
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/44679/2014
                                                               IA/44687/2014
                                                               IA/44696/2014
                                                               IA/44698/2014
                                                               IA/44705/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 10 November 2015                  |On 2 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                            Mr BABATUNDE SOSANWO
                              Mrs JANE SOSANWO
                                     OeS
                                     OnS
                                     OaS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Praisoody of Counsel instructed by Visa Direct

For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nash, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction and Background

      1. The first two appellants are a Nigerian couple, now aged 43 and  40
         respectively. The remaining appellants are their two daughters, now
         aged 10 and 4 years, and their son now aged 9  years.  By  decision
         dated 24 October 2014 the Secretary of State refused to  grant  the
         appellants leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  issued
         directions for their removal under section 47 of  the  Immigration,
         Asylum and Nationality Act 1999. The appellants sought to challenge
         the Secretary of State's decision on  human  rights  grounds  at  a
         hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  23  April  2015.  By
         decision promulgated on  15  May  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Tipping dismissed the appeals. By permission dated 22 July 2015 the
         appellants were given leave to appeal his  decision  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal.

      2. The first two appellants have lived in  the  United  Kingdom  since
         their return to this country in 2004, they having arrived and  been
         removed the previous year. On each occasion they entered the United
         Kingdom they did so using passports which were not their  own.  All
         of their children have been born in the United Kingdom. On 12  July
         2013 the appellants applied for further leave to remain  which  was
         refused for the reasons given in the respondent's  decision  letter
         of 24 October 2014.

    The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

      3. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it was argued on  the
         appellants' behalf that to  return  them  to  Nigeria  would  be  a
         disproportionate breach of their rights to private and family  life
         as protected by Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights. The argument was focused on the circumstances of the  three
         children, none of whom had any  exposure  to  life  or  culture  in
         Nigeria. The two elder children were in  education  in  the  United
         Kingdom and it was argued that it would be unreasonable  to  remove
         them from that environment. A  further  argument  was  advanced  in
         relation to health problems which two of the children were said  to
         suffer from.

      4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence  from  the  first
         appellant only but took into  account  other  documentary  material
         lodged  on  the  appellants'  behalf,  which  included  a   witness
         statement prepared by the first appellant.

      5. Having considered the available evidence  the  Judge  rejected  the
         contention that neither of the first two appellants had any  family
         remaining  in  Nigeria.  He  rejected  the  explanation  that   the
         appellants had been supported throughout their time in  the  United
         Kingdom by an unnamed church, as the first appellant  had  claimed,
         and he rejected the evidence given by the  first  appellant  as  to
         medical difficulties suffered by two of his children.

      6. In addressing the question of interference with  family  life,  the
         Judge noted there was no reliance placed on any  such  life  beyond
         that which existed between the family group.  Upon  the  view  that
         they would return to  Nigeria  together  he  concluded  that  their
         family life would not be interfered with and dismissed the  appeals
         under Article 8 based on the right to respect for family life.

      7. In addressing the question of interference with private  life,  the
         Judge observed that there was an almost total lack of  evidence  as
         to any private life established in the United Kingdom by the  first
         and second appellants. He noted there was no suggestion that  their
         personal circumstances engaged the  Article  8  provisions  of  the
         Immigration Rules and the Judge concluded that there was nothing in
         their circumstances which might be characterised as exceptional.

      8. The Judge also noted more generally  that  there  were  significant
         gaps in the evidence given in support of the appeals.  In  addition
         to the absence of evidence concerning private life  for  the  first
         two appellants, he commented that there was no  supporting  medical
         evidence led for the  first  appellant's  claim  that  two  of  his
         children suffered from medical  conditions.  He  also  recorded  in
         paragraph 8 of his decision that: "The  second  appellant  did  not
         attend the hearing to give oral evidence and no explanation of  her
         absence was provided".

      9. In considering the interference with private life  which  would  be
         engaged on the removal of the children, the Judge took  account  of
         the need for him to have regard to the welfare of the  children  as
         set out in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
         2009 and the relevant  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  He
         concluded that some knowledge of African language and culture would
         have been communicated to these children of Nigerian parents,  that
         the language commonly spoken in Nigeria was English  and  that  the
         children would adapt readily to  new  circumstances.  He  concluded
         that none of the children had been shown to  be  suffering  from  a
         significant medical condition  affecting  their  removal  and  that
         there was nothing in their  circumstances  which  would  render  it
         unreasonable for the children to travel to and live in Nigeria. For
         all of these reasons the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  refused  the
         appeals on behalf of the children on Article 8  grounds  under  the
         Immigration  Rules,  concluded  that  there  was  nothing   of   an
         exceptional nature which  outweighed  the  public  interest  to  be
         served by the enforcement of a firm and fair system of  immigration
         control and decided that it would be proportionate to remove all of
         the appellants to Nigeria.




    The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

     10. The grounds upon which permission to  appeal  was  granted  do  not
         identify any succinct basis upon which it is said that an error  of
         law was  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  However,  the
         essential points being made seem to be these:

          i. The appellants then legal representatives did not prepare  for
             or conduct the hearing adequately;

         ii. The Judge failed to give adequate weight to the  circumstances
             of the children's education in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             disruption to that which would flow from expulsion to Nigeria;



        iii. An apparent misunderstanding was made by the Judge as  to  the
             presence of the second appellant at the hearing.

     11. On behalf of the appellants it was argued that there  was  evidence
         as  to  family  life  which  could  have  been  provided  had   the
         appellant's then legal representative taken witness  statements  in
         advance of the hearing or taken that evidence  orally  from  either
         the first appellant or the second, whom it was asserted was present
         within the hearing room during the appeal,  contrary  to  what  was
         said by the Judge. It was also argued  that  medical  evidence  was
         available  but  had   not   been   introduced   by   the   previous
         representatives.

     12. It was argued  that  the  evidence  placed  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge concerning the education of the two oldest  children
         was not given sufficient weight. We were informed  that  since  the
         hearing the eldest child had been offered the opportunity to  apply
         for admission to a grammar school in Kent. It was argued that  this
         was an opportunity which would not be available in Nigeria and that
         the Judge had failed to give adequate weight to the  importance  of
         the children remaining in the educational  environment  with  which
         they were familiar and to the fact that they had no connection with
         or experience of life in Nigeria.

     13. On behalf of the respondent it was observed that no  authority  had
         been relied upon by the appellants in support of their argument  on
         inadequate  representation.  It   was   queried   what   additional
         information would in any event have been available in  a  statement
         from the second appellant.  It  was  submitted  that  all  relevant
         material had been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge who had been
         well aware of the obligation under section 55 of the  2009  Act  to
         treat  the  needs  and  welfare  of  the  children  as  a   primary
         consideration. He had taken full account  of  the  educational  and
         other circumstances pertaining to the children and had arrived at a
         proper decision which had been well reasoned.





    Discussion

     14. We did not find it easy to understand what  legal  consequence  was
         said to flow from the complaint advanced about the quality  of  the
         appellant's  previous  legal  representatives.  It  was  not,   for
         example, said to reflect an error of law on the part of the  Judge.
         Broadly, the argument seemed to be that the appellants had suffered
         unfairness as their appeals had not been presented as well as  they
         might have been. However, there  was  no  attempt  to  explain  the
         detail of what other evidence was available, far less  why  it  had
         not been presented. There was, for example,  even  now  no  witness
         statement from the second appellant setting out the evidence  which
         she would have given and providing an explanation as to why she was
         not called as a witness, if it is true that she was at the previous
         hearing. In the bundle produced  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  Hearing
         there were some  documents  apparently  demonstrating  appointments
         made for the eldest child in April and May  2015  at  a  children's
         physiotherapy orthotic clinic and an appointment in  May  2015  for
         her at the paedodontic outpatient Department of  the  Kings  Dental
         Institute. There was still no information as to the nature  of  any
         treatment received, her condition or prognosis. There is  therefore
         no basis upon which we  could  be  satisfied  that  the  appellants
         possess important information relevant to their appeals  which  was
         not  presented  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   because   of
         inadequate preparation or poor presentation on the  part  of  their
         legal representatives. We could not therefore  conclude  that  they
         had been denied a right to a fair hearing on account of  inadequate
         representation. We would also observe that we do not know what  the
         previous representatives' response to the suggestions made is.

     15. In our view, the First-tier Tribunal Judge was correct to conclude,
         as he did in paragraph 13 of his decision, that the  children  will
         have acquired a knowledge of Nigerian  language  and  culture  from
         their parents, that they were all in any event of an age readily to
         adopt the culture and practices of Nigeria with the  assistance  of
         the parents and that English is widely spoken in that country.

     16. The Judge also took the view that the two elder children  would  go
         to  Nigeria  with  the  benefit  of  their  respective  periods  of
         education in the United Kingdom and  that  this  coupled  with  the
         knowledge of English language would stand them  in  good  stead  in
         that country. He considered that it would be reasonable  to  expect
         children of their ages to adapt to new  surroundings  and  he  took
         full account of the evidence relating to their education which  was
         placed before him. He gave due weight to  the  stage  of  education
         which each child had reached but concluded,  appropriately  in  our
         view, that it would not be unreasonable for the children to  travel
         to and live in Nigeria. He also concluded, correctly, that none  of
         the appellants suffered from a medical condition which would create
         an obstacle to the family establishing life together in Nigeria.

     17. In our view there is no merit in the criticisms of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge's approach to the issue  of  interference  with  the
         right to private life possessed by the appellant children.

     18. The last issue raised  concerns  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
         apparent  misunderstanding  as  to  the  presence  of  the   second
         appellant at the hearing. No evidence was offered in support of the
         assertion that the second appellant was  in  fact  present  at  the
         hearing contrary to the Judges understanding.  However,  proceeding
         on the assumption that the assertion is correct, we do not consider
         that this can be said to have infected the decision making  process
         to any material extent. As we have  already  observed,  it  is  not
         apparent that the  second  appellant  has  anything  additional  to
         contribute. The only real issue before the First-tier Tribunal  was
         focused upon  the  impact  of  removing  the  children  from  their
         educational circumstances in the United Kingdom.  The  Judge  dealt
         adequately  with  the  evidence  concerning  this  issue  and   the
         submissions made to him thereon. As we  have  explained  above,  we
         consider that his conclusions were appropriate.  The  question  for
         the Judge was whether or not it would be reasonable to  expect  the
         three children  all  then  under  10  to  return  to  Nigeria.  His
         assessment of this question was not influenced by the  presence  or
         otherwise of their mother at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

    Decision

     19. For the reasons which we have given the decision of the  First-tier
         Tribunal promulgated on 15 May 2015 contains no error  of  law  and
         will stand. This appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.  No
         anonymity direction is made.




    Signed: Alan D. Turnbull
    Judge of the Upper Tribunal


    Date: 26/11/2015
