
IAC-AH-LR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44425/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16th December 2014                           |On 22nd January 2015       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            Mr blaise kouao koffi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge E G Elliman promulgated on 25th January 2014, following a hearing
    in Richmond on 17th June 2014.  In the determination, the judge allowed
    the appeal of Blaise Kouao Koffi.  The Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo
    (DRC), and was born on 14th  August  1983.   He  appealed  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State on 9th  October  2013  refusing  him
    leave to enter the United Kingdom.  The determination of Judge  Elliman
    makes it clear that,

         "the decision was taken pursuant to a  decision  that  his  removal
         from the United Kingdom would  not  be  an  interference  with  his
         rights under the European Convention for the  Protection  of  Human
         Rights and Fundamental Freedoms  (ECHR)  following  an  application
         based on his rights under Article 8" (see paragraph 1).

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The nature of the Appellant's claim rests on his  alleged  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a Ms Whelan, and the fact that he takes an
    active part in his son's upbringing, and has regular contact  with  his
    other children.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard evidence from three separate witnesses.  She found that
    all the witnesses before her

         "gave credible (and consistent in this respect) evidence  that  the
         Appellant is a strong father figure to his two  stepchildren,  that
         he deals with the practical matters of taking them  to  school  and
         that he provides discipline to the children and  deals  with  their
         basic care, that he is loved and respected by the two children  and
         has established himself as a strong and  important  part  of  their
         life.  There is no doubt at all that the Appellant has  established
         family life in the United Kingdom with his partner, his son and the
         two stepchildren with whom he lives.  There is a further  child  of
         his partner but no details were given of his relationship with that
         child and it appears that he does not play any significant role  in
         that child's life.  However, he does, I accept, play a  significant
         role in his own son's life ..." (paragraph 19).

 5. The judge concluded that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  did
    amount to an interference with the Appellant's  family  life  and  held
    that

          "it would  undoubtedly  do  so  and  would  inevitably  be  hugely
         disruptive.  The Appellant has a partner who  is  British  and  two
         stepchildren in whose  lives  he  plays  a  significant  part.   He
         himself has not been in his home country - the DRC -  for  fourteen
         years  and  neither  his  partner,  his  own   children   nor   his
         stepchildren have ever been to the DRC nor to any African  country.
         ...". (paragraph 20).

    Consideration was also given to  the  leading  case  of  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4 and to the obligation upon the Secretary of  State  under
    Section 55 BCIA 2009  (see  paragraphs  22  to  23).   The  appeal  was
    allowed.





Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  did  not  apply  the
    strictures of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 which are to the effect that  the
    position must first be considered under the Immigration Rules, and only
    then must it be asked whether there are good grounds to  consider  that
    there are compelling circumstances, not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Rules, that require a consideration of  the  same  situation  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  The judge made no findings that  there  were  arguably
    good grounds and compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognized
    under the Rules.

 7. On 13th November 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 16th December 2014, Mr Burrett, of Counsel,
    on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the decision  of  the  judge
    was entirely correct because this decision was  made  prior  to  coming
    into effect of the 2002 Rules on 9 July 2012.  This being so, the judge
    was entirely correct in looking at  the  position  as  it  used  to  be
    following 2010, and applying the Razgar guidelines.

 9. For his part, Mr Tarlow submitted that these were good grounds  at  the
    time that they  were  drafted,  but  he  would  have  to  concede  that
    following the Court of Appeal judgment in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA  Civ
    985, and the judgment of Lord Atkins (at paragraph 128),  all  that  is
    required now is a "arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
    granting leave to remain outside the Rules".

10. In reply, Mr Burrett submitted that this was not a case where the Rules
    were a complete code, and envisaged every conceivable scenario.   There
    was no relevant Immigration Rule.  This was a FLR(O)  application.   It
    was determined entirely on the basis of Article 8 ECHR.  This being so,
    the judge was perfectly entitled to look  at  the  jurisprudence  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside this decision.  This is a  case
    where the judge at the outset indicated that "the  decision  was  taken
    pursuant to a decision that his removal from the United  Kingdom  would
    not be an interference with his rights under  the  European  Convention
    for the Protection of Human Rights ..."  (paragraph  11),  such  as  to
    directly engage Article 8 jurisprudence.   There  were  no  Immigration
    Rules applicable.  Before making her clear, comprehensive, and  fulsome
    findings, the judge at the outset again stated that,

         "it was agreed at the outset of the hearing that the  Secretary  of
         State, dealing with an application made in August  2010,  had  been
         wrong to consider the Appellant's position under provisions of  the
         Immigration Rules that did not come into force until 9th July  2012
         and were not, (according to  the  Transitional  Provisions  of  the
         Rules themselves) to be applied to applications  made  before  that
         date.  It  was,  therefore,  agreed  that  the  appeal  was  to  be
         considered as a claim that his  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom
         would amount to an interference with his rights under Article 8  as
         a freestanding right ..." (see paragraph 16).

12. In the circumstances, therefore, the  judge  was  entirely  within  her
    powers to determine the appeal as she did,  namely,  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8 jurisprudence,  because  anything  else  would  have  been  a
    distraction, because it was not relevant to the matter at hand.

13. There is no arguable error of law in this appeal at all.

Decision

14. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

15. No anonymity order is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        21st January 2015

