
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44252/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 December 2014                  |On 27 February 2015                  |
|Prepared 20 December 2014            |                                     |


                                   Before

                              MRS JUSTICE CARR
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR mohammad jakiul Huda
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms B Poynor, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Bangladesh, date of birth 1  January  1980,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's  decision,  dated  9  October
    2013, to make removal directions under Section 10  of  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999, a form IS151A having been served on 14 March 2013,
    an asylum and human rights-based claim having been refused.

3.   The Claimant's appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Morrison
    ("the judge") who on 18  July  2014  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

4.   The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge V P McDade on 12 November 2014.

5.   Incorporated  within  the  Secretary  of  State's  application  was  an
    application to extend time for reasons given but   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McDade, whilst granting permission to appeal, did not  deal  with
    the out of time application. We  were  prepared  to  accept  that  time
    should be extended because of late receipt of the judge's decision.

6.   A response on behalf of the Claimant, dated 25 November 2014,  resisted
    the Secretary of State's, grounds.

7.   The grounds of appeal followed the Secretary of State's  interpretation
    and understanding of the case law, Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  and
    Gulshan (article 8 - new rules - correct approach) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
    640, that there were prior and threshold tests to be established before
    considering Article 8 ECHR outside of the  Immigration Rules.

8.   We found most helpful the analysis provided  by  Huang  v  SSHD  [2007]
    UKHL 11, MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192.

9.   We agree that the primary consideration is whether or not the  decision
    was ECHR compliant.  Secondly, we are satisfied that Huang [2007]  UKLH
    11 applied and that in assessing whether or not a claim can properly be
    sustained on Article 8 ECHR grounds the outcome may well depend on  the
    exceptional or compelling  factual  circumstances  when  assessing  the
    proportionality of the Secretary of State's decision.

10.    In this case there was no dispute that the Claimant  could  not  meet
    the financial requirements under the Immigration  Rules  ("the  rules")
    and similarly did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of  the
    rules.

11.   Initially the judge assessed whether or not returning the Claimant  to
    Bangladesh would lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome by reference to
    the following matters.  First, the family history of domestic  violence
    and which the children had also  been  subjected  to,  and  their  best
    interests did not lie in the Claimant  being  removed.   Secondly,  the
    five children, aged at material  times  17,  15,  10,  9  and  6,  were
    British citizens who had lived all their lives in  the  United  Kingdom
    and had no experience of living overseas or having enjoyed family  life
    elsewhere.  Thirdly, the judge found that the Claimant  was  taking  an
    active part in the household and care of the  children.  Fourthly,  the
    fact that, if the Claimant left the United Kingdom,  the  consequential
    impact on the Sponsor's ability  to  work  and  care  for  the  younger
    children meant it was unlikely that the financial threshold  for  entry
    clearance of the Claimant would be met in future.   Fifthly, the  judge
    also concluded that there would be a very substantial  interference  in
    family life if the Claimant was removed.

12.   The judge considered the Appellant's was an unusual case. We  bear  in
    mind that the Claimant's wife and five children are British  nationals,
    there is a subsisting  marriage  and  there  was  no  evidence  of  the
    Claimant becoming a burden upon the taxpayer. He had  English  language
    qualifications or skills.  In those circumstances, it was argued by  Ms
    Poynor that taking  proper  account  of  Section  117A  and  B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as amended the judge  had
    made no error of law which was material. It was fair to say the judge's
    decision did not make particular reference to those  sections  but  the
    judge plainly had in mind the importance of the public interest, from a
    fair reading of paragraphs 19, 20 and 21 to 24 of the decision.

13.  We concluded that  the  judge  had  provided  adequate  and  sufficient
    reasons, even if  we  would  not  necessarily  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion. It was not proportionate for the family life to  be  broken
    up or interfered with because of the impact on the children  and  their
    interests which the judge properly  considered:  Those  were  primarily
    matters of fact for the judge.

14.  The Secretary of State's principal attack  upon  paragraph  17  of  the
    decision. The judge said '... the test is not unjustifiably  harsh  but
    whether there are good  arguable  reasons  for  making  a  freestanding
    Article  8  assessment'.  The  Secretary  of  State  relied  upon   her
    understanding of Nagre. However, the grounds  are  really  directed  at
    establishing there are hurdles to be crossed before Article  8  can  be
    considered. We consider that 'exceptional  circumstances',  'compelling
    circumstance', 'unduly harsh' considerations are all  matters  relevant
    to the judgement on proportionality. We concluded that there is no need
    for  a  threshold  criterion  of  arguability:  per  Aikens  LJ  in  MM
    (Lebanon)[2014] EWCA Civ985 [128-129][174][175].  Rather  such  factors
    as compelling, exceptional  circumstances together with  other  factors
    such as the extent to which the rules  take  account  of  circumstances
    relevant to Article 8,  condition  the  consideration  required  of  an
    individual's claim under Article 8 outside the rules.

15.  We considered the judge's assessment of the  issues  did  not  disclose
    any material error of law. In any event we  think  proportionality  was
    one of the issues addressed by the parties before the  judge  and  that
    ultimately the judge did not misapply the law [decision 18-24].

15.  There was a challenge by Ms Poynor to Mr  Tufan's  submissions  because
    he was seeking to widen the grounds of attack on the  judge's  decision
    by arguing matters that were not taken up in the original  decision  or
    at the original hearing, for example the requirements of care  for  the
    Sponsor's mother being met  by  third  parties,  a  claim  of  previous
    deception and the Claimant becoming a burden on the  British  taxpayer.
    We were not asked to enlarge the Secretary of State's grounds  nor  did
    we think the points of any substance or disclosed any material error of
    law.

16.   We found the balance of the grounds of appeal, [8]-[14]  substantially
    amounted to a simple disagreement with the findings of fact made by the
    judge and the way they were then applied: These grounds do not disclose
    any material error of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION.

17.  The appeal of the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed.   The  Original
    Tribunal's decision stands.

No anonymity direction was sought.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


