
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 April 2016                          |On 20 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                              MR REZAUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Zahir (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant whose date of birth is 13 April 1984 and is a citizen  of
    Bangladesh.  He appeals against a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Miles) ("FTT") who in a decision and reasons promulgated  on  22
    September 2015 dismissed his appeal on  immigration  and  human  rights
    grounds.  The central issue before the  FTT  was  whether  or  not  the
    appellant used deception to obtain his  English  language  certificate.
    The arguable error identified is whether or not  the  FTT  applied  the
    correct burden and standard of proof.

2.   This matter comes before me as an error of law hearing.

Background

3.   The appellant had  a  long  immigration  history  having  been  granted
    various periods of leave as a student from 2006  until  2014.   He  was
    then given leave as a spouse until 6.7.2016. The appellant  arrived  in
    the UK on 19 October 2014 from Dhaka, Bangladesh. He was questioned and
    subsequently interviewed by an immigration officer.  A  refusal  notice
    was issued on 20 October 2014 cancelling the appellant's leave  as  the
    spouse of a British citizen, on the grounds that false  representations
    were employed for the purposes of obtaining leave and/or there had been
    a change of circumstances such that leave should be cancelled.

4.   It was the respondent's contention that the appellant had used a  proxy
    test taker  in  order  to  obtain  an  English  language  qualification
    certificate which he had then used in connection with two  applications
    for leave, the last of which was leave  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
    citizen.  Enquiries made by an Immigration Officer  revealed  that  the
    appellant's ETS certificate had been declared invalid and cancelled.

5.   At the hearing before the FTT the respondent relied on  evidence  of  a
    printout of the relevant  ETS  record,  the  record  of  interview  and
    generic  witness  statements  made  by  Rebecca  Collings   and   Peter
    Millington, Home Office officials.

FTT decision

6.   The FTT  had regard to the oral and written evidence of  the  appellant
    and his wife.  He denied using a proxy tester.  He stated that  he  had
    taken two English language tests and passed overall  with  high  bands.
    The  FTT  found  that  at  the  appeal  hearing  he  had   demonstrated
    proficiency in English to a high standard.

7.   The FTT  placed  weight  on  the  evidence  of  Mr  Millington  and  Ms
    Collings. Whilst accepting that  the  voice  recognition  analysis  was
    imperfect, the FTT found that the respondent had built  a  very  strong
    case that the English language certificates provided by  the  appellant
    were false documents to the extent that  they  were  obtained  using  a
    proxy test taker.  The FTT  [24]  took  into  account  the  appellant's
    response at interview on being informed that his ETS was  invalid.   He
    replied "I did not know that.  This is the first  time  that  this  has
    happened.  I got the results and I submitted it to the UKBA.  I have no
    idea what happened.  There was disruption".   The  FTT  considered  the
    response to be striking  by  the  absence  of  any  response  from  the
    appellant along the lines of an assertion of innocence. Accordingly the
    FTT at [26] found that the respondent had discharged the burden to  the
    standard on the balance of  probabilities  that  the  English  language
    certificate had been obtained by deception.  The FTT referred  at  [19]
    to the burden being on  the  respondent  and  the  standard  the  civil
    standard, namely balance of probabilities.

Grounds of Application

8.   The FTT erred by failing to apply RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria  [2006]
    UKAIT which held that "in judicial proceedings an allegation of forgery
    needs to be established to a high degree of proof, by the person making
    the allegation".

Permission

9.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth on 15 February 2016 in the following terms:

         "In the light of the references made by the judge at paragraphs  8,
         19 and 26 to the standard of  proof  in  relation  to  the  use  of
         deception and falsity, without particularising or using appropriate
         words to indicate the place on  the  spectrum  of  the  balance  of
         probabilities which would need to be reached by the  respondent  in
         this regard, it is arguable that an error of law has  taken  place.
         The reference by the judge at paragraph 26 of the decision  to  the
         building  of  a  very  strong  case  is  arguably  insufficient  to
         demonstrate the qualification to the standard of proof in  relation
         to the balance of probabilities which is necessary in cases of this
         nature".

Rule 24 Response

10.  The respondent opposed the appeal.  The respondent's position was  that
    to suggest that an allegation of forgery  requires  a  high  degree  of
    proof was inconsistent with the  House  of  Lords  reasoning  in  Re  B
    (Children) [2008] UKHL 35 where Lord Hoffmann stated "I think that  the
    time has come to say once and for all, that there  is  only  one  civil
    standard of proof and that  is  proof  that  the  fact  in  issue  more
    probably occurred than not".

Error of Law Hearing

11.  Mr Zahir submitted that the FTT failed to apply  the  correct  standard
    of proof having regard to the need for strong and cogent evidence where
    an allegation  of  forgery  or  deception  is  made.   Furthermore,  he
    submitted that the FTT erred by concluding that the generic evidence of
    Ms Collings and Mr Millington was reliable and capable of  meeting  the
    standard of proof.   Mr  Zahir  relied  on  a  summary  of  the  recent
    presidential judgment in SM Qadir  (IA  31380/36319/2014).   He  argued
    that the Upper Tribunal ("UT") found their evidence to be intrinsically
    limited and having subjected  all  of  the  evidence  to  detailed  and
    careful scrutiny,  concluded  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
    discharged the legal burden of establishing that the appellant procured
    his TOEIC certificate by dishonesty  to  the  requisite  standard.   Mr
    Zahir submitted that following Qadir no reliance  whatsoever  could  be
    placed on the evidence of Ms Collings and  Mr  Millington.  Accordingly
    the FTT erred in law and the decision fell to be set aside.

12.  Mr Clarke relied  on  the  Rule  24  notice  with  reference  to  Re  B
    (Children) as regards the standard of proof.  He also cited R  (on  the
    application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS - judicial  review)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00327 (IAC) (para 35) where the UT considered the respondent's  generic
    evidence in ETS  cases.   The  UT  found  that  the  evidence  had  the
    hallmarks of care, thoroughness, underlying  expertise  and  sufficient
    reliability such as to warrant an assessment that the applicant's TOEIC
    had been procured by deception.  However the UT did not state that  the
    generic evidence was infallible and, indeed, at  paragraph  14  the  UT
    suggested  that  all  cases  involving  ETS   certificates   would   be
    "unavoidably fact-sensitive".  The UT said that "each litigant will put
    forward his  or  her  individual  disputed  assertions,  agreed  facts,
    considerations and circumstances", which must be assessed alongside the
    generic evidence submitted by the respondent.

13.  Mr Clarke submitted that the appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  asserted
    that the FTT was required to import a high degree in  the  standard  of
    proof, whereas the issue raised by Mr Zahir was the  FTT's  failure  to
    discharge the burden of proof.  This was a misunderstanding of the  law
    and  the issues raised went beyond what was asserted in the grounds  of
    appeal.

14.  Mr Clarke submitted that it was hard to see any error in  the  decision
    and reasons as the  FTT  had  carried  out  the  required  fact-finding
    exercise and had not  simply  relied  on  the  generic  evidence.   The
    judgment in Qadir was in summary form and was not therefore capable  of
    supporting the appellant's submissions.

15.  Mr Zahir responded that the judgment in Qadir now overturned  Gazi  and
    was effectively a landmark decision.

Discussion and Decision

16.  The legal principles involved where there is an allegation  of  forgery
    were considered in SM Qadir from paragraph 56 and included reference to
    a recent review conducted by the  UT  in  Muhabdiramge  (section  S.LTR
    1.7)[2015]UKUT 00675 IAC (PARS 9-11).  That review approved  the  three
    staged approach in Shen(Paper appeal; proving dishonesty) 2014 UKUT 236
    IAC.   The judicial task was to decide whether the evidence adduced was
    of sufficient cogency to warrant the  conclusion  that  the  burden  of
    proof had been discharged to the civil  standard.  This  is  consistent
    with R (N) v MHRT (Northern Region)  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1605  in  which
    Richards LJ expressed it as "the flexibility lies not in any adjustment
    to the degree of probability required for an allegation  to  be  proved
    ... but in the strength  or  quality  of  the  evidence  that  will  in
    practice be required". In R (on the  application  of  Beckett)  v  SSHD
    [2008] EWHC 2002 (Admin) Ouseley J held  that  the  "high  probability"
    standard of proof,  was  addressed  to  the  cogency  of  the  evidence
    required to prove an allegation of this type rather than to a shift  in
    the standard of proof itself.

17.   The UT outlined the correct approach to be followed in  ETS  cases  in
    Gazi and SM Qadir. In the latter the UT had the benefit of hearing oral
    evidence from the two witnesses Collings and Millington  and  from  the
    language expert Dr Harrison.  In Qadir the UT found  that  the  generic
    evidence had significant shortcomings and when considered together with
    the expert evidence and the appellant's evidence, the UT concluded that
    the  respondent  failed  to  discharge  the  civil  standard  of  proof
    required.

18.  In reaching its decision the  FTT  failed  to  express  or  follow  the
    qualified or  staged  approach  to  the  standard  of  proof  in  cases
    involving an allegation of deception.  It  made  no  reference  to  the
    flexibility needed in such cases. No reference was made to the need for
    strong and cogent evidence. Further  the  FTT  failed  to  take  proper
    account of the appellant's evidence as to his two IELTS qualifications,
    which the FTT  specifically  excluded  as  irrelevant  [18].   This  is
    evidence relevant to motivation for using a proxy test taker and  ought
    to have been assessed  in  reaching  findings  as  to  the  appellant's
    linguistic  ability  and  which  would  have  had  greater  force  than
    consideration of the language skills of the appellant at  the  hearing.
    Further such consideration was relevant to the weight to be attached to
    the appellant's comments, from which the  FTT  drew  adverse  inference
    [24].

19.   In the light of the FTT's failures and the reservations  expressed  as
    to the reliability of the generic evidence in  Qadir,  I  am  satisfied
    that the FTT decision and reasons amounts to a material error in law.


Notice of Decision

20.  There is a material error of law.  The decision  shall  be  set  aside.
    In terms of future disposal I have decided to remit the matter  to  the
    First -tier Tribunal for rehearing at Taylor House  on  a  date  to  be
    given.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 15.4.2016
GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as it was necessary to have a hearing.



Signed                                  Date 15.4.2016
GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

