
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44519/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2015                 |On 6th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                            HAFIZ MD ABU SIDDIQUE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Malhotra, Counsel, instructed by Chipatiso
                    Associates LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Bangladesh  whose  date  of  birth  is
    recorded as 22nd March 1963.  He first arrived in the United Kingdom in
    1998 on a visit visa in order to visit his wife and two  sons  who  are
    British citizens.  After five and  a  half  months  he  then  left  but
    returned again in 2000 on a visit visa, returning again in 2001 when he
    and his wife separated.  He made  application  to  the  courts  in  the
    United Kingdom for contact with his sons but whilst that was pending he
    left the United Kingdom, returning again in 2003 so that he might  give
    evidence.  Then in 2003 he was granted leave until 30th September  2004
    but later refused further  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules, and according to the Decision  and  Reasons  under  appeal,  his
    appeal rights became exhausted in 2006  although  it  is  submitted  on
    behalf of the Appellant that it was 2008, but little turns on  that  in
    this case.

 2. An application was made on  human  rights  grounds  to  regularise  his
    status but that was refused on 21st  October  2010  with  no  right  of
    appeal.  Further representations were made with letters written on  his
    behalf dated 22 July 2013  and  9  June  2014.  They  resulted  in  the
    decision dated 7 August 2014 in respect of which  he  appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal; his appeal being heard on 28th April 2015 by Judge
    Clarke sitting at Taylor House.

 3. It was a very significant part of the Appellant's case that he suffered
    and suffers from clinical depression and that in those circumstances he
    was dependent upon his sons for their support.   The  judge  considered
    the evidence and found there to  be  no  family  life  with  the  sons,
    although reading the decision as a whole it  is  clear  that  what  was
    meant was no sufficient family life within the  context  of  the  claim
    that was being brought rather than saying none at all.  Counsel for the
    Appellant agreed.

 4. The appeal was dismissed but not  content  with  that  decision,  by  a
    Notice dated 22nd May 2015  application  was  made  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   The grounds  are  lengthy,  running  to
    eleven paragraphs.  It is submitted that there was  a  failure  by  the
    judge to consider paragraph 276ADE(6) and that in considering the issue
    of family life it should have  been  accepted  that  the  rather  rigid
    approach in Kugathas v SSHD [2003] INLR 170 had been  modified  by  the
    guidance in Ghising [2012] UKUT 00160.  It is  further  submitted  that
    greater weight should have been given by  the  judge  to  the  clinical
    depression and that the judge made a factual error in  concluding  that
    the Appellant had been away from Bangladesh  for  the  last  eleven  to
    twelve years when in fact it was nearer nineteen. I should add to that,
    that at paragraph 12 of the Decision and Reasons the judge  had  regard
    to family property in Bangladesh in which one  of  his  brothers  lived
    with his wife and children.  It was suggested to me, as  a  preliminary
    matter, that that was an error of fact but that was not something  that
    had been raised in the  grounds  and  in  those  circumstances,  absent
    sufficient evidence that there was an error of fact, is  not  a  matter
    upon which I attach significant weight.

 5. On 10th August 2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hollingworth
    granted permission in these terms:

         "An  arguable  error  of  law  has  arisen  in  relation   to   the
         construction to  be  placed  upon  the  facts  in  respect  of  the
         conclusion that no family life existed. At paragraph 21  the  judge
         has referred to the Appellant's clinical depression  being  managed
         by medication and the visits by his sons. It is arguable  that  the
         conclusion that it is proportionate for the Appellant to be removed
         in the light of this  finding  weighs  against  proportionality  in
         respect of removal."

 6. When determining whether or not there is an error of law I also have to
    have regard to whether or not it is material.  There is no disagreement
    about that.  Although my attention was drawn to the possible  error  of
    fact on the part of the judge, given when one reads paragraphs  11  and
    12 together, this Appellant  was  more  likely  to  have  been  out  of
    Bangladesh for nineteen years rather than the  eleven  or  twelve,  the
    issue I have to determine is whether  the  findings  and  the  eventual
    conclusion were open to the judge.  It is trite law to  make  reference
    to R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 para 9 but it is  apposite  in  a  case
    such as this.

 7. For the Appellants it  was  conceded,  and  quite  properly,  that  the
    material findings of fact made by the judge were open  to  him.   Those
    material facts are the extent to which there was family life,  which  I
    have already indicated is to be seen in the context of the claim,  that
    is to say whether it is sufficient to engage Article 8 family life  and
    whether it was open to the judge to find that the  clinical  depression
    relied upon was such that  taken  with  other  factors  outweighed  the
    public interest in removal. The judge quite properly made reference  to
    Section 117B.

 8. The point taken in the grounds that the judge did not  have  regard  to
    276ADE has to be seen in the context  of  the  application  being  made
    outside of the Immigration Rules itself which was stated at paragraph 1
    of the Decision and Reasons and not a fact which was  challenged.   And
    so it is to the wider application of Article 8 that I am to have regard
    and indeed that was  also  conceded  at  the  outset  when  there  were
    preliminary discussions as to what the issues were before me.

 9. However, when  one  looks  to  an  appeal  which  turns  on  the  wider
    application of Article 8 the starting point has to be  whether  or  not
    the Immigration Rules  themselves  adequately  deal  with  the  factual
    matrix being presented.  If they do not,  then  there  needs  to  be  a
    sufficient "gap"; that was a matter that was discussed at  some  length
    in the case of SS(Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

10. What is relied upon  by  the  Appellant  in  asserting  that  there  is
    sufficient "gap"?  It is the clinical depression  taken  together  with
    the period of absence from Bangladesh and  the  relationship  that  the
    Appellant has with his sons. But there is  guidance  as  to  how  cases
    relying on medical conditions should be approached.  The  leading  case
    is now GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.  It was  not  suggested  in  this
    case nor has it ever been suggested that Article 3 is  met.   It  is  a
    high threshold and the guidance points to the fact that in  nearly  all
    cases it will be the same high threshold in  Article  8  cases.   There
    needs to be something over and above the Article 3  factors  to  engage
    Article 8.  That is not to say that Article 8 cannot be engaged, it can
    be but there have to be other factors.  When I invited  submissions  on
    what those additional factors were, it was  not  suggested  that  there
    were any.

11. The difficulty facing the Appellant in this appeal was  quite  properly
    recognised by Miss Malhotra. She did her very best to point some  error
    of law on the basis of a lack of  consideration  of  all  the  material
    issues but I do not find that there is anything perverse or  irrational
    in the way in which the judge, having made findings of fact,  which  it
    is conceded were open to him, then looked to the public interest  which
    in this case involved a person who had,  at  least  for  a  significant
    period of time, been in the United Kingdom unlawfully  even  though  he
    sought eventually to regularise his status..

12. I observe that the medical evidence upon which reliance was placed  did
    not go into considerable detail  as  to  the  nature  of  the  clinical
    depression and the witness statements that I have seen  speak  much  of
    the dependency of the sons on their father rather than  the  other  way
    round. I quite accept the submission that there  will  be  a  symbiotic
    relationship but whether that was sufficient, was,  I  find,  a  matter
    that was open to the judge and the finding that he made  was  one  that
    was open to him.

13. In these circumstances there is no material error of law.

Notice of Decision

14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.

15. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

