
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/44804/2014
                                                               IA/44814/2014
                                                               IA/44823/2014
                                                               IA/44830/2014
                                                               IA/44835/2014
                                                               IA/44839/2014
                                                               IA/44843/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 7th September 2015               |On: 23rd September 2015              |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            Robson Fernandes Rosa
                           Amanda de Carvalho Rosa
                           Rafaela Fernandes Rosa
                             Ryan Fernandes Rosa
                            Vanessa da Costa Rosa
                          Isabele da Costa E Silva
                            Leticia da Costa Rosa
                                                                 Respondents


For the Appellant:     Ms Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondents are all nationals of Brazil.  On  the  12th  February
       2015 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Kirvan)  allowed  their  linked
       appeals against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse to  issue
       them with a residence card confirming their right of residence as the
       family members/extended family members of an EEA national  exercising
       treaty rights in the UK. The Secretary of State now has permission to
       appeal against the decision[1].

    2. The Sponsor of all the applications was  Mr  Robson  Ribiero-Rosa,  a
       national of Italy. His relationship to the Respondents in  each  case
       was said to be as follows:

           Robson Fernandes Rosa  Father

           Amanda de Carvalho Rosa      Father-in-law

           Rafaela Fernandes Rosa Father

           Ryan Fernandes Rosa    Father

           Vanessa da Costa Rosa  Father

           Isabele da Costa E Silva     Grandfather

           Leticia da Costa Rosa  Grandfather

    3. The detailed refusal letter is dated the  27th  October  2014.   This
       explains  that  the  evidence  submitted  to  establish  the  claimed
       relationships was not acceptable to the Secretary of State because it
       was not original, not accompanied  by  a  certified  translation,  or
       both. It then reads "therefore, it has  been  decided  to  refuse  to
       issue the confirmation that you seek  ...".   The  letter  raises  no
       other issue under the Regulations.

    4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal it was listed  as
       a paper appeal. The Tribunal had regard to the  bundle  of  documents
       submitted by the Respondents and having done so made findings of fact
       that the relationships were as claimed. The determination then reads:



           "28. I note from the refusal letters that the only issues raised
           against the applicants were that the documents provided did  not
           establish the relationships claimed.

           29. I infer therefore that the Respondent was satisfied that the
           EEA Sponsor was exercising treaty rights  as  a  worker  in  the
           United Kingdom. I note that  there  is  evidence  before  me  of
           payslips and of pay being paid into his bank account  and  I  am
           satisfied on that basis that the EEA Sponsor, Mr Robson  Riberio
           Rosa, is exercising treaty rights".

       The appeals were therefore allowed.

       Error of Law

    5. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  the
       following respects:

        i) It was not open to the Tribunal to infer that all other elements
           of the EEA regulations were met. The  refusal  letter  makes  no
           concessions.

       ii) As to the 'evidence' relied upon at paragraph 29 to show that Mr
           Robson Riberio Rosa was exercising treaty rights it is submitted
           that  the  determination  contains  no  reference  to   original
           documents or any other corroborative evidence to  show  that  he
           was working as claimed.

      iii) As to the children of Mr Robson Ribiero-Rosa who are now  adults
           (the first and fifth  Respondents)  it  is  submitted  that  the
           Tribunal was required to determine whether they  were  dependent
           upon him.

       iv) As to  his  daughter-in-law  (the  second  Respondent)  findings
           should have been made as to dependency and the  matter  remitted
           to the Secretary of State  for  her  consideration  pursuant  to
           Regulations 8(2) and 17(4).

    6. I received no Rule 24 response from the Respondents,  nor  was  there
       any appearance at the hearing before me, despite notice of it  having
       been sent to the representative on record on the 11th August 2015.

    7. I am not satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing  to
       make findings as to dependency in respect of the  adult  Respondents.
       The refusal letter does not make  any  express  concessions  but  the
       Tribunal was entitled to infer that the matter in issue was  confined
       to whether the relationships were as claimed.  That  is  because  the
       refusal letter indicates that this was the sole reason  for  refusal.
       Having set out the shortcomings of the copied and untranslated  birth
       certificates the letter reads "therefore,  it  has  been  decided  to
       refuse to issue the confirmation that  you  seek..."  (my  emphasis).
       The Tribunal cannot now be criticised for not  realising  that  there
       was another matter that the Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied
       about.

    8. As to the second Respondent the determination does contain an  error.
       Amanda de Carvalho Rosa is  not  a  direct  descendent.  She  is  his
       daughter-in-law and as such her application  fell  to  be  considered
       under Regulation 8. Whether she is issued with a residence card is  a
       matter for the Secretary of State, who must exercise  her  discretion
       under Regulation 17(4).  Her appeal  can  only  be  allowed  to  that
       extent.

       Decisions

    9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       in respect of the first, third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth  and  seventh
       Respondents.

   10. In respect of the Second Respondent  the  determination  contains  an
       error of law. The appeal should not have been allowed outright; I re-
       make it by allowing the appeal to the extent that it is  remitted  to
       the Secretary of State in order  that  she  exercise  her  discretion
       under Regulation 17(4).


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          7th September 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 17th April 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Mark Davies

