

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44196/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |             Decision and Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 9th November 2015                   |             On 12th November 2015      |
|                                       |                                        |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                 MOHSIN SHAH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Sawar, counsel, instructed by Sanctuary Law

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal  of  Mr  Mohsin  against  a
      decision dated 16th October 2014 under s10 Immigration and Asylum  Act
      1999 to remove him from the UK for reasons set out in a letter of  the
      same date. The First-tier Tribunal described the decision under appeal
      as an appeal against a decision to refuse him leave  to  remain  as  a
      spouse which of course it was not. At  the  date  of  application  for
      leave to remain as a spouse Mr Mohsin was an overstayer and  thus  the
      refusal of that application was not an appealable decision as  defined
      by s82 Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  Secretary  of
      State for the Home  Department  ("SSHD")  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds that  it
      was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge  had  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons for placing such weight as  he  did  upon  a  witness
      statement by an individual who did not attend the hearing and was  not
      therefore tendered for  cross  examination.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge had identified discrepancies in the evidence of  Mr  Mohsin  and
      his wife and had found that Mr Mohsin had previously  submitted  false
      bank statements in support of an  earlier  application  for  leave  to
      remain and had been found to have fraudulently taken an ETS test which
      he had relied upon in a previous application.


   2. Mr Mohsin first arrived in the UK as a Tier  4  student  with  a  visa
      valid until 10th August 2012. He  submitted  an  application  on  10th
      August 2012 for further leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur
      together with an ETS language certificate as evidence of  his  ability
      to meet the language requirements. That certificate was identified  as
      having been obtained by deception and his  application  for  variation
      was refused by the SSHD for reasons set out in a decision  dated  10th
      July 2013. Mr Mohsin exercised his appeal rights  and  the  First-tier
      Tribunal in a determination promulgated on 22nd January 2014 dismissed
      his appeal. He submitted an application for permission  to  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  21st
      February 2014.

   3. On 9th May 2013 Mr Mohsin had married Ms A B Shah. On 15th  July  2014
      Mr Mohsin withdrew his appeal against the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the decision to  refuse  him  a
      Tier 1 Entrepreneur visa.  The  following  day  (16th  July  2014)  he
      submitted an application for leave  to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
      British Citizen. That application was refused for reasons set out in a
      decision dated 16th October 2014, supplemented  by  a  further  letter
      dated 6th January 2015. It  follows  from  this  that  Mr  Mohsin  was
      unlawfully present in the UK from the date of dismissal of his  appeal
      by the First-tier Tribunal namely 22nd January 2014.

   4. In its decision the First-tier Tribunal found that Mr Mohsin  did  not
      meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
      Immigration Rules. There was no appeal  by  Mr  Mohsin  against  those
      findings. The First-tier Tribunal judge also made  findings  that,  on
      the balance of probabilities, the test score obtained by the appellant
      in his ETS language test had been improperly  obtained  and  the  test
      certificate was 'correctly cancelled'. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      also found, reflecting the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      who had heard  his  'Entrepreneur  appeal'  although  considering  the
      evidence afresh, that Mr Mohsin submitted false documents namely  bank
      statements in support  of  his  Entrepreneur  application.  The  judge
      concluded (see [19]) that it was "right for [Mr Mohsin's] appeal under
      the [Immigration Rules] to be refused on the grounds of suitability.

   5. In [20] the First-tier Tribunal judge notes  that  the  SSHD  accepted
      that Mr Mohsin and Ms Shah were married and that  Mr  Mohsin  met  the
      criteria under the Rules save for suitability but did not accept  that
      the relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting  or  that  the  couple
      intended to live together permanently. The  judge  then  proceeded  in
      [21] to set out the discrepancies in the couples account of when  they
      met again after their first meeting, when Ms Shah's mother had met  Mr
      Mohsin, how many events there had been to  celebrate  the  engagement,
      the lack of witness evidence form Mr Mohsin's  brother  or  Ms  Shah's
      sister and that the only independent evidence was a bank statement and
      two Barclaycard statements for the period December 2014 to March  2015
      addressed to the same address.

   6. The First-tier Tribunal judge then refers to a witness statement  from
      a Ms Kaur who states she provides home care services for the  previous
      7 years for Ms Shah but would  not  be  able  to  attend  the  hearing
      because she was not permitted to become  involved  in  client's  legal
      affairs.

   7. It is plain that by writing and signing a  witness  statement  to  the
      effect that she knows the couple are a genuine couple, she is "getting
      involved in Mr Mohsin's legal affairs". There was no other evidence to
      which my attention was drawn which indicated or confirmed that Ms Kaur
      had in fact been providing support services  or  what  those  services
      amounted to or on what basis she was able to reach the conclusion  she
      did as to the nature of the relationship  between  the  couple,  other
      than in general terms. It is plain that the presenting officer  before
      the First-tier  Tribunal  was  concerned  about  the  genuineness  and
      subsistence of the relationship given the detailed questions asked  in
      cross examination about when and where  the  couple  met  and  contact
      between Mr Mohsin and his wife's family members. The judge  has  given
      no reasons for placing what must by any consideration be  considerable
      weight upon the untested witness evidence of Ms  Kaur  given  that  Mr
      Mohsin has been found to have exercised deception  previously  on  two
      separate matters and that the marriage was entered into at a time when
      Mr Mohsin was an overstayer. To place such weight  upon  that  witness
      statement in those circumstances borders on the perverse and certainly
      requires reasons other than a simple statement  that  he  accepts  the
      evidence as true.


   8. It is therefore plain that the judge erred  in  law  in  reaching  the
      findings he did as to the genuineness and subsistence of the  marriage
      such that the decision must be set aside to be remade.

     9. Mr Mohsin continued to assert before me that the  findings  of  the
        First-tier Tribunal as to the deception  perpetrated  by  him  were
        incorrect. No cross appeal had been lodged against the decision  of
        the First-tier Tribunal in relation  to  that  finding  or  to  the
        finding that he did not meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules.

    10. Both parties were of the view that further evidence was required to
        enable primary findings of fact to  be  made  with  regard  to  the
        genuineness of the relationship and whether the parties  intend  to
        live together permanently. Mr Sarwar  indicated  that  it  was  the
        intention of Mr Mohsin to submit further evidence.  The  scheme  of
        the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does  not  assign  the
        function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.


    11. In the circumstances of this appeal I therefore remit the appeal to
        the First-tier Tribunal to be determined.

     Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision and remit the appeal for  hearing  before  the
First-tier Tribunal.

     Consequential Directions


    The hearing to take place where  Mr  Mohsin's  wife  is  able  to  give
    evidence - she is wheelchair bound.


    First-tier Tribunal judges Ennals, Tipping and Pirotta to  be  excluded
    from hearing the appeal.
[pic]
                                    Date 10th November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
