
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44419/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower,          |Determination Promulgated            |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 2nd December 2015                 |On 14th January 2016                 |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                              Miss FATOU TOURAY
                            (ANONYMITY NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pipe instructed by Rashid & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This appeal comes before the Upper Tribunal  following  our  error  of
    law decision dated 2 October 2015, which is to be  read  alongside  the
    present decision and which is appended to it.  In that decision we held
    that Judge of the First tier Tribunal Frankish materially erred in  law
    in dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision
    of 14 October 2013 to refuse to vary her leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom and  making  a  decision  under  s.47  Immigration  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006 to remove her to Gambia. The  error  had  been  to
    fail to have proper regard to the Appellant's  best  interests:   [19],
    and [27-30].

2     At the earlier hearing, we set aside the FtT's decision  and  proposed
    to remake the decision, but it was not possible to proceed  to  re-hear
    the appeal on that occasion. We ruled that the following finds of  fact
    of the FtT, not vitiated by error of law, would stand:
    (i)    it was not the intention of  the  Appellant's  family  that  the
         Appellant should come to the United Kingdom only as a genuine short
         term visitor; the family's intention had been, all  along,  to  use
         the visit visa to abuse the system and  circumvent  the  settlement
         rules (FtT para 16);
    (ii)   the Appellant's paternal  uncle  could  continue  to  provide  a
         supportive role to the Appellant upon return (FtT para 21).

    Hearing

3     Before us, the Appellant, her father Mr Bakary Touray, and her  mother
    Natoma Ceesay adopted recent witness statements and gave oral  evidence
    which is recorded in the record of proceedings. We do not  set  it  all
    out  here.   Documentary  evidence  before  us  establishes  that   the
    Appellant's parents and her brothers KT and ST have  all  been  granted
    further discretionary leave  to  remain  until  4  February  2018.  The
    Appellant's oldest brother MT has already been registered as British.

4     The Appellant herself said in evidence that before  she  travelled  to
    the United Kingdom she did not in fact know her parents very well,  but
    all witnesses gave evidence to the  effect  that  since  the  Appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom the bonds between them had grown  strong,
    and they were all now very close. Her uncle in Gambia had looked  after
    her but it was not the  same  as  being  with  your  own  parents.  The
    Appellant had obtained GCSE's at school in the UK. She  would  like  to
    continue studying here; a  Diploma  in  Health  and  Social  Care.  Her
    further education would  suffer  if  she  had  to  leave  the  UK.  The
    Appellant said that talking on the phone with her family here would not
    be enough if she had to leave the UK. She had friends in the UK but has
    not maintained contact with school friends from Gambia.

5     If the Appellant had to leave the UK,  the  Appellant's  parents  both
    said that it would not be possible for the whole family to relocate  to
    Gambia; their other three children had been born in the UK; MT had  now
    been registered as British. When  they  had  travelled  on  holiday  to
    Gambia before to see the Appellant, the  boys  had  found  the  climate
    difficult to cope with. The boys' education would suffer if they  lived
    in Gambia. Mr Touray said that the Appellant having to leave  would  be
    devastating. The Appellant's mother is expecting her fifth  child,  due
    on 6 January 2016.

6     In  evidence  some  further  information  was  also  given  about  the
    Appellant's circumstances before travelling to the UK. For the 12 years
    prior to her travelling to the UK, the Appellant had lived in  a  house
    in Brikama  with  her  maternal  grandmother  (Fatoumatta  Dibba),  her
    grandfather (who  we  note  died  in  September  2013),  and  also  the
    Appellant's paternal uncle, Alagi Touray, his wife and their (then) two
    children, the Appellant's cousins. Since the Appellant came to  the  UK
    there been another cousin born to her uncle Alagi and his wife.

7     They now live in Essau, which is across the mouth of the river  Gambia
    from the capital Banjul.  There  is  a  ferry  service.  The  witnesses
    described this as taking 45 minutes to an hour. Mr Touray  stated  that
    his brother Alagi had built a house in Essau  and  travelled  by  ferry
    each day to work at GAMTEL, the Gambia Telecommunications  Company,  in
    Banjul from 9 am to 6 pm Monday to Thursday. He is a very busy man.  Mr
    Touray said that his brother had built his house in Essau because  that
    is where he could afford to build it.  Although the Appellant suggested
    that there were no schools  or  colleges  in  Essau,  her  father  gave
    evidence that there were primary and secondary schools  there,  but  no
    colleges of higher education - these were in the capital.

8     The Appellant's paternal grandmother now lives  with  the  Appellant's
    paternal aunt, (also called Fatou Touray) in the aunt's house which  is
    also in Brikama. There is now nobody living in the house the  Appellant
    lived in with her grandmother. Mr Touray described that  house  as  now
    belonging to him. The Appellant's  mother  explained  that  she  had  a
    sister, Fatou Ceesay, in Tangeh, said to be  about  2  hours  from  the
    capital. Fatou has 8 children. The Appellant has never lived with them.
    The mother of Natoma and Fatou Ceesay also lives in Tangeh, with  their
    uncle (their mother's brother).

9     There are in fact affidavits dated 15 November 2015  sworn  in  Gambia
    from the Appellant's paternal aunt Fatou Touray  and  her  uncle  Alagi
    Touray. The aunt's evidence is much the same as that indicated from the
    witnesses before us. Alagi Touray asserts as follows:
         "3. However, I have my own family with three children and  Bakary's
         three bedroom house is not spacious enough to accommodate us all.
         4. For this reason, having built my own house, I decided to move to
         my property.
         5. Although I have also contributed helping Fatou Touray while  she
         was in the Gambia, I would like to suggest that Fatou stay with her
         parents at this moment as I will not be in a  position  to  provide
         any care for her due to my commitments.
         6. Also, felt it is in the best interest of Fatou  Touray  to  stay
         with her family because some time in February  2016,  I  intend  to
         travel to Ghana to pursue my master programme."

    Submissions

10    Mr Mills accepted that it was in the  Appellant's  best  interests  to
    live with her parents and younger siblings, even in a case  such  as  a
    present where they had been separated for a prolonged period  and  have
    only lived together relatively recently. However, it was not necessary,
    for those best interests to  be  served,  for  the  Appellant  and  her
    immediately family to live together in the United Kingdom.  Her  family
    members are Gambian nationals, save for the Appellant's brother MT  who
    is now also British, although he accepted that MT's British nationality
    was a significant factor in determining whether it would be  reasonable
    to expect the whole family to live in Gambia.

11    If the  Tribunal  was  not  satisfied  that  the  whole  family  could
    reasonably be expected to live in Gambia, Mr Mills submitted  that  the
    Appellant's return to Gambia, even if contrary to her  best  interests,
    was proportionate, given  the  importance  of  maintaining  immigration
    control and, in light of the retained findings of fact from  the  First
    tier decision, and the Appellant's parents having been  involved  in  a
    deception in securing the Appellant's entry to the United Kingdom.

12    The proportionality of the  Appellant's  proposed  removal  should  be
    considered through the lens  of  the  immigration  rules,  and  neither
    paragraph 301 or appendix FM of the rules afforded a route to leave  to
    remain for the Appellant - her parents do not have the appropriate form
    of leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  required  by  Parliament.
    The Appellant's parents had entered as a student and student  dependent
    respectively and had leave to remain until 2007, from which  time  they
    overstayed.  Following judicial review proceedings  they  were  granted
    discretionary leave to remain in 2011 on the basis the  long  residence
    of the children born in the United Kingdom. The Appellant however  does
    not satisfy  any  requirement  of  leave  to  remain  under  e.g.  para
    276ADE(1) on the grounds of the duration of her private life in the UK.
    There was a strong public interest in her removal given  in  particular
    the  family's  action  of  deliberately  acting   to   circumvent   the
    immigration rules.

13    As regards Part 5A of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002, Mr Mills doubted that with such a large  family  the  Appellant's
    family  was  or  would  remain  financially  independent  (a   relevant
    consideration under s.117B(2)), and the Appellant's private life,  such
    as it was, as distinct from her family life,  was  developed  when  her
    status  was  precarious  and  was  to  be  given  little  weight  under
    s.117B(5).

14    There were  no  'compelling'  circumstances  required  by  SSHD  v  SS
    (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  to  demonstrate  that  the  Appellant's
    proposed removal would be disproportionate, although he suggested  that
    the case was finely balanced and not 'run of the mill'.

15    Mr Pipe for the Appellant argued that the task in the  present  appeal
    was to balance the immigration history of the Appellant with  the  best
    interests of all the children. The Appellant's immigration position  is
    not sufficiently recognised by the rules, for example,  where  a  child
    has been in the United Kingdom  for  less  than  7  years,  then  their
    private lives are not capable of being  considered  within  the  rules,
    because, for instance, para 276ADE(1)(vi) which considers whether there
    would be very significant obstacles to an applicant's integration  into
    the country to which he would have to go if required to leave  the  UK,
    does not apply to children.

16    Mr Pipe set out the ages of the children born in  the  UK  and  argued
    that the question was not only about whether the children would receive
    a better education in the UK but that by reason of their being born and
    brought up in the UK they had strong roots here. He argued that with MT
    being British and KT being entitled to be registered as British as from
    8 July 2016, the Respondent cannot argue that it would be reasonable to
    require British national children to leave the European Union - as  per
    the concession made by Mr Devereux (Assistant Director UKBA and Head of
    European Operation Policy) in evidence to the Upper Tribunal in  Sanade
    and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) India [2012] UKUT  48
    (IAC), and as maintained to the present  time  under  the  Respondent's
    Immigration Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration:  Appendix  FM,
    Family Life (as a Partner or Parent) and  Private  Life  from  page  53
    onwards. In any event the Appellant's siblings had only visited  Gambia
    for short periods.

17    The meaning  of  the  expression  'bests  interests'  is  informed  by
    paragraphs 26 -30 of Re G (Children)  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1233,  a  case
    regarding a dispute about the welfare of children.

18    The Appellant has now been in the UK for 2 � years and  has  a  strong
    bond with her family members. It is not in the best interests of any of
    the children for the Appellant to be removed from the United Kingdom.

19    As to the Appellant's potential circumstances if living in Gambia,  Mr
    Pipe argued that it was not appropriate for the Appellant, aged 16,  to
    live by herself. There was a paternal grandmother, in  ill-health,  who
    now  lived  with  the  Appellant's  paternal  aunt  together  with  her
    children. There is also the Appellant's paternal  uncle  who  expresses
    the view that the Appellant should live with her family and states that
    he does not want to care for her.  There  are  some  relatives  on  the
    maternal side of the family but the  Appellant  has  never  lived  with
    them.

20    Regarding Part 5A NIAA 2002, Mr  Pipe  suggested  that  there  was  no
    particular test within s.117B as to financial independence,  and  noted
    that both of the Appellant's parents are in work  (save  for  the  fact
    that her mother has recently commenced maternity  leave  ahead  of  her
    expected delivery in January).

21    Mr Pipe pointed out that there is no route by which the Appellant  may
    gain entry clearance to the UK as an alternative to the present appeal;
    if  the  Appellant's  family  members  are  successful   in   obtaining
    indefinite leave to remain  at  the  end  of  their  second  period  of
    discretionary leave to remain (which runs to 4 February 2018) then  the
    Appellant will by that time be an adult and will not be able  to  apply
    for entry as a  dependent  child.  In  conclusion,  any  adverse  point
    arising from the Appellant's  parents'  immigration  history  does  not
    outweigh the best interests of the Appellant, which are  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom with her family.

22    Neither advocate objected to  our  looking  at  a  map  of  Gambia  if
    necessary to assist us in understanding the  locations  of  the  places
    mentioned in evidence.

    Discussion

23    Directing ourselves according to the principles set out at  paragraphs
    22-26 of our error of law decision, we find that  the  first  issue  to
    determine is what is in the best interests  of  the  children  in  this
    case. We also agree that the principles discussed  in  the  context  of
    proceedings under the Children Act 1989 in Re G (a child) are relevant,
    e.g.:
         "26      'Welfare', which in this context is synonymous with 'well-
         being' and 'interests' (see Lord Hailsham LC in In re B  (A  Minor)
         (Wardship: Sterilisation) [1988]  AC  199,  202),  extends  to  and
         embraces everything that relates to the child's  development  as  a
         human being and to the child's present and future life as  a  human
         being. The judge must consider the child's welfare now,  throughout
         the  remainder  of  the  child's  minority  and  into  and  through
         adulthood. The judge will bear  in  mind  the  observation  of  Sir
         Thomas Bingham MR in  Re  O  (Contact:  Imposition  of  Conditions)
         [1995] 2 FLR 124, 129, that:
             "... the court should take a medium-term and long-term view of
             the child's development and not  accord  excessive  weight  to
             what appear likely to be short-term or transient problems."
         ...
         27 ... Evaluating a  child's  best  interests  involves  a  welfare
         appraisal  in  the  widest  sense,  taking  into   account,   where
         appropriate, a wide range of  ethical,  social,  moral,  religious,
         cultural, emotional and  welfare  considerations.  Everything  that
         conduces to a child's welfare  and  happiness  or  relates  to  the
         child's development and present and future life as a  human  being,
         including the child's familial, educational and social environment,
         and the child's social, cultural, ethnic and  religious  community,
         is potentially relevant and has, where  appropriate,  to  be  taken
         into account. The judge must adopt a holistic approach ..."

24    Both parties now appear to agree that it is in the best  interests  of
    the Appellant and her younger brothers  that  she  remain  living  with
    them. We agree, and also find, taking into account the medium and  long
    term view of the development of the Appellant and  her  siblings,  that
    those best interests would be served by the Appellant  remaining  in  a
    household with her parents and siblings in the United  Kingdom,  rather
    than in  Gambia.  It  would  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant's siblings, who have lived the whole of their  lives  in  the
    United Kingdom, to be uprooted from that life to  a  place  where  they
    have little experience. The educational opportunities  of  all  of  the
    children, including the Appellant, are likely to be greater in  the  UK
    than in Gambia. We treat the fact that is in the best interests for the
    Appellant  to  remain  with  her  family  in  the  UK  as   a   primary
    consideration  in  determining  the  proportionality  of  her  proposed
    removal, and as an integral part of that assessment.

25    We find, applying the approach in Razgar  [2004]  3  All  ER  821,  as
    follows:
         (1)      The Appellant clearly enjoys a family life with her family
         in the UK, and , to a lesser extent, will  have  developed  private
         life connections with friends,   and  the  proposed  removal  would
         amount to an interference by a public authority with  the  exercise
         of the Appellant's right to respect for  that  private  and  family
         life.
         (2)      Such interference will have consequences of  such  gravity
         as potentially to engage the operation of article 8.
         (3)      The interference is in accordance with the law,  involving
         the maintenance of immigration control.
         (4)      The interference is necessary in a democratic  society  in
         the interests of national security, public safety or  the  economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of
         the rights and freedoms of others.
         (5)      In assessing the proportionality of the end to be achieved
         we take into account the following factors.

26    The Appellant's parents are not settled in the UK.  Routes  for  leave
    to enter or remain under paragraph 301 or Appendix FM (Section  R-LTRC:
    requirements for leave to remain as a child under Appendix FM) are  not
    available to her. The Secretary of State  has  drawn  the  rules  under
    Appendix FM in such a way that a child may be granted leave  to  remain
    under that appendix only if one of their parents has also been  granted
    leave to remain under that appendix (see E-LTRC.1.6).  Neither  of  the
    Appellant's parents has gained their leave to  remain  by  that  route.
    There is nothing about these  parts  of  the  immigration  rules  which
    suggests that a person in the Appellant's position is not  catered  for
    by reason of inadvertent drafting; it is likely to be intentional.

27    However, Paragraph 17 of SSHD v SS (Congo) provides:
         "If the gap between what Article 8 requires and the content of  the
         Immigration Rules is wide, then  the  part  for  the  Secretary  of
         State's residual discretion to play in satisfying the  requirements
         of Article 8 and section 6(1) of the HRA  will  be  correspondingly
         greater. In  such  circumstances,  the  practical  guidance  to  be
         derived from the content of the Rules as to relevant public  policy
         considerations for the purposes of the balance to be  struck  under
         Article 8 is also likely to  be  reduced:  to  use  the  expression
         employed by Aikens LJ in MM (Lebanon) in the Court  of  Appeal,  at
         [135], the proportionality balancing  exercise  "will  be  more  at
         large". If the Secretary of State  has  not  made  a  conscientious
         effort to strike a fair balance for the purposes of  Article  8  in
         making the Rules, a court or tribunal will naturally be disinclined
         to give significant weight to her view regarding the actual balance
         to be struck when the  court  or  tribunal  has  to  consider  that
         question for itself. On the other  hand,  where  the  Secretary  of
         State has sought to fashion the content  of  the  Rules  so  as  to
         strike what she regards as the appropriate balance under Article  8
         and any gap between the  Rules  and  what  Article  8  requires  is
         comparatively narrow, the Secretary of State's formulation  of  the
         Rules may allow the Court to be more confident that she has brought
         a focused assessment of considerations of the  public  interest  to
         bear on the matter. That will in turn allow the Court more  readily
         to give weight to that assessment  when  making  its  own  decision
         pursuant to Article 8. An issue arises on this appeal as to whether
         the Secretary of State has made a conscientious effort to  use  the
         new Immigration Rules to strike the fair balance  which  Article  8
         requires and whether there is a substantial gap,  or  not,  between
         the content of the FTE Rules and the requirements of Article 8."

28    We are of the view that Article 8 ECHR requires  consideration  to  be
    given to the respect for family and private life  of  children  in  the
    United Kingdom whose parents have limited leave to remain, but are  not
    settled. There is nothing in the immigration rules which permits such a
    private or family life to be considered.   There  is  therefore  a  gap
    between what  is  required  under  the  ECHR  and  that  which  may  be
    considered under the Rules. For that reason, we are of  the  view  that
    the proportionality balancing  exercise  is  more  'at  large'  in  the
    present case than where the rules have been more closely  fashioned  to
    the requirements of Article 8 ECHR.

29    In assessing what the Appellant's circumstances are likely  to  be  if
    remaining in the United Kingdom, we record that her  family  (save  for
    MT, who is British) currently enjoy limited leave to  remain  here.  We
    make no prediction about whether they will be able to secure indefinite
    leave to remain, but for the purposes of our present assessment we take
    no negative point from the fact that her family are not yet settled  in
    the UK. If remaining in the UK, the Appellant is likely to continue  to
    develop bonds with her immediate family. There is another  sibling  due
    to be born in January 2016. The Appellant will continue to maintain and
    develop friendships in the UK. As the Appellant becomes  an  adult,  we
    think it likely that if the Appellant starts to live independently, she
    will probably maintain close relationships with her parents and younger
    siblings.

30    In assessing  the  circumstances  that  the  Appellant  is  likely  to
    experience in Gambia if returned, we are entitled and  indeed  required
    to take into account the findings  of  the  FtT  which  have  not  been
    successfully challenged by the Appellant, as set  out  at  paragraph  2
    above.

31    As regards the position  of  the  Appellant's  uncle,  we  reject  any
    suggestion that he is now simply unwilling to care for  the  Appellant.
    In his witness statement of 12  August  2015,  the  Appellant's  father
    states that sometime in  April  2012  his  brother  told  him  that  he
    intended to move to his own house in  Essau.  However,  in  his  letter
    dated 17 June 2013 addressed to Bakary Touray (page 65 of Part B of the
    Appellant's bundle) Alagi Touray himself says:
         "I just want to inform you  that  my  responsibility  at  work  has
         increased and the fact that is full time employment is a big burden
         for me at this present time. It is my  wish  to  continue  to  take
         great care of Fatou Touray but at the moment due to the  nature  of
         my work, it will be difficult to take care  of  her  as  you  would
         like. For that been (sic) the case I would suggest that Fatou  live
         with the family in England permanently."

32    Taking into account the findings of the FtT, we are entitled to  treat
    any assertions of Alagi Touray about his  inability  to  care  for  the
    Appellant with caution, as with his recent assertion that he intends to
    travel to Ghana for studies. We note in any event that  that  assertion
    was made in relation to himself; the evidence was silent as to  whether
    his whole family  would  be  relocating.  There  was  no  corroborative
    evidence of his proposed travel to Ghana.

33    We also note that Alagi Touray was not saying in  June  2013  that  he
    was unwilling to care for the Appellant; in fact, he says the opposite.
    Even if Alagi himself is busy at work (which we note in  any  event  is
    only four days a week, 9 - 6 pm, plus  commuting  time  by  ferry,  and
    therefore burdened with work no more or less than many parents  in  the
    UK), other members of his household include his wife and children; i.e.
    the same people that the Appellant grew  up  with  for  12  years.  The
    amount of time that Alagi himself may be away  from  the  household  at
    work is of no great relevance in determining whether the  household  is
    an acceptable environment for the Appellant.

34    We therefore consider that it is possible for the  Appellant  to  live
    in Essau in her uncle's household.  Although the  Appellant's  original
    home in Brikama was said, at 3 bedrooms, to be too small, no  assertion
    has been made by any witness before us that the house  in  Essau  could
    not accommodate the Appellant. We proceed on the basis that  there  are
    schools in Essau that the Appellant could attend; that was her father's
    evidence, and  we  think  it  unlikely  that  Alagi,  an  educated  and
    professional man working for a national company, would build  and  move
    to a house in a location where  there  were  no  schools  for  his  own
    children. The Appellant's family in the UK could continue to contribute
    financially to her upbringing, as they have done in the past (there are
    a number of such remittances shown in the Appellant's bundle). The very
    positive school report from the Brikama Methodist Academy dated 4  July
    2013 (Appellant's bundle Part B page 47) is testament to the fact  that
    the Appellant was doing well  in  Gambia  when  surrounded  by  Alagi's
    family (although we accept that she  was  also  then  living  with  her
    paternal grandparents).

35    With the consent of the parties, we have considered a  map  of  Gambia
    (Google maps). Even taking into account the  fact  that  there  is  the
    physical barrier of the Gambia river between Essau (which is  near  the
    ferry port of Barra) and  the  westernmost  part  of  Gambia  on  which
    Banjul, Brikama and Tengeh are situated, we find that in the  immediate
    and medium future  there  would  be  no  regular  requirement  for  the
    Appellant to commute to Banjul. Bakary Touray gave evidence that  there
    are higher education colleges in Banjul. If  in  future  the  Appellant
    wishes to pursue higher education and needed to take the ferry  commute
    from Barra to Banjul to achieve that, we do not  see  that  that  would
    present a difficulty; indeed we do not find any great difficulty in her
    making such a journey at her present age.

36    We find in any event that there are  other  possible  alternatives  to
    the Appellant living in Essau. There are other relatives in the Brikama
    or Tanji/Tangeh.  The  impression  from  oral  evidence  was  that  the
    Appellant's maternal relatives lived in a remote rural area -  however,
    maps indicate that Tanji/Tangeh is a coastal town some 30 minutes  from
    Brikama. Both are a similar distance (some  50  minutes)  from  Banjul.
    Although there are many children living in the households of  both  the
    Appellant's  paternal aunt and grandmother in Brikama, and her maternal
    aunt and grandmother in Tanji, the Appellant is at 16 a  largely  self-
    sustaining near-adult. There is a resource of an empty home in Brikama,
    belonging to the Appellant's father, from which capital or income could
    be derived to improve the accommodation in Brikama or Tanji.

37     We  do  not  find  it  necessary  to  specify  exactly  what   living
    arrangements might prevail for the Appellant in Gambia; rather we  find
    that it has not been established that no appropriate accommodation,  in
    an appropriate household, would be available for her in Gambia.

38    Having found above (without reference to the  Appellant's  immigration
    history) that it would be in her best interests to remain in the UK, we
    proceed, applying the guidance of Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4 (1 February 2011), to see if  the  cumulative  effect  of
    other considerations outweigh them: See para 33:
         "... In making the proportionality assessment under article 8,  the
         best interests of the child must be a primary  consideration.  This
         means that they must be considered first. They can, of  course,  be
         outweighed by the cumulative effect  of  other  considerations.  In
         this case, the  countervailing  considerations  were  the  need  to
         maintain firm  and  fair  immigration  control,  coupled  with  the
         mother's appalling immigration history and  the  precariousness  of
         her position when family life was created."

39    In the present  case,  a  significant  countervailing  factor  is  the
    fiction advanced by the Appellant's parents that following her  arrived
    in the UK, circumstances overtook them and it was  no  longer  possible
    for the Appellant to return to  Gambia.  The  Appellant's  mother  more
    candidly stated in oral evidence before us that 'Our plan was  for  her
    to be here with her family'. The Appellant's parents came to the UK for
    the temporary purpose of enabling her  father  to  study.  It  was  her
    parents' active decision that her mother travel to the  UK  to  support
    her husband, and leave the Appellant in Gambia being cared for by other
    relatives. The Appellant's parents had three  children  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The situation which prevailed before the Appellant entered the
    UK as a visitor was one entirely of her  parents'  making.   After  the
    Appellant's arrival  in  the  UK,  her  parents  then  put  forward  an
    unreliable account as to why the Appellant could not return to Gambia.

40    We find that there are not  sufficiently  compelling  factors  in  the
    present case to demonstrate that the  public  interest  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control (s.117B(1)  NIAA  2002)   is  outweighed.
    Even if the Appellant's family in the UK are  financially  independent,
    and if the Appellant can speak English,  this  does  not  result  in  a
    positive entitlement to leave to remain in the UK: AM  (s.117B)  [2015]
    UKUT 260 (IAC).  We give little weight to the  private  life  that  the
    Appellant may have developed in the UK  during  her  precariously  held
    status  (s.117(5)  NIAA  2002).   We  accept  that  there  will  be   a
    detrimental impact on the Appellant upon returning to Gambia; she  will
    be distressed at being separated from her parents and siblings and will
    have to resume her relationships with her relatives in Gambia, and make
    contact with old friends and make new ones. However, we find that these
    factors  do   not   result   in   the   Respondent's   decision   being
    disproportionate.

    Decision

41    Having previously set aside the decision of the First  tier  Tribunal,
    we remake the decision, dismissing the Appellant's appeal.


Signed:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Date: 13 January 2016
