

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44423/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at IAC Birmingham               |                   Decision and Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                              |
|On 20 July 2015                       |                   On 27 July 2015       |
|                                      |                                         |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                 ali naqash
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 18 December  1987.  He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hussain, dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
      decision to refuse his application for leave to remain in  the  United
      Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-  based
      system.

   2. The appellant's immigration history is not clear from the papers,  but
      appears to be that he entered the United  Kingdom  in  September  2012
      with leave to enter as a student. He was subsequently granted leave to
      remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant until 30 March  2015,  to
      study at Midlands Business Management College. However  following  the
      revocation of the college's sponsor licence, his leave  was  curtailed
      on 14 July 2014 to expire on 15 September 2014.

   3. On 15 September 2014 the appellant made his most  recent  application,
      for leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.  That
      application was refused on 22 October 2014 on the grounds that he  had
      failed to meet the maintenance requirements of the  immigration  rules
      under paragraph 245ZX(d) and Appendix C. Since he  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of paragraph 14 of Appendix C for having  an  established
      presence studying in the United Kingdom he was required  to  meet  the
      higher level of funds for maintenance, which he was unable to do.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision and  requested  that  the
      appeal be determined  on  the  papers  without  an  oral  hearing.  In
      determining the appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain  noted  that
      the appellant had produced no evidence other than an unsigned skeleton
      argument and had provided no details of any courses he  had  completed
      or their duration and no evidence that he was presently  studying.  He
      found accordingly that the appellant had failed to satisfy the  burden
      of proving that he had an established presence in the  United  Kingdom
      and of proving that he was able to meet the  maintenance  requirements
      of the immigration rules. He found  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
      suggest that the respondent had not observed the common law principles
      of fairness and he found that the appellant's removal would not be  in
      breach of Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  with  regard  in  particular  to
      paragraph 276ADE. He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   5. Permission to appeal that decision was  sought  by  the  appellant  in
      person on the grounds that the decision was contrary to the common law
      principles of fairness since the respondent had accepted all the facts
      about his courses and bank statements; that he was studying; and  that
      his removal would breach his Article 8 rights.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted on 5 May 2015 on arguable grounds  of
      unfairness, on the basis that it was arguable that the respondent  had
      failed to comply with directions and to provide  the  judge  with  the
      relevant evidence.

   7. At the hearing there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant.  No  further  evidence  had  been  filed.  I  heard   brief
      submissions from Mr Smart and indicated that I found no errors of  law
      in the judge's decision. My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

Consideration and findings

   8. Permission was granted on the basis that it was not obvious  that  the
      respondent had complied with directions given by the  Tribunal  on  20
      January 2015 and that the evidence held by the respondent had arguably
      not been put before the judge. However, having had the opportunity  to
      consider the papers in the file it is clear that  the  respondent  did
      respond to the directions and provided the  Tribunal  with  an  appeal
      bundle which was before the judge when he heard the appeal. It is also
      clear that there is nothing in the respondent's  appeal  bundle  which
      comprises evidence that enabled the appellant to make out his case for
      having an established presence studying in the United Kingdom  at  the
      time his application was made.

   9. The documents in  the  respondent's  appeal  bundle  include  the  CAS
      produced by the appellant  for  a  course  of  studies  at  University
      Tutorial College commencing  on  22  September  2014.  The  respondent
      accepted that a valid CAS had been produced and awarded the  appellant
      the relevant points in that respect. However the CAS did not in itself
      demonstrate that the appellant was actually undertaking those  studies
      and, as the judge properly  found,  there  was  no  evidence  to  that
      effect.  Neither  was  there  anything  in  that  bundle,  or  in  the
      appellant's  own  evidence  for  the  appeal  before  the   First-tier
      Tribunal, demonstrating that he had completed a single  course  of  at
      least six months' duration or that he  had  completed  six  months  of
      study and was applying to continue studying on that  same  course,  as
      was  required  under  paragraph  14  of  Appendix  C.  The  judge  was
      accordingly entitled to conclude that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
      demonstrate that he had an established presence studying in the United
      Kingdom, that he  was  required  to  meet  the  higher  threshold  for
      maintenance, and that he had failed to meet that threshold. There  was
      no unfairness in the decision of the respondent or the  judge  and  he
      was entitled to make the decision that he did.

  10. Having found, for reasons properly given, that the appellant could not
      meet the requirements of the immigration rules for the purposes of the
      points-based system application, the judge went on to  give  full  and
      proper consideration to Article 8, both within and outside the  rules.
      The decision that he reached was one that was properly open to him  on
      the evidence.

  11.  Accordingly, I find no errors of law in the  judge's  findings  under
      the immigration rules or  on  Article  8  grounds  and  I  uphold  his
      decision.

DECISION

  12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.





Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:
