
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/44074/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 July 2016                               |On 9 August 2016              |
|Decision given orally at the hearing          |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                           Muhammad Mujtaba Hashmi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire of Counsel, Law Lane Solicitors
For the Respondent:    MR L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this case is a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  in  March
    1992.  He came to Britain as a student and thereafter applied  for  the
    issue of a residence card  as  a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights.  That application was refused. The  appellant
    appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Nicholls on 12 October 2012.

2.   The judge heard evidence from  the  appellant  and  from  his  wife,  a
    Romanian national, and in a thorough determination set out her findings
    of fact in paragraphs 15 onwards. In particular, in paragraph  19,  she
    emphasised that she had had the benefit of seeing both parties  to  the
    marriage, hearing their testimony and considering the interview records
    of the interviews conducted with them  both.   The  conclusion  of  the
    judge was that this was a  genuine  marriage  and  that  the  wife  was
    exercising Treaty rights.

3.   Some time later, on 28 October 2014, the appellant attended a  marriage
    of a friend of his with an EEA national.  That marriage was  raided  by
    the Immigration Service because it was a suspected sham  marriage.   It
    appears from the papers before me that although the marriage did not go
    ahead on the date when the marriage ceremony was raided it did go ahead
    on another occasion so had it been a suspected sham marriage then  that
    is possibly shown to be incorrect by the fact the marriage was able  to
    go ahead on a later occasion.  There is no evidence in the papers  from
    the Secretary of State regarding  that  marriage.   In  any  event  the
    appellant was interviewed and in fact it appears that  he  was  at  one
    stage handcuffed. He answered questions put to him about his  marriage:
    in particular, he was asked if his wife was working and  he  said  that
    she was not.  The context of that question is unclear:  it  is  unclear
    whether or not he had in mind that she  was not working on that day  or
    whether she had ceased work altogether.  He was also  asked  about  his
    telephone numbers for his wife and why there were  not  photographs  of
    her on his mobile phone.  At that stage the Secretary of State  decided
    to issue the Section 10 notice  which  followed  the  relevant  law  in
    Regulation 19,  but following the terms of Regulation 26,   meant  that
    the appellant had an in country right of appeal.

4.   The appeal came before Judge Thomas.  There was no attendance by or  on
    behalf  of  the  appellant  on  that  occasion.   Judge  Thomas   heard
    submissions from the Presenting Officer and concluded that despite  the
    fact there was some evidence before her that the appellant's spouse was
    working,  the appellant had not addressed any of the issues detailed in
    the decision against him and that the matters raised by the respondents
    remained, it was stated,  unchallenged.   The  judge  stated  that  the
    appellant had provided no  evidence  to  the  Tribunal  of  either  his
    immigration or his marital status.  There was no  marriage  certificate
    and no evidence  to prove that they were  living  in  a  marital  or  a
    durable relationship.  It is most unfortunate that the  judge  did  not
    have before him the determination of Judge Nicholls two years before.

5.   The judge concluded that the appellant had not proved to  the  required
    standard that he had valid immigration status in the United Kingdom  or
    that he was married to an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights  as  a
    worker here and therefore the judge concluded  that  the  decision  was
    justified.  The judge reached that conclusion despite the evidence that
    the appellant had married in Slough on 6 September 2012.

6.   The decision of the judge to dismiss the appeal was  then  appealed  in
    the First-tier, permission was then refused but permission was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds in the Upper Tribunal.  She  pointed  out
    that whilst the judge had found that he had not  provided  evidence  of
    his marital status that had not been disputed by the Secretary of State
    and that he had been granted a residence card by reason of his marriage
    to an EEA citizen and the issue was whether or not he would cease to be
    a family member of an EEA national who was exercising Treaty rights.

7.    The  matter  has  now  come  before  me  and  usefully  I   have   the
    determination of Judge Nicholls and also  the  detailed  notes  of  the
    interview.  It is clear that after the interview there was a  telephone
    call from a woman purporting to be the appellant's wife.  I  have  been
    able to consider all the documentation but in the light of the findings
    of Judge Nicholls I can only conclude that  this  marriage  was  not  a
    sham, that the appellant had properly been issued with a residence card
    and  that  there  was  evidence  that  his  wife  was   working.    The
    circumstances of the interview with the appellant were unfortunate:  it
    was not a formal interview it appears, but really a  subsidiary  matter
    to a raid on what was thought might be a sham  marriage.   I  therefore
    place less weight on what the appellant said then because in particular
    the evidence before me shows that the appellant's wife was working.

8.   I consider that there are material errors of law in  the  determination
    of the judge  in  his  conclusion  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    discharged the burden of proof and that there was  sufficient  evidence
    to show that the appellant's wife was  not  exercising  Treaty  rights.
    Clearly that evidence was available in the totality of the evidence and
    indeed,  of  course,  the  judge  did  accept  that  evidence  of   the
    appellant's wife working was available.  I consider that  the  decision
    reached by the judge was not based on all the evidence before  him.   I
    have considered all the evidence and I conclude that this is an  appeal
    which it is appropriate to allow.   The  evidence  indicates  that  the
    appellant's wife is exercising Treaty  rights  here,  that  this  is  a
    genuine marriage and that the appellant  has  a  residence  card  valid
    until 2018.  So the appeal of the appellant is therefore allowed.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy











