
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44887/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th July 2014                               |On 11th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                             Ms Sohna busu Mbye
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Singh, South Manchester Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Ms Sohna busu Mbye  date of birth 9 September 1996 ,  is
    a citizen of Gambia.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking account  all
    of the circumstances  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the respondent against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Harris promulgated on 2 May 2014.  Whilst it is the
    respondent's appeal I have kept the designation of the parties as  they
    appear in the original determination.

 4. The judge allowed the appeal of the appellant against the decisions  of
    the respondent dated 9 October 2013 to refuse the appellant a permanent
    residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

 5. By decision made on 6 June 2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Deans  granted
    permission to appeal and the following terms:-

        1 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Harris allowed this appeal under
        the EEA Regulations. The appellant claimed  a  permanent  right  of
        residence as the child of an EEA national. The difficulty she faced
        was that the EEA national, who was her stepfather, had returned  to
        Germany and was unwilling to  assist  the  Appellant  by  providing
        evidence to show that he had been exercising Treaty rights  in  the
        UK for a continuous period of five years. The Appellant was able to
        produce some wage slips for her stepfather  and  on  the  basis  of
        these and the appellant's oral testimony the  judge  accepted  that
        the requirement was satisfied.

        2 The application could permission to appeal to contends  that  the
        judge erred in finding that the  requirement  was  satisfied  where
        there was a lack of  '  corroborative  evidence  '  and  where  the
        Appellant had not discharge the burden of proof.

        3 Arguably the approach the judge should have taken was to issue  a
        direction  requiring  the  Respondent  to  produce  evidence   from
        National Insurance  records  in  relation  to  the  stepfather,  as
        contemplated  in  Amos   [2011]  EWCA  Civ.  552.  Presumably   the
        Respondent should be in a position to remedy this omission prior to
        any further Tribunal hearing. In that that the judge did not follow
        this course the grounds are arguable.

 6. It was clearly contemplated that upon receipt of the permission granted
    the respondent would make enquiries with the National Insurance records
    to check the work record of  the  stepfather.  There  were  no  further
    records before me. The respondent had made no checks and there  was  no
    information as to the work  record  of  the  stepfather  from  National
    Insurance, Inland Revenue or any other source.

 7. Within the determination in  paragraph  10  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Harris had noted that the parties agreed that the  only  issue  in  the
    case was whether or not the stepfather was exercising treaty rights  at
    the time that he left the United Kingdom.

 8. Before me Miss Johnson on behalf of the respondent sought  to  raise  a
    further issue as to whether or not the appellant had been studying on a
    single course of study for the relevant period  of  time.  That  arises
    because of the wording of Regulation 10 as set out below. That was  not
    an issue that was raised either before the First-tier  Tribunal  or  in
    the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

Factual background

 9. The appellant is a Gambian national. Her mother is Sukai Sarr,  she  is
    also a Gambian national. On 2 April 2006 Sukai Sarr  married  Mr  Lamin
    Sambou, who is a German national. Mr Sambou was in the  United  Kingdom
    exercising treaty rights. The appellant's mother joined her husband  in
    the United Kingdom in 2006. Since that time the appellant's mother  and
    Mr Sambou have had two children together.

10. On the 22nd April 2008 the appellant, who would have been 11 years  old
    at the time, came to the United Kingdom. At that point she came to  the
    United Kingdom to join her mother and stepfather on a  European  family
    permit. It does not appear that any application was thereafter made for
    a residence card. It appears to have been accepted that the  stepfather
    was at that point working otherwise no family permit  would  have  been
    issued.

11. On 16 October 2008 Mr Sambou applied for a permanent residence card. On
    3 November 2009 the UK Border Agency wrote requesting further  evidence
    that Mr Sambou had been working for a continuous period of five  years.
    It  appears  that  further  documents  were  submitted  but  such  were
    insufficient for the UKBA. On the 16th February 2010  UKBA  refused  Mr
    Sambou a permanent residence card.

12. Shortly thereafter Mr Sambou  left  the  United  Kingdom  returning  to
    Germany. Sukai Sarr returned to Germany at some time in  2011.  Whether
    that was to join her husband is unclear. Subsequently  they  appear  to
    have parted. The appellant appears to have  been  left  in  the  United
    Kingdom with a Mr and Mrs Yarbo, although there is  some  reference  to
    the local authority or social services being aware of and approving the
    arrangement. .

13. Since coming into the United Kingdom the appellant has been  in  school
    attending Whalley Range School from September 2008 to June 2013. She is
    now studying her A-levels. However because of problems with  regard  to
    her immigration status she could only study  her  A-levels  at  Rutland
    County College.

14. On the basis of the facts as presented the appellant claims that she is
    entitled to a permanent  right  of  residence.  As  identified  by  the
    parties before the judge the only issue was whether  the  EEA  national
    was exercising treaty rights at  the  time  that  he  left  the  United
    Kingdom. A secondary issue is now being raised as to whether or not the
    appellant was studying on a single course.

Relationship of the appellant to the EEA national

15. This matter is governed by the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006. The relevant provisions of Regulation  7  provide  as
    follows: --

        Subject to paragraph (two), for the purposes of  these  regulations
        the following person shall be treated as family members of  another
        person-

          a) his spouse or civil partner;

          b) direct descendants of his, his spouse or his civil partner who
             are-

      i) under 21; or

     ii) dependence appears, his spouse or civil partner;.....

16.  Thus the purposes of the regulations the appellant is a family  member
    of an EEA national, as a child under 21 of an EEA national's spouse.

Permanent right of residence

17. The provisions  of  regulation  15  deal  with  a  permanent  right  of
    residence. Regulation 15 provides: --

         15 (1) The following person shall acquire the right  to  reside  in
         the United Kingdom permanently

         (a) an EEA national who  has  resided  in  the  United  Kingdom  in
         accordance with these regulations for a continuous period  of  five
         years;

         (b) A family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an  EEA
         national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the  EEA
         national in accordance with  these  regulations  for  a  continuous
         period of five years;...

         (f) a person who -

             (i) has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
         regulations were continuous period of five years; and

             (ii) was, at the end of that period, a family member  who  has
         retained the right of residence. ....

18. Thus as a family member the appellant could if she had resided  in  the
    United Kingdom with an EEA national for a  continuous  period  of  five
    years have acquired the right of residence or under subparagraph (f) if
    she has resided in the United Kingdom for five years and was at the end
    of the period a family member who had a retained  right  of  residence.
    Provided the appellant met the requirements she would have  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence.

19. The issue of a retained right of residence is dealt with in  Regulation
    10. Regulation 10 provides as follows: --

         10 (1) In these regulations, family member who has  retained  right
         of  residence  means,  subject  to  paragraph  (8),  a  person  who
         satisfies the conditions in paragraphs (2), (3), (4) or (5).

         (2) ...

         (3) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if-

         (a) he is a direct descendant of-

         (i) a qualified person or an EEA national with a permanent right of
         residence who has died

         (ii) a person who ceased to be a qualified  person  on  ceasing  to
         reside in the United Kingdom; or

         (iii) the person who  was  the  spouse  or  civil  partner  of  the
         qualified person or the EEA national  with  a  permanent  right  of
         residence mentioned in subparagraph (1) when  he  died  or  is  the
         spouse or civil partner of the  person mentioned  in  sub-paragraph
         (ii); and

         (b) he was attending an educational course in  the  United  Kingdom
         immediately before the qualified person or the EEA national with  a
         permanent right of residence died  or  ceased  to  be  a  qualified
         person and continues to attend such a course.




20. The appellant is the direct descendant of the  spouse  of  a  qualified
    person who ceased to be a qualified person  by  reason  of  ceasing  to
    reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.  As  such  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of Regulation 10(3)(a)(iii) and (b).

21. The argument on behalf of the appellant is that:-

         a) The appellant is a family member of an EEA national by virtue of
            Regulation 7.

         b) The appellant by virtue of regulation 10(3)(a)(iii) and (b)  has
            a retained right of residence entitling her  to  remain  in  the
            United Kingdom in accordance with the regulations.

         c) The appellant by virtue of regulation 15(1)(f)  having  been  in
            the United Kingdom for  five  years  under  the  regulations  is
            entitled to a permanent right of residence.

22. The issue before Judge Harris was whether at  the  time  that  the  EEA
    national ceased to reside in the United Kingdom the  EEA  national  was
    immediately prior to that exercising treaty rights.

23.  The secondary argument sought to be advanced by the representative for
    the respondent was that the appellant was  not  at  the  material  time
    attending an course but had changed to a different course and therefore
    did not meet the requirements of regulation 10 (3)(b).

24. The judge had specifically identified the only  issue  that  was  taken
    before him with regard to the  appellant  qualifying  for  a  permanent
    right of residence. That was related to the  work  record  of  the  EEA
    national. On the basis of the evidence presented the judge was entitled
    to come to the conclusion that at the time that the  EEA  aim  national
    left the United Kingdom the EEA national was working and therefore  had
    been exercising treaty rights at that stage. Further  the  judge  found
    that that the EEA national had been working  through  out.  That  is  a
    finding of fact made by the judge.

25. On the basis of the findings the  judge  found  that  on  EEA  national
    ceasing to reside the appellant had a retained right of residence under
    Regulation 10.

26. Thereafter the appellant continue to reside in the  United  Kingdom  in
    accordance with the regulations and had been  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom from the period of April 2008 until April  2013  in  accordance
    with the regulations that at that stage she had  acquired  a  permanent
    right of residence.

27. Even if I had allowed the respondent to pursue a point not taken before
    the first-tier tribunal and not within the grounds  of  appeal  on  the
    basis of the findings of fact made by the judge the appellant continued
    in a single course of study through until April 2013 by which time  she
    had acquired a permanent right of residence. I do not however allow the
    respondent to amend the grounds of appeal. The issue was not raised  in
    the grounds to the First -tier Tribunal and was not the  basis  of  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

28. In the  circumstances  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I uphold the decision to allow this  matter  under  the
    EEA regulations.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


