
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44407/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2015                  |On 4 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ANTHONY CHIMAKPA ONUOHA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Appeared in person and was not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    a First-tier Judge, promulgated on 6 June 2015,  allowing  Mr  Onuoha's
    appeal against the respondent's decision of 20 October 2014 refusing to
    grant him leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   For convenience I will refer to Mr Onuoha as the appellant, as  he  was
    below, and to the Secretary of State as the respondent.

3.   The appellant's application for leave  to  remain  was  made  on  human
    rights grounds.  It appears that he has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since 2000 when  he  came  into  this  country  on  the  basis  of  his
    relationship with his father who was  employed  at  the  Nigerian  High
    Commission.   The  appellant  has  remained  in  the   United   Kingdom
    thereafter and his claim was based essentially on his relationship with
    his son C, who was born on 10 May 2009 to EH, a former partner  of  the
    appellant.  He has another son, J, by SW, but he does  not  know  where
    they live and there has been  no  family  life  between  them  and  the
    appellant for many years.

4.   By the time C was born the appellant and EH had separated.  EH did  not
    appear at the hearing before the Judge.  She had provided  a  statement
    dated 5 May 2015 and there were also letters from her dated 25 February
    2011 and 27 July 2014.  It appears that she lives in Yorkshire with  C,
    and the appellant lives in London.  I note no evidence was produced  by
    the appellant of him travelling to Yorkshire but there were photographs
    produced of him and a child who, the Judge said,  EH  would  have  been
    able to identify if it was C, if she had given evidence.

5.   The Judge accepted that the letter written by EH  of  9  May  2015  had
    been written by her.  He said that with some reservations he found  the
    appellant played a part in C's life.  He said it would be in  C's  best
    interests to have direct contact with  his  father.   C  is  a  British
    citizen and it was not reasonable to expect C and his mother to live in
    Nigeria.  Under paragraph 117B [of the 2002 Act] the  Judge  found  the
    appellant was in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a
    qualifying child and also took into consideration the number  of  years
    he had lived in the United Kingdom and that he was of  good  character.
    He concluded that it would not be proportionate for the reasons set out
    above to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom.

6.   The Secretary of State sought and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal
    against this decision, on the basis that the Judge's findings  did  not
    establish that the appellant was in a genuine and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with C as the Judge had failed to enunciate the extent  of
    his input into C's life and the impact his removal would have.  It  had
    therefore not been established that the appellant formed a  fundamental
    part of C's best interests which were clearly realised  by  being  with
    his mother who provided his fundamental needs and had done so since his
    birth.  It was also argued that to refer to the respondent's failure to
    provide expert evidence to disprove  the  contention  that  C's  mother
    wrote letters in support  of  his  application  unlawfully  placed  the
    burden on the Secretary of State and it was argued that it was for  the
    appellant to establish with  sufficient  evidence  that  he  enjoyed  a
    meaningful relationship with C; he had failed to do so.   It  was  also
    argued that the Judge failed to consider  whether  C's  best  interests
    were outweighed by countervailing factors and the  public  interest  in
    maintaining effective immigration control  and  that  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal on Article 8  grounds  was  rendered  unsound  by  the
    failure to adopt  a  proportionality  exercise.   In  effect  the  best
    interests of the child had been elevated to a trump card.

7.   Mr Onuoha appeared without representation.  A letter had been  received
    from his previous representative  stating  that  they  were  no  longer
    instructed and would not be attending.  I explained to  Mr  Onuoha  the
    difficulties he might face in arguing that there was not  an  error  of
    law in the Judge's decision, bearing in mind that he is  not  a  lawyer
    and would be confronted by Ms Holmes' argument that there was an  error
    of law.  He said that he did not work and had not worked for some  time
    and would be  unable  to  afford  a  lawyer's  fees  and  therefore  he
    preferred to go ahead.  I gave him a copy of the  bundle,  drawing  his
    attention to the Judge's decision, which he had  previously  read,  and
    also to the grounds of appeal.  In addition I drew his attention  to  a
    Rule 24 response which had been put in on his behalf  by  his  previous
    representative.

8.   Ms Holmes relied on and developed the points made in the  grounds.   As
    regards ground 1, she argued that the relationship had  not  been  made
    out.  Paragraph 27 of the determination was very brief and contained no
    real analysis or explanation of its  conclusions.   She  placed  little
    weight on the third point in ground 1, given  that  it  came  into  the
    territory of forgery where the burden was on the  Secretary  of  State.
    With regard to the second ground she argued there had been a failure to
    factor in the public interest, again at paragraph 27.  There, there was
    a reference to section 117B, but there was no reference to  immigration
    control being in the public interest.  It was of assistance  to  no-one
    to have such a limited, inadequate analysis and the decision was flawed
    by material errors of law.

9.   In his submissions Mr Onuoha said that he played  a  father's  role  in
    his son's life.  He travelled to Yorkshire two or three times a  month,
    and sometimes C came to London to see  him  as  well.   He  had  travel
    documents the Home Office had sent and he had pictures of his son.   He
    was here to plead to the Home Office  to  consider  his  circumstances.
    That was so that he could be there more for his son.   As  he  had  not
    been working for six years he would love to see him more but could  not
    see him as often as he would like and friends covered travel  expenses.
    He thought that paragraph 27  of  the  determination  was  a  perfectly
    adequate summary of the situation.  Also he  had  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom when he was under age and had been here for a long time and had
    never been in any trouble or involved in  criminal  activity.   He  was
    here to plead to be allowed to play a more fatherly role in  his  son's
    life.  Things had been difficult for the last six years and he had  had
    to beg many people to get money to see his son and it was not fair.  It
    was his birthday today and he would have liked to have  spent  it  with
    his son but there were the usual problems with money.

10.  I reserved my determination.

11.  It may help Mr Onuoha if I say at the outset that I  do  not  think  he
    was disadvantaged by the absence of legal representation, in the  sense
    that, although there were points that  could  have  been  made  on  his
    behalf, they could in my view have made no difference to  the  outcome.
    The matters set out in the Rule 24 response endorsed the reasoning  and
    conclusions of the Judge and argued that he gave  proper  consideration
    to  the  relevant  issues.   It  is   argued   that   the   appellant's
    circumstances were considered in the round and the appeal was  properly
    allowed.

12.  These matters in no sense engaged with  the  weakness  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning.  The  essential  reasoning  is  to  be  found  in  brief  at
    paragraph 27 of the determination.  I agree with all the points made in
    the grounds of appeal and endorsed by Ms Holmes and, I say,  I  do  not
    think that even the most capable legal representative would  have  been
    able to transform the determination into  something  more  substantial.
    The Judge  moved  from  a  finding  that  with  some  reservations  the
    appellant plays a part in C's life to a conclusion  that  he  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with him.  His findings in
    this regard entirely  lack  reasoning.   The  two  elements  cannot  be
    equated.  Playing a part in someone's life in no sense shows that there
    is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.  As the grounds, say
    the Judge failed to enunciate the extent of the appellant's input  into
    C's life and the impact on C that his removal would have.

13.  In addition the conclusion that C's best interests are to  have  direct
    contact with his father has in effect been elevated to a  determinative
    factor.  There is a failure by the  Judge  to  take  into  account  the
    public  interest  in   maintaining   effective   immigration   control,
    including, as Ms Holmes noted, the fact of immigration control being in
    the public interest being part of the section 117B analysis.  There has
    been a total failure on the part of the  Judge  to  give  the  kind  of
    detailed careful evaluation of the  evidence  in  the  context  of  the
    correct  legal  tests  that  was  necessary  in  this  case.   In   the
    circumstances I can see no alternative but to direct that the appeal be
    reheard in its entirety at Hatton Cross before a  different  First-tier
    Judge.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

