
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44716/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18 December 2015                             |On 4 January 2016          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Olga Novoselova
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the claimant: Mr M Schwenk, instructed by GM Immigration Aid Unit
For the respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                  NOTICE OF CONSENT TO WITHDRAWAL OF APPEAL

 1. The claimant, Olga Novoselova, date of birth 22.7.57, is a  citizen  of
    Russia.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed against the determination of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Williams, who allowed the claimant's appeal against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse her application for an EEA
    Residence Card and to refuse her human rights claim.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    13.5.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 18.12.15 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 5. However, at the appeal hearing Mr McVeety sought permission to withdraw
    the appeal of the Secretary of State, explaining that the Secretary  of
    State has reconsidered and will now issue an EEA Residence Card.

 6. In the circumstances, the Tribunal gives its consent to the  withdrawal
    of the appeal, pursuant to Rule 17 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 7. It follows that there are no extant proceedings before the Tribunal.

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 11.3.15 shall stand
    and the appeal remains allowed.
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of the above, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: There is no extant appeal and thus I can make no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

