

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44439/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 20 August 2015                             |On 4 September 2015          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON
                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                               PALASH HAMID ABDUL
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D. MacLeod instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M. O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant, Mr Palash Hamid Abdul who is a citizen of  Bangladesh
       and was born on 8 May 1989, has been granted  permission  to  appeal
       against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge P. Grant-Hutchison
       dismissing his  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  22
       October 2014 to remove the appellant from the UK as someone  subject
       to administrative removal under Section 10 of  the  Immigration  and
       Asylum Act 1999.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) we do not make an anonymity  order.   The  First-
       tier Tribunal made no order and there were no issues before us  that
       might require such an order.


       Background

   3. The appellant applied for leave to remain on 15 June 2011 on the
      grounds that removal would place the UK in breach of its obligations
      under the Human Rights Act 1998.  His case is that he was born in
      Bangladesh but moved with his family to Dubai as a baby where he lived
      until 14.  We observe that  it is unclear as to exactly what age he
      was when he travelled to Dubai, with the respondent making references
      to an emergency travel document application noting the appellant as 6
      years old and the appellant's grounds of appeal against the
      respondent's decision indicating that he did not have a clear
      recollection of when.  He states that he was brought to the UK in 2003
      by his parents who left him in the care of Mr Aziz Abdul and his
      family and did not return to care for him.


   4. The appellant had applied for leave to remain as a student on 23
      February 2006 by when he was aged 16, but that application was refused
      with no right of appeal on 31 July 2007.  Earlier on 12 June 2007 the
      appellant was served with an IS.151A as an illegal entrant as he could
      not provide any evidence of lawful entry to the UK.  On 15 June 2011
      he applied for leave to remain under Article 8 of the ECHR.  That
      application was also refused with no right of appeal.  On 24 November
      2011 the appellant asked the respondent to reconsider his application.
       Following judicial review proceedings the respondent issued the
      decision of 22 October 2014 which gave rise to these proceedings.


   5. It is the appellant's case that he was then looked after by Mr Aziz
      and his family whom he regards as his adoptive family.  The appellant
      claimed that his removal would be a breach of his human rights as he
      claimed it would deprive him of his right to family life with his
      'adopted family' and interfere with his private life established
      during his time in the UK.  Additionally he stated that removing him
      to Bangladesh would be a danger to his health as he suffered from a
      kidney problem in 2012.


   6. The respondent set out the grounds for refusing the application in a
      letter dated 22 October 2014 with reference to Appendix FM and
      paragraphs 276ADE (1).  It was not considered that the appellant could
      satisfy the Eligibility criteria under Appendix FM of the Immigration
      Rules as a partner or a parent and consequently it was concluded that
      the appellant cannot claim to have established family life within the
      meaning of Article 8 under the Immigration Rules.


   7. The appellant's case was also considered under paragraph 276ADE.  It
      was not considered that the appellant could fulfil the requirements on
      the basis of his private life under paragraph 276ADE because he was 25
      years of age at the date of decision and claimed to have entered the
      UK in September 2003.  He had spent no more than 11 years in the
      country.  He therefore failed to meet the requirements of paragraph
      276ADE (1) (iii)-(v).  The respondent considered that the appellant
      will have remained somewhat familiar with Bangladeshi culture as he
      had resided with Mr Aziz Abdul and his wife Mrs Shahana Begum, both of
      whom were originally from Bangladesh and that it was reasonable that
      they would have friends and relatives in Bangladesh who would be able
      to assist him on his return.  The respondent noted that the appellant
      spoke Bengali and did not consider that there would be very
      significant obstacles to the appellant establishing private life in
      Bangladesh and the respondent found he could not fulfil the criteria
      of Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.
       The respondent went on to consider whether there were any
       exceptional circumstances that would make it appropriate to allow
       the appellant to remain outside of the Immigration Rules but found,
       having considered all the relevant factors, that there were no such
       circumstances that might justify allowing the appellant to remain
       exceptionally.


   8. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and Mr Abdul Aziz but
      reached the same conclusion.  He found that the appellant did not meet
      the criteria of Appendix FM as he was neither a partner nor a child
      and that he could not meet the terms of Appendix FM.EX.1.  The judge
      found that the appellant's relationship with Mr Aziz and his wife did
      not constitute family for the purposes of Appendix FM.  The judge also
      concluded that whilst the appellant had built up a considerable
      private life he had not lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
      years and neither had he spent half of his life living continuously in
      the UK.  Further, the judge did not accept that there were very
      significant obstacles to the appellant integrating into Bangladesh.
      The judge noted that the appellant had been raised by his own father
      and mother until he was 14 years old and by another Bengali family
      thereafter.  The appellant could speak Bengali and appeared to be an
      intelligent, educated individual who should have no great difficulty
      integrating into Bengali society either with or without the assistance
      of Mr Aziz or Mrs Begum's extended family.  The judge did not consider
      it necessary to go on to consider Article 8 outside the rules but did
      so in any event, finding that removal would be proportionate.


   9. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis
      that it was arguable that the approach to Article 8,  the
      consideration of section 117B of the 2002 Act was flawed and that
      errors of law were disclosed by the application.


      Error of Law Consideration


  10. Permission was granted on all grounds by the First-tier Tribunal as it
      was arguable that the judge's approach to Article 8 and the
      consideration of section 117B was flawed.


  11. Mr MacLeod's submitted that the judge gave inadequate reasons for his
      findings.  He conceded that an irrationality argument could not
      succeed, given the very high threshold. We pause here to observe that
      he was correct to do so as a conclusion is not irrational just because
      some alternative explanation has been rejected or can be said to be
      possible: R (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  Mr MacLeod accepted that the grounds were
      somewhat discursive and he identified that the core of the appellant's
      challenge was to be found at paragraph 7 of the grounds.  This is in
      essence that the judge failed to adequately assess paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules.


  12. Paragraph 276ADE( 1)(vi) provides as follows:


       "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
       remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
       of the application, the applicant:
       ....
       (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has
       lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting any
       period of imprisonment) but there would be very significant
       obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to which
       he would have to go if required to leave the UK."


  13. Our analysis is as follows. The judge at [16] of the decision directed
      himself to consider 'whether the Appellant has established a private
      life in the UK under paragraphs 276ADE-276DH'.  It was not argued
      before us and we find that there was no error in the judge's finding
      that the appellant had not lived continuously in the UK for at least
      20 years, nor had he spent half of his life living continuously in the
      UK.  Given his age and the length of time he has spent in the UK the
      appellant has no arguable case under 276ADE, other than 276ADE(1)(vi).


  14. Although the judge's subsequent reasoning in [16] on the question of
      whether there were 'very significant obstacles' to the appellant's
      integration into Bangladesh was brief, we are satisfied that he
      directed himself appropriately and made findings that were open to him
      on the evidence.


  15. Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) confirms an acceptance that there are cases
      where an applicant cannot meet the 'length of residence' requirements
      set out at subparagraphs (i) - (v) of the rule, but that if the
      appellant can show that there is something which will amount to a very
      significant obstacle to him integrating into the country of return,
      than this will give rise to a disproportionate interference with the
      appellant's private life.  As we indicated at the hearing, unlike in
      any Article 8 assessment outside the immigration rules, the weight to
      be given to the public interest has already been factored into the
      provision.


  16. No indication is given in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) as to what would
      meet the test but in our view there is a very high threshold and
      clearly a more demanding test than the previous requirement to show a
      'lack of ties' to the claimant's country of return.  Each word must be
      given its ordinary meaning and it is incumbent on the appellant to
      identify obstacles (which there are in this case) but also to
      demonstrate that they are very significant.  That is to say they could
      not reasonably be overcome.


  17. We have considered the meaning of integration: an individual returning
      to their home country has to be in a position to participate in life
      in his country.  The judge took into account that the appellant had
      not lived in Bangladesh since he was a very young child, having moved
      to Dubai with his family.  Although Mr MacLeod submitted the judge was
      incorrect to refer to the appellant being 6 years old when he moved to
      Dubai, the judge was correct to identify that there was a dispute in
      relation to this issue.  The appellant in his witness statement before
      the First-tier Tribunal stated that he did not say, in his Emergency
      Travel Document interview on 16 April 2008, that he was 6 years old
      when his family moved to Dubai.  The judge did not resolve this
      dispute but found that it was not of great significance whether the
      appellant went to Dubai as a baby or at 6 years old.  That was a
      finding open to him as the appellant was clearly on any basis a very
      young child when he left Bangladesh.  The judge does not suggest in
      his findings that the appellant's early residence in Bangladesh could
      assist him in his integration.  It is clear that the judge took into
      consideration the length of time the appellant has both been in the UK
      and that he left his country of origin as a very young child.


  18. The judge referred to the fact that the appellant had been raised by
      his own father and mother until he was 14 years old and then 'by
      another Bengali family thereafter'.  It is clear from the findings at
      [16] that the judge was aware that the appellant's parents lived with
      him outside of Bangladesh for the majority of the time until he was
      14.  What the judge did find would assist the appellant in integrating
      was the fact that he had been brought up until the age of 14 by his
      own Bengali parents.


  19. The judge also took into consideration that the appellant was then
      raised in the UK 'by another Bengali family'.  Although Mr MacLeod
      made detailed submissions on this point including that there was a
      confusion in the judge's findings between language and culture and
      that living in Scotland with Scottish siblings is not the same as
      living in Bengali culture, the judge set out the evidence including
      the oral evidence from Mr Aziz that he and his wife, although
      naturalised British nationals, were of Bangladeshi origin.  Mr Aziz is
      recorded as stating that 'he uses the Bengali language with his
      children but they have no knowledge about the culture'.  It is clear
      that the judge was aware of the circumstances of the appellant's life
      in the UK.  It was open to the judge to make the general finding that
      he did,  in relation to the combination of the appellant's own Bengali
      parents and his subsequent life in the UK with family of Bengali
      heritage, albeit a family that is now British, being a factor in the
      appellant's ability to integrate in Bangladesh.


  20. The judge went on to find that the appellant can speak Bengali.  The
      appellant in his witness statement at paragraph 5 indicated that when
      he arrived in the UK at the age of 14 he could not speak English.  He
      went on to state at paragraph 9 that he 'can speak a little Bengali'.
      Although Mr MacLeod initially submitted that the appellant had stated
      in evidence that he only spoke a 'bit' of Bengali and thus a very
      significant obstacle to integration this did not reflect the judge's
      record or that of the presenting officer.  We drew Mr McLeod's
      attention to the record of proceedings noting that the appellant's
      answer on speaking Bengali as 'not fully, but a little'.  The
      presenting officer's note was 'not fluently, but a little'.  It is
      undisputed that the appellant spoke only Bengali up until arriving in
      the UK in 2003.  The evidence was that he had lived in a household
      where the father uses the Bengali language with his children.  The
      judge was clearly entitled as he did to find that the appellant could
      speak Bengali.


  21. The judge went on to find that the appellant appeared to be an
      intelligent, educated individual who should have no great difficulty
      integrating in Bengali society with or without the help of Mr Aziz or
      Mrs Begum's extended family''.


  22. It was open to the judge to take into account the appellant's level of
      education and intelligence in assessing whether there were very
      significant obstacles to the appellant integrating into Bangladesh.
      The judge had before him evidence of the appellant's SQA
      qualifications in Scotland together with evidence of further studies
      and work experience.


  23. Mr MacLeod referred on a number of occasions to a letter from
      Brewmeister brewery dated September 2014 in which the director of the
      business indicates the company is interested in working with the
      appellant as a potential business associate in establishing an Indian
      beer product.  The letter referred to the appellant being 'able to
      speak with potential customers who own Indian restaurants' and being
      able to 'translate their culture for our understanding'.  It is clear
      there is no reference to Bengali culture.  Rather this letter is
      further evidence that the appellant is a 'capable young man' as
      indicated by the author of the letter.  Although the judge recorded
      the respondent's submissions on this letter as showing that he had not
      lost contact with his culture, he also recorded Mr MacLeod's
      submission that the letter shows it is in the public interest that the
      appellant should be allowed to stay.  The judge's findings do not show
      that the judge misdirected himself in relation to the letter or in
      making a finding that the appellant appears to be an intelligent and
      educated individual.  It was not necessary for him to make a specific
      finding on the letter.


  24. Mr MacLeod submitted that the judge was incorrect to place weight on
      the appellant integrating 'with the help of Mr Aziz or Mrs Begum's
      extended family' having regard to the evidence  that Mr Aziz and Mrs
      Begum have no extended family in Bangladesh with the exception of one
      elderly mother.  There is no error in this finding.  Mrs Begum's
      mother is 'extended family'.  Even if there were an error it would not
      in our view be material as the judge made his finding that the
      appellant could in the alternative integrate without such assistance.


  25. It is not disputed that the appellant has no contact with his
      biological family and has no recall of living in Bangladesh having
      lived outside of his home country for the vast majority of his life.
      Although that may be an obstacle to integration, the judge made no
      error in not finding this to be a very significant obstacle.  The
      grounds refer to the appellant's witness statement and the appellant's
      claim there that he received NHS treatment as his 'one of my kidneys
      was down to 20 per cent' which the grounds argue indicates that there
      is no possibility that the appellant will be provided with adequate
      care and attention should there be any further kidney difficulties.
      However there was no medical evidence before the judge (as recorded at
      [7]) and no material error in the lack of a specific finding on this
      point.  Similarly there was no error in the judge's finding that the
      cumulative factors lead to the conclusion at [16] that there are not
      very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into
      Bangladesh.


  26. Despite initially accepting that there was in essence just the one
      ground, Mr MacLeod indicated in the course of his submissions that he
      relied on others. These included the assertion that the typographical
      errors in the determination cumulatively affected the decision.  In
      any event the errors referred to are insufficient to amount to a
      material error and are likely to have resulted from a lack of proper
      proofreading.  We are satisfied that the judge understood the case
      before him and properly engaged with the issues.  He adequately
      explained his reasons and it is clear to both parties why the
      appellant's appeal was not successful.


  27. The final aspect we consider is in relation to the judge's findings at
      [17] of the determination and reasons on Article 8 outside the
      immigration rules.  Although the judge did not specifically set out
      the public interest considerations set out at section 117B of the
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the judge directed
      himself to take account of these considerations at [14].  In any event
      any error would not in our findings be material.  Compelling
      circumstances are required to be identified to support a claim for a
      grant of leave to remain outside the immigration rules; SSHD v SS
      (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 applied. In addition section 117B(4)
      requires that little weight should be given to a private life that is
      established by a person at a time when the person is in the United
      Kingdom unlawfully and there is no evidence of any lawful stay by the
      appellant in the UK.  Even if the period of time the appellant was
      here as a minor private life then developed, it is unarguable that he
      has been aware as an adult of his unlawful status since 2007.  Mr
      MacLeod conceded that Article 8 considerations were dealt with within
      the immigration rules consideration.


          Decision:

   28. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a point  of  law.  The  appeal  is
       dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed:                                            Dated: 27 August 2015


M M Hutchinson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
