
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/44712/2014
                                                               IA/44713/2014
                                                               IA/45092/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 basit qamar
                                 amna basit
                                 yasir rahim
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kalim, Counsel, instructed by Rainbow
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly (the judge), promulgated on 5 June 2015, in  which
    he dismissed the Appellants' appeals. These appeals  had  been  against
    the Respondent's decision of 23 October 2014, refusing to vary leave to
    remain and to remove the  Appellants  from  the  United  Kingdom  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The first and second Appellants are husband and wife: the latter's case
    is dependent upon that of  the  former.  The  third  Appellant  is  the
    business partner of the first. On  5  August  2014  the  two  principle
    Appellants (the Appellants) sought an extension  of  leave  as  Tier  1
    Entrepreneurs. In refusing  the  applications  the  Respondent  awarded
    points under Appendices A, B  and  C  to  the  Immigration  Rules  (the
    Rules),  but  concluded  that   the   Appellants   were   not   genuine
    entrepreneurs. She relied  on  paragraph  245DD(h)  of  the  Rules.  In
    particular,  emphasis  was  placed  upon  the  following  matters:  the
    contract provided; the website; market research; the business plan; the
    business  stationary;  and  the  previous  educational   and   business
    experience.

The judge's decision

 3. The judge set out the relevant provisions of the Rules,  a  summary  of
    the Appellants' case,  the  Respondent's  position,  and  the  evidence
    before him. Of relevance is the fact  that  the  Appellants  gave  oral
    evidence at the hearing. This is summarised at paragraphs 20-26.

 4. The findings and conclusions in relation to the appeals under the Rules
    are set out in paragraphs 31-40. Article 8 is  dealt  with  briefly  at
    paragraph 41.

 5. In deciding against the Appellants the judge went through  the  matters
    raised by the  Respondent  in  her  reasons  for  refusal  letter.  His
    conclusions on these points were in line with the Respondent's view. In
    summary, the judge found the following:

          a)  The  documentary  evidence  was   "vague   and   lacking   in
             credibility";

          b) The business plan was poorly written, ill-thought through  and
             implausible;

          c) The business cards contained spelling errors;

          d) The contract contained errors, was vague in its  content,  and
             generally of poor quality;

          e) The market research was lacking in detail;

          f) There was a lack of knowledge about relevant software;

          g) There was no real educational or business experience.

 6. In addition, the oral evidence from the Appellants clearly did not help
    their cause (see paragraph 32).

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds assert that the judge erred in hearing oral  evidence  from
    the Appellants. This was  contrary  to  the  decision  in  Ahmed  (PBS:
    admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365 (IAC). It is also said that  the
    judge failed to give adequate reasons,  went  behind  the  Respondent's
    positive view of documentary evidence, failed to put  concerns  to  the
    Appellants at the hearing, raised new issues, failed to have regard  to
    all relevant evidence, and failed to deal properly with the  Article  8
    clam.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson
    on 25 September 2015. The grant was effectively on  the  basis  of  the
    Ahmed point.

The hearing before me

 9. In response to a query from me that perhaps Ahmed did not  apply  where
    paragraph 245DD(k) of the  Rules  was  not  also  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent, both representatives contended that it  this  decision  did
    apply.

10. Mr Kalim relied on the grounds. He submitted that the judge should  not
    have taken any oral evidence into account. The oral evidence was relied
    upon and so the decision was flawed.

11. Ms Sreeraman submitted that the oral evidence made no difference to the
    outcome. The judge had in fact substantially  based  his  findings  and
    conclusions on the evidence submitted with the applications.

Decision on error of law

12. I accept for the purposes of my decision that Ahmed did  apply  to  the
    appeal before the judge. Although I have some further  reservations  as
    to the existence of an absolute bar to taking any oral evidence in  PBS
    cases concerning paragraph 245DD(h) of the Rules, I am also prepared to
    accept that as a result of Ahmed the judge was precluded  from  hearing
    such evidence.

13. Therefore the judge erred.

14. However, it is clear to me that this error  was  not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeals.

15. The judge has carefully proceeded through  the  very  same  matters  as
    raised in the reasons for refusal letter. Nothing new or unexpected  is
    brought up. It is readily apparent from a proper reading of  paragraphs
    31-39 that the judge has based  his  findings  and  conclusions  almost
    entirely upon  the  very  same  evidence  as  was  submitted  with  the
    applications and considered by the Respondent. The oral  evidence  that
    he erroneously heard only compounded the significant problems the judge
    found existed within  the  original  evidence.  The  findings  made  in
    respect of the business plan, the contract, the  market  research,  the
    stationary, the lack of relevant experience, and the website  were  all
    entirely open to the  judge:  the  oral  evidence  made  little  or  no
    difference to any of them.

16. In light of the sustainable findings, the judge  was  always  going  to
    reach the equally sustainable conclusion that the  Appellants  had  not
    shown themselves to be genuine entrepreneurs.

17. Aside from the Ahmed point,  the  rest  of  the  grounds  are  entirely
    misconceived. Indeed, the points raised at paragraphs 5 and 6 are  very
    close to being disingenuous. In respect of a failure to take account of
    relevant evidence, I have  been  referred  to  nothing  in  the  papers
    indicating what this evidence might have been and  how  it  might  have
    affected the outcome. The Article 8 claim was almost bound to fail, and
    the judge's brevity is dealing with this issue was permissible.

18. For the sake of completeness, there  is  nothing  inconsistent  in  the
    Respondent  awarding  points  under  Appendix  A   and   refusing   the
    applications under paragraph 245DD(h).  The  latter  provision,  whilst
    related to the acquisition of points (at least notionally)  is  clearly
    separate from paragraph 245DD(k) (which is directly linked  to  points)
    and Appendix A. It does not  follow  that  an  award  of  points  under
    Appendix A must preclude reliance  upon  paragraph  245DD(h),  or  vice
    versa. Reference to paragraph 245DD(k) at one point in the reasons  for
    refusal  letter  does  not  undermine  either  the  lawfulness  of  the
    Respondent's original decision or that of the judge.

19. The Appellants' appeals are all dismissed.

Anonymity

20. No direction has been sought and none is appropriate.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed      Date: 12 February 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 12 February 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
