
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/44212/2014

                                                    PA/03173/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 6 December 2017                     |        On 11 January 2018           |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik, Counsel, instructed by Saj Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was not made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  However,
the two appeals before us include a protection  claim.   It  is  accordingly
appropriate that a direction be made. Unless and until a tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family. This direction applies amongst others to  all  parties.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. These matters came before us as an appeal by the  Appellant  against  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart  promulgated  on  11
    April 2016 in relation  to  appeal  number  IA/44212/2014  ("the  First
    Decision").

 2. We do not need to deal with the substance of that appeal  in  light  of
    the way in which the hearing before us proceeded.  It suffices  for  us
    to set out the factual background to the application for permission  to
    appeal the First Decision and the reasons given by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Finch when granting permission on 12 September 2017 as follows:-

         "The Appellant is appealing  against  the  decision  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart  to  dismiss  his  appeal  against  the
         decision that she had no jurisdiction to hear his appeal.

         On 23 July 2014 the Appellant had applied for leave  to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom.  This application was refused but the basis  of
         his application raised protection issues.  Therefore, at the appeal
         hearing listed on 28  July  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross
         adjourned the hearing so that the Respondent  could  determine  the
         Applicant's protection claim.  The appeal was then re-listed for 29
         March 2016, when it came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
         Stewart.

         The Appellant and his solicitors had been put on notice of the date
         of this hearing on 11 December 2015 but it was not until  23  March
         2016 that they received a decision refusing the  Appellant  asylum.
         This was the day before Maundy Thursday and the hearing was  listed
         for the Tuesday after Easter Monday.   Therefore,  the  Appellant's
         solicitors faxed the First-tier Tribunal refusing an adjournment as
         the Appellant had not been provided with the  appropriate  time  to
         appeal against the decision to refuse him asylum and they  did  not
         have sufficient time to prepare for an asylum appeal.  There  is  a
         fax call report on file, which confirms that  the  request  for  an
         adjournment was received by the First-tier Tribunal at 20.48 on  23
         March 2016.

         It does not appear that the Tribunal responded to this  request  or
         that the application for an adjournment was put  before  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart.  In her decision she just  noted  that
         the Appellant and his legal representatives did not appear  at  the
         hearing and that the latter's telephone went to  voice  mail.   She
         was in possession  of  the  asylum  bundle,  including  the  asylum
         refusal letter, which was dated 18 March 2016.  The  decision  does
         not indicate when the decision was sent to the  Appellant  and  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider that,  even  if  it  had
         been received on 21 March 2016, this would not  have  provided  the
         Appellant with 14 days to articulate his appeal against the  asylum
         decision before the date of the hearing.

         On 31 March 2016 the Appellant did appeal against the  decision  to
         refuse  him  asylum  and  this  appeal  was  allocated  the  number
         PA/03173/2016.  Directions were given and it was  set  down  to  be
         heard on 27 September 2016.  It  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Green.  At the hearing neither representative  was  aware  of
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart's decision.

         First-tier Tribunal Judge  Green  proceeded  to  hear  evidence  in
         relation to the asylum appeal and it was  only  after  the  hearing
         that  he  was  provided  with  the  earlier   decision   and   file
         IA/44212/2014.  He then decided that until the earlier decision was
         set aside he had no jurisdiction to hear  the  asylum  appeal.   He
         also found that the Appellant and his solicitors were not aware  of
         the earlier decision.

         I find that there was a procedural error of law in  the  manner  in
         which the appeal under IA/44212/2014 was decided.  The  application
         for an adjournment was not considered by the First-tier Tribunal or
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart.  Furthermore, the Appellant
         was not provided with the necessary  time  to  appeal  against  the
         decision to refuse him asylum.

         The problem was exacerbated by the Tribunal  generating  a  further
         appeal number (PA/03173/2016) and listing that appeal.

         I find that it is in the interests of justice to  extend  time  for
         the Appellant to appeal against the decision by First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Bart-Stewart in order for the inadequacies in procedure to be
         explored and his right of appeal against the decision to refuse him
         asylum to be heard according to international and national  law  to
         be respected.

         As a consequence, I find that there were arguable errors of law  in
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision."

 3. As appears from this grant of permission to appeal,  also  relevant  to
    the issues before us are the facts of appeal number PA/03173/2016. That
    appeal was an appeal against the Respondent's decision dated  18  March
    2016.  It was determined  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Green  by  a
    decision promulgated on 7 November 2016 ("the  Second  Decision").   It
    appears from the Second Decision that Judge Green  heard  evidence  and
    submissions at the hearing before him but then concluded  that  he  did
    not have jurisdiction.  He allowed time  for  the  parties  to  provide
    submissions. As a result of those submissions, he concluded that  there
    was in fact no valid appeal before him.

 4. The Second Decision was  itself  the  subject  of  an  application  for
    permission to appeal which was refused first by the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and secondly by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt in a decision  dated  3
    February 2017.  She refused permission to appeal in that  case  in  the
    following terms:-

         "1.  The appellant, a citizen of  Pakistan,  appealed  against  the
         respondent's decision to refuse  his  claim  on  asylum  and  human
         rights grounds.

         2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge (FTTJ) Green heard the appeal on  27
         September 2016.  He found that he had no  jurisdiction.   This  was
         because an appeal against the same Home Office decision had already
         been dismissed in appeal number IA/44212/2014 by FTTJ Bart-Stewart,
         her determination being promulgated on 11 April 2016.

         3.   The  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  finding  no  jurisdiction.   The
         appellant has a right of appeal against the decision of  First-tier
         Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart.   Having  obtained  the   file   for
         IA/44212/2014  it  is  apparent  that  he  is  in  the  process  of
         exercising that right of appeal and an application  for  permission
         to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal dated 23 December 2016  awaits
         a decision.  The appellant's arguments that he was not aware of the
         hearing before FTTJ Bart-Stewart taking place  and  an  application
         for an extension  of  time  can  be  addressed  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal in that application.

         4.   The grounds do not show an error on a point of law."

 5. As will be apparent from the foregoing, although  the  Second  Decision
    was the second in time in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  refusal  of
    permission to appeal by  the  Upper  Tribunal  preceded  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal of the First Decision.  Accordingly, UTJ Pitt when
    refusing permission to appeal against the Second Decision did not  have
    the benefit of the reasons given by UTJ Finch when granting  permission
    to appeal the First Decision and did not have a full  picture  of  what
    had happened.

 6. The Respondent's decision refusing asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    was dated 18 March 2016 and was made very shortly prior to the  hearing
    before Judge Bart-Stewart in appeal number IA/44212/2014  on  29  March
    2016.  When making that decision, the  Respondent  expressly  gave  the
    Appellant a further right of appeal against that decision.  It  is  for
    that reason that there are in fact two appeals before us; appeal number
    IA/44212/2014  which  does  not  concern  asylum  and   appeal   number
    PA/03173/2016 which does.

 7. It was accepted in discussions before us that Judge Bart-Stewart  erred
    in law in her conclusion that she also had before her an appeal against
    the Respondent's decision refusing asylum. The Respondent had expressly
    given a  second  right  of  appeal  against  that  decision  which  the
    Appellant had exercised (giving rise to appeal  number  PA/03173/2016).
    Furthermore, by the date of the hearing before FTTJ  Bart-Stewart,  the
    Appellant's time for lodging an appeal against the asylum decision  had
    not expired.  Judge Bart-Stewart should not have determined the  appeal
    against the asylum decision as that  was  the  subject  of  a  separate
    appeal.  There is for that reason a material error of law in the  First
    Decision.   We agree with the parties that it is  appropriate  that  we
    set aside the First Decision and remit appeal number  IA/44212/2014  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for re-determination.

 8. That leaves us then with appeal number PA/03173/2016.  As  is  apparent
    from the decision of UTJ Pitt which we cite at [4] above and from  what
    we say about the error of law in the First  Decision,  FTTJ  Green  was
    wrong in the Second Decision to conclude that there was no valid appeal
    before him in  PA/03173/2016  because  an  appeal  against  the  asylum
    decision had already  been  considered  and  concluded  by  FTTJ  Bart-
    Stewart.  It follows that UTJ Pitt was also  therefore  wrong  to  find
    that there was no material error of law in the Second Decision.

 9. There has been no  "Cart"  challenge  to  Judge  Pitt's  decision.   In
    discussions with the representatives before us, we  considered  whether
    it was open to us to set aside Judge Pitt's decision applying  Rule  43
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  ("Rule  43")  in
    the circumstances of this case.

10. Rule 43 reads as follows (so far as relevant):-

         "[43](1) The Upper Tribunal may set aside a decision which disposes
         of proceedings, or  part  of  such  a  decision,  and  re-make  the
         decision or the relevant part of it, if -

         (a)  the Upper Tribunal considers that it is in  the  interests  of
         justice to do so; and

         (b)  one or more of the conditions in paragraph (2) are satisfied.

         (2)  The conditions are -

         (a)  a document relating to the proceedings was not sent to, or was
         not received at an appropriate  time  by,  a  party  or  a  party's
         representative;

         (b)  a document relating to the proceedings was  not  sent  to  the
         Upper Tribunal at an appropriate time;

         ....

         (d)  there has been  some  other  procedural  irregularity  in  the
         proceedings."

11. Judge Pitts' decision is clearly  one  which  disposes  of  proceedings
    there having been no application to judicially  review  that  decision.
    We have already indicated that there is an error of law  in  the  First
    Decision.  As we have also noted, when Judge  Pitt  made  her  decision
    refusing permission to appeal the Second Decision, she did not have the
    benefit of Judge Finch's grant of permission against the First Decision
    and was not therefore aware when she made her decision that  the  First
    Decision contained an error of law which was  material  to  the  Second
    Decision.  We take the view that this is capable of falling within  the
    definition of "some other procedural irregularity" in  the  proceedings
    relating to appeal number PA/03173/2016.  The  procedural  irregularity
    first arose in appeal number IA/44212/2014 and Judge Pitt was not  made
    aware of that irregularity when she  reached  her  decision  in  appeal
    number PA/03173/2016 thereby constituting a procedural irregularity  in
    that latter appeal.

12. For those reasons and because we consider that it is in  the  interests
    of justice to do so we set aside Judge Pitt's decision.  The effect  of
    the setting aside of Judge Pitt's decision is that we need  to  whether
    permission to appeal should be granted in appeal number PA/03173/2016.

13. We think it is clear  from  what  we  have  already  said  that  it  is
    appropriate to grant permission to appeal.  There was a misapprehension
    by Judge Green when  reaching  the  Second  Decision  that  he  had  no
    jurisdiction to deal with the appeal.  For the reasons we have  already
    given, it is clear to  us  that  he  did  in  fact  have  jurisdiction.
    Accordingly, we grant permission to appeal.

14. In all the circumstances of this case, we consider that bearing in mind
    the overriding objective, it would be in the interests  of  justice  to
    waive any  failures  to  comply  with  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and as  necessary  to  grant  extensions  of  time
    and/or abridge time limits.

15. It follows that there is an error of law in the  Second  Decision.   We
    therefore set aside also the Second Decision.  It  is  appropriate  for
    the re-making of the decision in both appeals to be dealt with  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  We remit both appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.
     We direct that the hearing of both  appeals  take  place  together  in
    order that they can deal with all issues in relation to this Appellant.

Decisions
IA/44212/2014
1. We are satisfied that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
Stewart promulgated on 11 April 2016 contains a material error  of  law.  We
set aside that decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for
re-determination by a Judge other than Judges Bart-Stewart or Green.
PA/03173/2016
2.  Pursuant to Rule 43 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008, we set aside the decision of UTJ Pitt dated 3 February  2017  refusing
the Appellant permission to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  FTTJ  Green
promulgated on 7 November 2016.
3.   We grant permission to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  FTTJ  Green
promulgated on 7 November 2016 on the basis that  it  contains  an  arguable
error of law.
4.    We are satisfied that the decision of  FTTJ  Green  promulgated  on  7
November 2016 contains a material error of law.  We set aside that  decision
and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  re-determination  by  a
Judge other than Judges Bart-Stewart or Green.
5.     Appeal numbers IA/44212/2014 and PA/03173/2016 should be  linked  and
heard together so that the Judge hearing the remitted appeals can deal  with
all issues in relation to the Appellant.






Signed[pic]            Dated:  10 January 2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith




