
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44273/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 September 2015                          |On 25 September 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Miss Ziyu Zhang
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal by the respondent against a decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and, in particular, the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Clemens ("the Immigration Judge") to allow the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

2.   The appellant is a Chinese national who was refused  further  leave  to
    remain in the UK on 18 October 2014.  The application  was  made  under
    the points-based scheme and the issue was  whether  the  appellant  had
    adequate funds to satisfy that scheme.

3.   The present appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  by  the  respondent.  The
    grounds of appeal dated 3 March 2015 state that the decision  to  allow
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules was wrong in law. The respondent
    advances one short point.  The appellant, having applied for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  under  the  points-based
    system, subsequently departed from the UK voluntarily, it would appear,
    on 12 December 2014.  That being so, the appeal  is  treated  as  being
    abandoned for the purposes of the relevant legislation.

4.   Unfortunately neither the representative of the respondent who  drafted
    the  grounds  nor  Mr  Harrison  referred  to  the  relevant  statutory
    provisions. Mr Harrison explained that he had limited time  to  prepare
    the file.

5.   Having carried out my own research on the point, it seems that  Section
    104(4) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  is  the
    relevant provision. It states that  an  appeal  under  section  82  (1)
    brought by a  person  shall  be  treated  as  being  abandoned  if  the
    appellant leaves the UK. That provision has now been  repealed  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 but I  have  carefully  considered  the  statutory
    provision which repealed section 104 and  note  that  the  repeal  only
    applies to cases where the application is made on or after  20  October
    2014 (see Articles 1, 9-11 of the Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement)
    Order 2014 S.I. 2771 of 2014 referred to in the notes  to  section  104
    (4) of volume 2 of Mac Donald's Immigration Law 9th  Ed,  volume  2  at
    p.258).  This is not such a case because the  decision  pre-dated  20th
    October and therefore the application cannot have been after that date.
    Given that the appellant had left the UK on 12 December 2014 it follows
    that the effect of section 104(4) of the 2002 Act is  that  her  appeal
    ought to have been treated as having been automatically abandoned.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
allowed.  I find that there was a material error of law in the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal which is to not  treat  this  case  as  having  been
abandoned.

As a postscript it is not surprising that the  error  occurred  because  the
point was not taken before the First-tier Tribunal, which  dealt  with  this
appeal on the papers.

No anonymity direction was made and I make no anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

