
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44443/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 1 March 2016                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                              Mrs Shaheen Nasir
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms L Kullar, SH & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born  on  14  June  1972.  Her
    appeal against the decision of the respondent refusing her  application
    to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  family  and  private  life  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal Judge under the Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention, in a decision promulgated
    on 5 June 2015.

The background evidence

 2. The appellant entered the UK on 16 February 2014 as a visitor.

 3. She married Mr Syed Nasir in Pakistan, in June 1999. He  is  a  British
    citizen and they have three children who are also British citizens. Two
    of the children, aged 9 and 12, came to the UK  with  their  father  in
    2012. The youngest child, who was aged  6  at  the  time,  remained  in
    Pakistan with the appellant, because she was  too  young.  Her  husband
    cared for the two elder children in the UK. He is  a  taxi  driver  who
    lives in rented accommodation.

 4. The appellant claimed that she had intended to visit  the  UK  for  two
    weeks and after that to return to Pakistan.  The Judge found  that  the
    appellant had changed her mind about her  priorities  and  decided  she
    should remain in the UK with her children instead of returning  to  her
    siblings, job and home in  Pakistan.  There  was  some  merit  in  this
    evidence which was supported in part  by  medical  letters  noting  her
    son's problems with headaches.   She  did  not  find  the  respondent's
    assertion that the appellant had used deception  to  gain  entry  as  a
    visitor in order to circumvent the immigration rules, had been made out
    [15].

 5. In her application for a visit visa, the appellant had stated that  she
    needed to return to Pakistan to care for her brother and sister.  That,
    she claimed, is still true. However, when her children cried  and  were
    not trusting her to return and her son had headaches, she  changed  her
    mind [6].

 6. The appellant produced medical letters  confirming  her  son's  medical
    situation. He has had a CT scan "and that was clear" [6]. She  extended
    her visa but claimed his situation had worsened. Her siblings  live  in
    her home in Pakistan and her aunt assists them. Her sister is  divorced
    and has a disabled child. She maintains them [6].

 7. The appellant's husband gave evidence. He married in 1999 and  came  to
    the UK after a few months. In April 2012 he brought  his  two  children
    back to the UK to live with him. He works around  their  schooling  and
    stays at home with them at weekends. He claimed that the appellant  has
    responsibilities in Pakistan but her siblings there are  now  grown  up
    and her children want and need her in the UK  [7].  Their  son  suffers
    from migraine and is always anxious about both parents. They need their
    mother and do not want to live in Pakistan. The children have  been  in
    the UK for over three years and returning to Pakistan would not be good
    for their well being. They have adjusted to the way of life here [7].

 8. The Judge referred to a  letter  from  a  doctor  dated  28  July  2014
    confirming that the child [S] has been under his  care  since  November
    2013, suffering from recurring headaches and vomiting. His symptoms got
    worse in 2014 and he was admitted to hospital. Examination revealed  no
    underlying physical cause. It is noted that his symptoms are  triggered
    by his  being  upset,  and  are  highly  suggestive  of  an  underlying
    separation anxiety associated with his mother  not  residing  with  the
    family. He recommended the input of a clinical psychiatrist.

 9. The Judge referred to two further letters dated 24  April  and  14  May
    2015 from a doctor and  a  nurse  respectively,  confirming  headaches,
    vomiting and emotional upset "which it is said worsens with  separation
    from his mother." There is also a vitamin D deficiency [8].

10. The Judge outlined the respondent's case in  the  refusal  letter.  The
    appellant did not meet the eligibility requirements under  the  partner
    route of Appendix FM as she made her application here whilst a visitor.
    As she failed to meet the eligibility requirements  under  the  partner
    and parent routes, the requirements of  section  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM
    could not be met [10]. Nor did she meet the requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE (1)(vii) and (vi) of the rules.

11. The respondent considered exceptional circumstances and found that  she
    had "an appalling immigration history" [12].  As regards  s.55  of  the
    2009 Act, her two children in the UK would be able to remain here  with
    their father, who would have  been  complicit  in  the  deception.  The
    decision does not deny the children their rights  as  British  citizens
    [12].

12. As already noted, the Judge did  not  accept  the  assertion  that  the
    appellant had used deception. She also found at [16] that the appellant
    did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM on  the  basis  of  family
    life and as a partner for the reasons already referred  to.  Nor  could
    she rely on EX.1.

13. Moreover, she found that the appellant did not meet the requirements of
    paragraph 276ADE of the rules on the basis of private life. She  has  a
    home, family and a job in Pakistan where she has lived all her life and
    is familiar with the culture, language and society; there are  no  very
    significant obstacles to her re-integration into Pakistan [17].

14. She went on to find that "... given the appellant's  children  and  the
    medical claims relating  to  her  son",  that  it  was  appropriate  to
    consider the appeal under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention  and
    in line with the Razgar principles. The  Judge  took  into  account  at
    [19], the decisions in Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008] UKHL 40 and R  (on  the
    application of Chen) v SSHD IJR [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC).

15. She found that the appellant lives with her husband  and  children  and
    that there is a level of family and private life that deserves  respect
    under Article 8. The respondent's decision was in accordance  with  the
    law.

16. She noted that the appellant's children are British citizens;  she  has
    to consider their best interests in line with s.55 of  the  UK  Borders
    Act 2009. The two elder children had been in the UK with  their  father
    since 2012. Prior to that, they had lived their lives in  the  care  of
    their mother in Pakistan.

17. One of them, their son, [S], has problems  with  headaches.  The  Judge
    found that there is no full medical or psychiatric report before her on
    the exact cause of his symptoms, treatment or  prognosis.  Accordingly,
    the conclusion that his problems are due to anxiety and being separated
    from his mother "are speculative." [20]

18.  Nevertheless,  the   Judge   took   the   medical   information   into
    consideration. The youngest child has, since birth, been in the care of
    the appellant in Pakistan. She found that "clearly" the children should
    at the very least remain in the care of at least  one  parent  as  they
    were until the appellant came to the UK. Ideally, given the  children's
    young ages and [S]'s  potential  difficulties,  it  is  in  their  best
    interests to be together and in the care of both parents wherever  they
    live [20].

19. She went on to consider the proportionality  of  the  decision,  noting
    that Article 8 is a qualified right. It did  not  permit  a  person  to
    choose the country in which to establish family and private life, or to
    circumvent the immigration rules.

20. She took into account the public interest considerations  under  s.117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  She  referred  to
    the public interest in the maintenance of  effective  immigration.  The
    appellant does not speak English [22].

21. She  found  that  it  was  the  appellant  and  her  husband  who  were
    responsible for  the  "split"  in  the  family  unit.  Following  their
    marriage, the appellant decided not to come to the UK but to remain  in
    Pakistan with all three children, to maintain her home, employment  and
    to give support to her siblings.  In 2012 the appellant and her husband
    made a decision out of choice for the elder children to come to the  UK
    to live with their father, thereby splitting the family unit [23].

22. She found that the present decision does not  require  the  appellant's
    husband or children to leave the UK as it is within the  power  of  the
    appellant to keep the family  together  by  her  husband  and  children
    accompanying her to  Pakistan  whilst  she  makes  an  entry  clearance
    application, if they choose to do so. This is an  option  available  to
    them, although they are not required to leave the UK [23].

23. Alternatively the appellant  can  take  one  or  all  the  children  to
    Pakistan or they can remain here with  her  husband  for  a  "temporary
    period" whilst she makes an application. There is no evidence  to  show
    that a temporary break in their education in such  circumstances  would
    be detrimental and given that the two elder children were  in  Pakistan
    until 2012, it is likely that they would be able  to  resume  education
    there for a temporary period [23].

24. She stated that there was no  evidence  that  [S]'s  medical  condition
    would worsen if he returned to Pakistan for a temporary  period.  There
    was no evidence that he would not have access to medical  treatment  in
    Pakistan during such a period, if necessary. The Judge thus found  that
    in any of those alternatives, "... the children's best  interests  will
    be met" [23].

25. Accordingly,  any  temporary  separation  that  may  occur  whilst  the
    appellant  returns  to  Pakistan  to  make  an  application  for  entry
    clearance is not in itself disproportionate [23].

26. On 29 September 2015, Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds noted that whilst  the
    grounds challenged the decision of the First-tier Tribunal relating  to
    Appendix FM, the Judge had given adequate and sustainable  reasons  why
    the appellant  could  not  so  succeed.  However,  at  [17]  the  Judge
    purported to consider Article 8 outside the rules "... and  it  is  not
    wholly  clear  of  the  basis  upon  which  the  Judge  considered  the
    children's best interests in the light of medical evidence referred  to
    in the grounds and disruption to the children with two of the  children
    having left Pakistan in 2012 and to be expected to leave again or  face
    separation from their mother." Nor was there any consideration of their
    relationship with their father. The Judge also  did  not  consider  the
    statutory factors set out in s.117 although the grounds  did  not  make
    any reference to this.

27. Ms Kullar relied on the skeleton argument dated 3 February 2016.

28. She referred to the decision in  JO  and  others  (s.55  duty)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC), where the Tribunal noted that the duty imposed
    by s.55 of the 2009 Act 'required the decision  maker  to  be  properly
    informed of the position of a child affected by  the  discharge  of  an
    immigration etc. function'.  Thus  equipped  the  decision  maker  must
    conduct a careful examination of all relevant information and factors.

29. Being adequately informed and  conducting  a  scrupulous  analysis  are
    elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of identifying  the
    child's best interests and then  balancing  them  with  other  material
    considerations.

30. The question  whether  the  duties  imposed  by  s.55  have  been  duly
    performed in any given  case  will  invariably  be  an  intensely  fact
    sensitive and contextual one. In the  real  world  of  litigation,  the
    tools available to the court or Tribunal considering this question will
    frequently be confined to the application or submissions  made  to  the
    secretary of state and the ultimate letter of decision.

31. Ms Kullar also relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in Zoumbas v
    SSHD [2013] 1WLR 3690, which considered the interplay between the  best
    interests of the child and Article 8 of the  Human  Rights  Convention.
    She relied on the "seven principles" enunciated by Lord Hodge to assist
    with the assessment of best interests.

32. Accordingly, the best interests of a child are an integral part of  the
    proportionality assessment; the best interests of the child must  be  a
    primary  consideration,  although   not   always   the   only   primary
    consideration; the child's best interests do not of themselves have the
    status of the paramount consideration; although the best interests  can
    be outweighed by the cumulative  effect  of  other  considerations,  no
    other consideration can be  treated  as  inherently  more  significant;
    while  different  judges  might  approach  the  question  of  the  best
    interests in different ways, it is important to ask oneself  the  right
    question in an orderly manner to avoid the risk that the best interests
    of the child might be undervalued when other  important  considerations
    were in place; it is important to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
    circumstances and what is in  their  best  interests  before  one  asks
    oneself whether those interests are outweighed by the  force  of  other
    considerations.  To that end there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
    examination of all relevant factors when the interests of the child are
    involved in an Article 8 assessment; and a child must not be blamed for
    matters which he or she is not responsible, such as the  conduct  of  a
    parent.

33. Ms Kullar noted that four medical reports were produced. She  submitted
    that the Judge's assessment at [20] that the absence of a full  medical
    or psychiatric report on the exact cause of his symptoms, treatment  or
    prognosis, resulting in the conclusion that his  problems  are  due  to
    anxiety at being separated from his mother, are speculative; she failed
    to attach sufficient weight to the medical evidence from three separate
    medical professionals confirming that the child suffers from  recurrent
    headaches.

34. She submitted in particular, that the Judge failed to conduct a careful
    assessment of the best interests of the children and did  not  properly
    apply the fifth and sixth principles set out by Lord Hodge in  Zoumbas,
    supra.

35. The letter dated 29 April 2014 from a consultant general  paediatrician
    had not been taken into account by the  Judge.  The  consultant  stated
    that [S] has recurrent headaches which may represent the anxiety he  is
    experiencing from missing his mother.  The  several  letters  from  the
    nurse and consultant paediatrician and earlier reports from  Birmingham
    Children's  Hospital  dated  29  April  2014  referred  to,  associated
    headaches with periods of time when [S] was missing his mother, or that
    his symptoms are triggered by being  upset,  suggesting  an  underlying
    separation anxiety associated with his mother  not  residing  with  the
    family and that his separation from his mother is  detrimental  to  his
    health and mental well being.

36. There had been a cursory reference to the medical reports  without  any
    "meaningful assessment" of the children's best interests or the  impact
    on the second child's health and medical well being  in  the  event  of
    separation.

37. She contended that the Judge did not make a careful examination of  all
    the relevant facts when conducting the best  interest  assessment,  and
    failed to consider any disruption that would be caused to the elder two
    children upon having to return to Pakistan, having previously  left  in
    2012 and who were now settled into full time education in  the  UK.  At
    paragraph 10 of her skeleton she contended that whilst  the  impact  on
    the youngest child's return to Pakistan would not be as great  "as  the
    eldest two children, having now been settled in the UK for four  years,
    no assessment nevertheless has been made upon the disruption caused  to
    him following him embarking upon full  time  education  in  the  UK  or
    indeed the prospect  of  him  being  again  separated  from  his  elder
    siblings."

38. Whilst the Judge stated at [23] that  the  children,  who  are  British
    citizens, are not required to leave the UK, she nevertheless  envisages
    that their best interests can be achieved by  the  family  choosing  to
    return to Pakistan, even for a temporary period, has failed however  to
    adequately consider the disruption to the children's  lives,  including
    the education and healthcare envisaged for that temporary period, which
    would nevertheless cause further disruption and anxiety when  returning
    to the UK, forcing them to have to re-adjust to their lives in the  UK.
    That is not in their best interests.

39. Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  Judge  has  carefully  considered  the
    evidence, including the finding that the respondent had  not  made  out
    the assertion that the appellant had used deception.

40. He submitted that when considering an Article 8  claim  of  this  sort,
    which the Judge found appropriate to do, this must  be  looked  at  and
    assessed on the basis that  the  appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the
    Rules.  There is within the Rules  a  significant  public  interest  in
    preserving the integrity of the immigration  system.  Accordingly,  the
    scales are weighed against her.

41. He referred to AJ (Angola) and decision of the Court of Appeal  SSHD  v
    SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387. The Rules under  consideration  provide
    evidence as to where the relevant public  interest  considerations  lie
    when seeking to strike a balance of interests under Article 8. He  also
    referred to the decision in Chen, supra at [39].

42.  Whilst  the  best  interests  are  a  primary   consideration,   other
    considerations must also be taken into  account.  Their  best  interest
    does not constitute a paramount consideration.

43. He submitted that the Judge has taken into account that  the  appellant
    cannot meet the rules and that there is a weighty public interest to be
    taken into account.

44. Her complaint against the Judge's evaluation of the medical evidence is
    also not made out. The Judge has taken into account  the  evidence.  At
    [6] she referred to the medical letters confirming  the  son's  medical
    situation. That included the fact that he had a CT scan  and  that  was
    clear. She had it in mind that his situation worsened resulting in  her
    extending her visa.

45. At [7] she took into account the evidence of the  child's  father  that
    his  son's  condition  is  "getting  worse"  and  that  he   has   been
    hospitalised in the past. [20] She noted that  [S]  has  problems  with
    headaches. She noted that there was  no  full  medical  or  psychiatric
    report on the exact cause or the treatment, but nevertheless,  she  has
    taken medical information into consideration [20]. He submitted that in
    the circumstances, she arrived at a reasoned conclusion, having  regard
    to the extent of the evidence produced.  The  letters  themselves  only
    refer to the fact that his condition "may be connected" to  separation.
    There was no actual diagnosis in the hospital letter. He has had  a  CT
    scan which was clear [6].

46. Dr Debenham's letter confirmed that [S] had been under his  care  since
    November 2013 suffering recurring headaches and  vomiting  resulted  in
    his being admitted to hospital. The examination revealed no  underlying
    physical cause, it being noted that the symptoms are triggered  by  his
    being upset and are  highly  suggestive  of  an  underlying  separation
    anxiety associated with his mother not  living  with  the  family.  The
    input  of  a  clinical  psychiatrist  was  recommended  [8].  Mr  Mills
    submitted that notwithstanding such recommendation in July 2014, it had
    not been put into effect.

47. The Judge considered Chen at  [19].  There  was  no  evidence  that  an
    application for the appellant to enter the UK  under  the  rules  would
    succeed.

48. He submitted that the Judge had proper regard  to  the  nature  of  the
    family unit and the separation of the mother, her  youngest  child  and
    the  other  two  children  in  2012.  She   properly   considered   the
    proportionality of the decision, setting  out  the  available  options,
    leading to the  ultimate  finding  and  conclusion  that  the  proposed
    interference was not disproportionate and did not breach Article 8.

    Assessment

49. I have set out the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  in  some
    detail. The two elder children, aged 9 and 12, lived with the appellant
    in Pakistan prior to joining their  father  in  the  UK  in  2012.  The
    appellant stated in her evidence that she could have joined her husband
    in the UK 16 years ago [6]. In her application for a  visit  visa,  she
    stated that she needed to return to Pakistan to care  for  her  brother
    and sister. That is still true.

50. When however the children cried and were not trusting her to return and
    her son had headaches, she decided otherwise. As noted, the  Judge  did
    not find that the  assertion  of  the  respondent  that  she  had  used
    deception had been made out.

51. The Judge has taken into account the medical evidence.  I  accept  that
    there is no express reference to her having considered the evidence  of
    Dr Evans, a consultant general paediatrician, who stated that the child
    has  recurrent  headaches  which  may  represent  the  anxiety  he   is
    experiencing from missing his mother. However, she has  considered  the
    other similar medical letters, including that from Dr Debenham, also  a
    consultant paediatrician and the letters dated 24 April 2015 and 14 May
    2015 from Dr Asghar and Nurse Innes, confirming headaches, vomiting and
    emotional upset, said to worsen with separation from his mother.

52. The Judge has had regard to the fact that the child has had a  CT  scan
    which fortunately was clear. She has also had regard  to  the  father's
    evidence that his son suffers with migraine and is anxious  about  both
    his parents [7].

53. Notwithstanding the recommendation  of  Dr  Debenham  recommending  the
    'input of a clinical psychiatrist' in his report dated  28  July  2014,
    there was no evidence that such input was ever sought.

54. In the circumstances the Judge's finding at [20] that there is no  full
    medical or psychiatric report before her on the cause of his  symptoms,
    treatment or prognosis is correct. She  concluded  that  the  assertion
    that his problems are due to anxiety as a result of separation from his
    mother, was speculative. In the absence  of  any  proper  diagnosis  or
    psychiatric or psychological report, that finding is sustainable.

55. The Judge nevertheless took the medical information into  consideration
    [20].

56. She also had regard to the best interests of the children in accordance
    with s.55 of the 2009 Act. She considered their best interests,  taking
    into consideration the medical  information  that  was  available.  She
    considered that in the circumstances the children should remain in  the
    care of at least  one  parent  as  had  been  the  position  until  the
    appellant came to the UK [20]. Ideally, given the children's young ages
    and [S]'s potential difficulties, it would be in their  best  interests
    to be together and in the care of both parents wherever they live.

57. She had in mind as part of the assessment relating  to  proportionality
    that Article 8 does not permit a person to choose the country in  which
    to establish family and private life or to circumvent  the  immigration
    rules. She noted that the appellant had not met the rules.

58. She also took into account the public interest considerations  set  out
    in s.117B of the 2002 Act flowing from the fact that she could not meet
    the Rules [22].

59. She took into account the decision in Chen, supra, where Upper Tribunal
    Judge Gill stated at [39] that if it is shown  by  an  individual  (the
    burden being upon her) that an application  for  entry  clearance  from
    abroad  would  be  granted  and  that  there   would   be   significant
    interference with family life by temporary removal, the  weight  to  be
    accorded to the formal requirements of  obtaining  entry  clearance  is
    reduced. In cases involving children where removal would interfere with
    the child's enjoyment of family life with one or other of  his  parents
    whilst the entry clearance is obtained it would be easier to show  that
    the balance of proportionality falls in favour of the claimant than  in
    cases which do not involve children.

60. Ms Kullar accepted that no evidence had been placed  before  the  Judge
    that an application for entry clearance from abroad would  be  granted.
    There was no evidence of the financial requirements that would have  to
    be met. The only evidence in that regard related to the fact  that  the
    appellant's husband worked as a  taxi  driver,  who  worked  while  the
    children were at school. There was no evidence of his  income  for  any
    relevant period.

61. The Judge nevertheless considered the  effect  on  the  children  of  a
    temporary break from their mother should the  appellant  leave  the  UK
    alone. She noted that the decision  did  not  require  the  appellant's
    husband or children to leave the UK. They are British citizens entitled
    to remain here.

62. She considered the options available in the circumstances.  It  was  in
    the appellant's power to keep the family unit together with her husband
    and children accompanying her to Pakistan whilst  she  makes  an  entry
    clearance application. She also considered  the  alternative  that  the
    appellant could take one or all of the children with her to Pakistan or
    that they could remain in the UK with her  husband  for  the  temporary
    period pending the outcome of her application. There  was  no  evidence
    showing that a temporary break in their education in such circumstances
    would be detrimental. The two elder children had been in Pakistan until
    2012 and they would be able to resume education for a temporary period.
    Nor was there any evidence that [S]'s medical condition would worsen if
    returned for a temporary period, nor evidence that he would not be able
    to access medical treatment during such a period if necessary.

63. She accordingly held that in any of the "above situations"  their  best
    interests would be met. The  availability  of  the  options  which  she
    identified led her to conclude that any temporary separation  that  may
    occur whilst the appellant returns to Pakistan to make  an  application
    for entry clearance is not in itself disproportionate.

64. This was a full and carefully reasoned decision. The Judge did consider
    the children's best interests in the light of the medical evidence. She
    has also considered the potential disruption to the  two  children  who
    left Pakistan in 2012  and  has  considered  the  effect  of  temporary
    separation if she went alone, as well  as  the  option  of  the  family
    accompanying her for a short period while she makes her application.

65. Having regard to  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  her  findings  were  in
    accordance with the authorities she referred to, and are sustainable.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error on a point of law. The  decision  shall  accordingly
    stand.

    No anonymity direction is made.




    Signed   Date 24 February 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
