
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44399/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                            kabir abiodun makinde
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mansoor Malik
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   In this case the appellant appealed against the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal dated 30 July 2014 in which  that  Tribunal  refused  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

Background

2.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria and appealed to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 10  October  2013
    to refuse his application to vary his leave to remain and to remove him
    from the UK under Section 47 of the  Immigration  and  Nationality  Act
    2006.

3.   This is what is commonly described as a "health case".

4.   The critical findings regarding the  appellant's  health  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal were these:

        "16. The medical evidence makes it clear that the Appellant suffers
             from a life-threatening illness.  He  is  dependent  on  thrice
             weekly dialysis, without which his prognosis is that  he  would
             die unless he were able to  obtain  a  transplant.   Access  to
             treatment in Nigeria is clearly problematic for him  and  I  am
             satisfied that his removal to Nigeria would place his  life  in
             jeopardy if he were unable to access suitable treatment.  I  am
             therefore  satisfied  that   this   case   raises   'compelling
             circumstances' that would warrant consideration of  the  matter
             under Article 8 outside the ambit of the Immigration Rules".

    Thereafter at paragraph 23 the First-tier Tribunal found as follows:


        "23. However, taking this evidence as a whole, I am satisfied  that
             the Appellant was ware that  he  had  kidney  disease  when  he
             entered the UK".

5.   At paragraph 18 the First-tier Tribunal finds that:

        "No issue has been raised with regard  to  'family  life'  and  the
        basis of the Appellant's Article 8 claim is therefore  his  private
        life".

    At paragraphs 19 and 20 the First-tier Tribunal set  out,  against  the
    foregoing background its approach to the issue of proportionality.

6.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  then  proceeded  to   the   proportionality
    assessment and at paragraph 26 held this:

        "I must now proceed to a balancing exercise,  taking  into  account
        the judicial dicta discussed above.  This is a  very  compassionate
        case and one cannot but have  great  sympathy  for  the  Appellant.
        However, I have found it likely that he came to  the  UK  with  the
        main purpose of getting publicly-funded  medical  treatment  for  a
        life-threatening condition.  This is, I regret, not  a  case  where
        there are factors in  the  Appellant's  favour  that  outweigh  the
        Respondent's legitimate  aim  and  I  have  to  conclude  that  the
        Respondent's decision does not violate his Article 8 rights".








7.   Finally at paragraph 27  in  its  concluding  comments  the  First-tier
Tribunal says this:

        "I  would  add  only   that,   given   the   highly   compassionate
        circumstances, I would expect  the  Respondent  to  deal  with  any
        removal arrangements with great sensitivity and to  organise  these
        in such a way and at such a time as to minimise the  risks  to  the
        Appellant's health and, if appropriate, to delay removal  until  he
        has been able to make suitable arrangements  for  future  care  and
        treatment in Nigeria".

8.   The appellant obtained permission to appeal on  a  very  narrow  basis.
    The ground on which permission to appeal was granted related solely  to
    the First-tier Tribunal's observations made at paragraph 27  as  quoted
    above.  It is perhaps convenient to quote  the  material  part  of  the
    permission to appeal at this stage:

        "While it may be that this last paragraph was not intended to  have
        more than persuasive effect, it is at least arguable that the judge
        there was stating his view that it would not  be  proportionate  to
        return this appellant until at the very least  the  respondent  had
        done her best to ensure  that  satisfactory  arrangements  were  in
        place regarding the continuity of the appellant's care  on  return.
        If that is so then it is  arguable  that  in  the  absence  of  any
        assurance from the respondent as to what steps she intended to take
        (if any), "to minimise the risk to the appellant's  health  and  if
        appropriate, to delay removal  until  he  has  been  able  to  make
        suitable arrangements for future care and  treatment  in  Nigeria",
        his finding that it would be proportionate to return the  appellant
        is inconsistent with this expectation that he would not be  retuned
        without such arrangements having been made".

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

9.   Mr Malik's submissions were  in  very  short  compass  and  in  summary
    repeated what we have above set out from the permission to appeal.   It
    was his position that until suitable arrangements for  the  appellant's
    future care and treatment in Nigeria had been  made  it  would  not  be
    proportionate to  remove  him.   The  First-tier  Tribunal,  given  its
    expressed view in paragraph 27,  in  the  absence  of  evidence  as  to
    suitable arrangements having been made,  could  not  hold  his  removal
    proportionate and thus it had erred in law.  In  addition  it  was  his
    position that given the view expressed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    paragraph 27 this should have formed  part  of  its  considerations  in
    assessing proportionality and accordingly  given  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had dismissed the  appeal  it  had  not  had  regard  to  this
    material factor and this amounted to an error in law.

Reply on behalf of the Secretary of State

10.  At the outset Mr  Bramble  drew  our  attention  to  this:   the  Upper
    Tribunal Judge who had granted permission to appeal had not dealt  with
    the issue of the appeal being allowed out of time.    We  have  treated
    the grant of permission as being conditional and in  the  interests  of
    justice given the particular circumstances of this case we allowed  the
    appeal to proceed.

11.  With respect to the substantive issues in the appeal his  position  was
    this:  the approach of the First-tier Tribunal  was  correct.   It  had
    made clear and detailed findings, it had  considered  and  applied  the
    relevant law and carried out a proper proportionality exercise.

12.  With respect to what was said within paragraph  27  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination this was no more than  a  remark  made  by  it
    after it had carried out the proportionality  exercise.   Moreover  the
    Upper Tribunal Judge who had granted the permission  had  misunderstood
    what was said at paragraph 27 as he appeared to think it  was  for  the
    respondent to do her best to ensure that satisfactory arrangements were
    in place and that was not what was said.

Discussion

13.  We believe that there is considerable force in the submissions made  on
    behalf of the respondent.

14.  It appears to us that the arrangements for the appellant's  return  are
    not  a  relevant  issue  in  the   proportionality   assessment.    The
    consequences to the appellant of his return,  which  are  held  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be life threatening  (see:  paragraph  16)  have
    been properly taken into account in that assessment.   They  have  been
    weighed against the public  interest  factors  and  looked  at  in  the
    context of the appellant being aware of his condition when  he  entered
    this country.  This is a  proper  assessment  of  proportionality.   In
    these circumstances we are satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    correct to hold that the appellant should be removed.  Thereafter,  the
    removal arrangements are a separate matter, which form no relevant part
    of the  proportionality  exercise.   How  and  when  the  appellant  is
    removed, the First-tier Tribunal having assessed proportionality, is  a
    matter for the respondent and outwith the jurisdiction  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

15.  Moreover, we agree with  Mr  Bramble,  the  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  who
    granted permission, appears to have misunderstood what was said by  the
    First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 27.  He seems to have understood  that
    the First-tier Tribunal was saying that it was for the respondent to do
    "her best to  ensure  that  satisfactory  arrangements  were  in  place
    regarding the continuity of the appellant's  care  on  return".   On  a
    proper understanding of paragraph 27 that is not  what  the  First-tier
    Tribunal said.  What it did say was this:

        "... to delay removal until he (our emphasis) has been able to make
        suitable arrangements for future care and treatment in Nigeria".


    The "he" referred to in the said passage  is  the  respondent  not  the
appellant.

16.  Further, what is said within paragraph 27  in  our  view  on  a  proper
    construction is no more than an observation, which is being made  after
    the decision on the issue of proportionality has been made and  has  no
    legal effect.  The paragraph commences in this way:

        "I  would  add  only   that,   given   the   highly   compassionate
        circumstances, I would expect ...".

    Such wording on a proper  reading  amounts  to  this:   the  First-tier
    Tribunal is, after making its decision on the substantive issue  before
    it, setting out its hope that certain steps regarding removal  will  be
    carried out with sensitivity and organised in a  particular  way.   The
    First-tier Tribunal is  saying  no  more  than  that.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal had no power  to  order  the  respondent  to  do  anything  in
    relation to how the removal is carried out.  It was rather, in what are
    clearly compassionate circumstances, making a statement of  hope  which
    could have no more than persuasive effect.  This statement had no legal
    effect and on a proper  reading  of  the  whole  determination  it  was
    clearly not intended by the First-tier Tribunal to have  had  any  such
    effect.  We are satisfied that the construction  sought  to  be  placed
    upon this paragraph by the judge who granted permission  in  this  case
    and by the appellant it is not capable of bearing.

17.  Overall, we believe that this is a well  constructed  determination  in
    which all relevant caselaw and evidence has been taken into account and
    in  which  the  approach   to   the   proportionality   assessment   is
    unimpeachable having regard to the authorities in this area.

18.  For the above reasons we dismiss the appeal.

19.  We make no anonymity direction.





Signed                                  Date



Lord Bannantyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
