
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/44463/2013
                                                               IA/44467/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 November 2014                        |On 20 November 2014              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

              ANA GUISELLA FRERKING DAVALOS  (FIRST RESPONDENT)
             LESLIE DARLYNE FRERKING DAVALOS (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr R Subramanium, of Lambeth Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   These appeals were allowed at the First-tier, and the appellant  before
    me is the Secretary of State.  For the sake of clarity and convenience,
    however, I will refer to the parties as they were  at  the  First-tier,
    where the Secretary of State was the respondent.

2.   The appellants are mother and  daughter,  both  German  citizens.   The
    first appellant came to the UK from Bolivia in 2007,  when  the  second
    appellant was only 1.  The first appellant has a second daughter,  born
    in the UK in 2009.  The first appellant is a  single  parent,  and  has
    been living in the UK with her daughter since  2007  (and  with  her  2
    daughters since 2009).

3.   Applications were made for permanent residence.   These  were  refused,
    and the appeals were then allowed, under the 2006 Regulations, by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Lingam (promulgated on 8 September 2014).

4.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Secretary of  State  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Shimmin.  The grounds on which permission had been sought
    were that it was not clear on what basis the appeals had been  allowed,
    particularly as the judge had indicated that the appeals would only  be
    remitted as being not in accordance with the law; and it was  not  open
    to the judge to allow the appeal where there had been no  finding  that
    there had been the necessary five years' residence.

5.   At the hearing before me Mr Bramble produced a  note  by  Suki  Dhadda,
    Counsel, who had represented the Secretary of  State  at  the  hearing.
    This note recorded the appellant's  main  submission  at  the  hearing,
    which was that the Secretary of State needed to show a valid reason why
    a passport was required, in  the  light  of  Barnett  and  Others  (EEA
    Regulations: rights and documentation) [2012] UKUT  00142  (IAC).   The
    note then indicated that the judge had remitted the matter back to  the
    respondent on the basis that the decision was not  in  accordance  with
    the law, because it  was  unlawful  to  refuse  an  application  merely
    because a passport was not forthcoming.

6.   Mr Subramanium, for the appellants, relied on  his  skeleton  argument.
    He had been the representative at the First-tier hearing.  He confirmed
    that  there  had  been  a  preliminary  discussion  about  whether  the
    decisions were not in accordance with the law, but at the  end  of  the
    hearing the judge did not give an indication that this was the basis on
    which the appeals would be allowed.  Instead she reserved her decision.
     In addition Counsel for the Secretary of State did not  challenge  any
    of the evidence put forward to show that the first appellant  had  been
    living and working in the UK since 2007, and indeed did  not  challenge
    any aspect of the evidence or submissions.

7.   Mr Bramble, for the Secretary of State, made the following points.   In
    the Barnett case the facts were different, because a valid passport had
    been submitted earlier.  In this case the first appellant had  made  no
    prior applications to the Home Office.  By the time of the  application
    for permanent residence the first  appellant's  passport  had  expired.
    There was a need for  the  Home  Office  to  be  satisfied  as  to  her
    identity.  It was accepted that the refusal letter was silent as to the
    documentary evidence submitted to show the  history  of  residence  and
    working.  It was accepted that this could be  read  both  ways,  either
    that the evidence was not being challenged, or that  it  had  not  been
    considered at all.  The judge therefore erred in law  in  allowing  the
    appeals outright.

8.   Mr Subramanium referred to the last line of the refusal  letter,  which
    suggested that there was no challenge to the first appellant's identity
    as an EU national.  The  first  appellant  had  provided  her  original
    passport.  Although this had expired she had  provided  an  explanation
    for why she had not been able to get it renewed.  The original passport
    was produced at the hearing.  It was valid between 19 October 2006  and
    18 October 2011.  This application had been made in 2013.

Decision and Reasons

9.   I have decided that no material error has  been  shown,  and  that  the
    judge's decisions allowing  the  appeals  under  the  2006  Regulations
    therefore remain undisturbed.

10.  On  the  issue  of  the  application  of  the  Barnett  case,  and  the
    interpretation of Regulation 18 of the 2006 Regulations, it appears  to
    me that the judge's decision was entirely correct.  She pointed out, at
    paragraph 19 of  her  determination,  the  crucial  difference  between
    Regulation 11 on the one hand, which requires the production of a valid
    national identity card or passport on arrival, and Regulation 18  which
    does not.  What is required by Regulation 18  is  proof  that  the  EEA
    national has a permanent right of residence.  What this amounts  to  is
    proof that the EEA national has been resident in the UK  in  accordance
    with the Regulations for a continuous period of five years.  The  judge
    quoted from the Barnett case within paragraphs 20, 21, and  24  of  her
    determination.  This is exactly the point that was made in  that  case,
    namely that  the  issue  of  entitlement  to  the  permanent  right  of
    residence did not involve any express requirement  to  submit  identity
    documents or passports.

11.  For these reasons it appears to me to be clear that the judge  made  no
    legal error in her application of the Barnett case.

12.  Where there is uncertainty is in the  question  of  what  approach  was
    taken by the Secretary of State to the evidence presented to show  that
    the first appellant had been living and working  in  the  UK  for  five
    years.  This uncertainty appears to me to flow from  two  things.   The
    first is that the refusal letter is silent on this point.  The  refusal
    letter concentrates on only two narrow issues, namely the fact that the
    first appellant's passport had expired, and the fact  that  the  second
    appellant's passport was not regarded as sufficient  evidence  to  show
    that she was related as claimed to her mother.  On every other  matter,
    including all the documentary evidence presented to  show  five  years'
    continuous residence, the refusal letter  says  nothing  at  all.   The
    second point is that this silence continued at the hearing.  The judge,
    in her record of proceedings, notes that Counsel for the  Secretary  of
    State restricted her submissions to a single sentence,  saying  nothing
    more than that she relied on the refusal letter and notice of decision.



13.  It seems to me that there are two ways of looking at this.   The  first
    is that the judge was entitled to regard all the evidence of continuous
    residence as unchallenged.  The second is that she should have regarded
    it as evidence that had not yet been considered at all,  and  that  the
    decision maker, rather than the Secretary of State's representative  at
    the hearing, should therefore have an opportunity to do so.

14.  The first approach would justify allowing the appeal outright;  whereas
    the second would only justify allowing the appeal to the limited extent
    that the decisions were not in accordance with the law, thus giving the
    Secretary of State an opportunity to make a further decision.

15.  On this issue the judge's determination makes no  mention  of  allowing
    the appeal to a limited extent.  The understanding of  Mr  Subramanium,
    who was present, was that this was considered in a  discussion  of  the
    issues at the start, but that the judge reserved her  determination  at
    the end of the hearing, and gave no indication that this would  be  the
    outcome.  The note by the Home  Office  Counsel,  on  the  other  hand,
    suggests that her understanding was that the remittal for not being  in
    accordance with the law was the outcome of  the  hearing,  as  well  as
    being a matter that was discussed as a preliminary issue.

16.  Looking at paragraphs 23 to 25 of the determination it  appears  to  me
    that the judge took the  first  approach,  namely  that  there  was  no
    challenge before her to the evidence  of  continuous  residence.   This
    flows from the fact that she adopted, in paragraph 24, a  passage  from
    the Barnett case to the effect that the applications should  have  been
    granted.

17.  Did the judge err in law in taking this approach?   It  appears  to  me
    that she did not.  This was an  application  in  which  the  appellants
    submitted a considerable volume of documentary  evidence  to  establish
    residence (see paragraphs 4 and 5 of the determination).  The Secretary
    of State had had an  opportunity  to  challenge  any  or  all  of  this
    evidence in the refusal letter and had not done so.  The  Secretary  of
    State then had a second opportunity at the hearing and  again  had  not
    challenged any of the evidence.  These  were  adversarial  proceedings,
    and it therefore appears to me that the judge was entitled  to  proceed
    in the way that she did.

18.  There is the remaining issue of whether the judge  gave  an  indication
    that she would be allowing the appeals only to a  limited  extent.   On
    this point there is a conflict between the  judge's  determination  and
    record of proceedings, which fits with the memory of Mr Subramanium  on
    the one hand; and the note by Home Office Counsel on the other.  In the
    circumstances it appears to me that I  should  prefer  the  version  of
    events set out in the judge's determination and record of  proceedings.
    It appears to me to be likely that counsel for the respondent  confused
    a preliminary discussion of the issues and the actual  outcome.    This
    is suggested by the  fact  that  the  note  is  under  the  heading  of
    'preliminary issues'.

19.  What I would say,  however,  is  that  it  would  remain  open  to  the
    Secretary of State to bring forward specific challenges to the evidence
    of continuous residence, rather  than  proceeding  to  issue  permanent
    residence cards.  If there  has  been  an  unintended  failure  by  the
    Secretary of State to give proper consideration to the  evidence,  both
    at the application stage and the appeal stage, I cannot see that  there
    would be anything to prevent the respondent from giving  that  evidence
    proper consideration now, although it does appear unlikely, looking  at
    the range of  evidence  provided,  that  there  would  be  any  serious
    challenge to the first appellant having established that she  has  been
    living and working in the UK since 2007.

20.  For these reasons I have therefore  concluded  that  it  has  not  been
    established that the judge made a material error on a point of law.

21.  I have decided that the decision should be anonymised in the  interests
    of the first appellant's two children.  The  First-tier  Judge  made  a
    full fee award in respect of both appellants,  and  that  also  remains
    undisturbed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

The judge's  decision  allowing  the  appeals  under  the  2006  Regulations
remains undisturbed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 20 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

