

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number:   IA/44949/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |                 Decision & Reasons      |
|On: 1st  December 2015                |Promulgated                              |
|                                      |On: 11th December 2015                   |
|                                      |                                         |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               MOHAMMAD ZAHID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Gray & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is against a determination by First-Tier Tribunal Judge J C
    Grant-Hutchison, promulgated on 21 May 2015, dismissing the appellant's
    appeal against refusal of leave to remain on the basis of  his  private
    and family life in the UK.

 2. The case has a long and complicated history.  After sundry procedure in
    the Upper Tribunal, it came to be common ground that if  the  appellant
    had made the application which leads to these proceedings on the  basis
    of long residence, it would have fallen to be considered under the "old
    Immigration Rules" as they stood prior to July 2012, and that  such  an
    application would more than likely have been granted.

 3. The respondent's continued opposition  to  the  appeal  rested  on  two
    grounds:-

          a) the respondent  could  not  be  faulted  for  considering  the
             appellant's case on the basis  of  the  application  which  he
             made; and

          b) there was no error by  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  because  the
             point was not argued at that stage.

 4. Mrs Saddiq also pointed out that the appellant has the options  of  now
    making an application to the respondent on the basis of long residence,
    or of making an application for settlement if and when he  succeeds  in
    passing his life in the UK test (which, it appears, he  has  taken  and
    failed about ten times).

 5. There is some force in the respondent's remaining arguments.  Mr Winter
    referred to the discussion in McDonald's Immigration Law and  Practice,
    9th ed., vol. 1, paragraph 20.15(6).  This case  is  not  the  clearest
    example of where an appellant has applied under one rule but  his  case
    should obviously be governed by another; but neither is it at the level
    where the decision maker or Tribunal would require to "conduct a roving
    enquiry" in order  to  bring  the  facts  into  another  setting.   The
    circumstances of the appellant's long  residence  and  his  immigration
    history were all before the respondent and before the Tribunal.  It  is
    unfortunate the matter was not developed until a late stage,  but  once
    the correct framework of the transitional provisions is identified,  it
    does become an obvious case.

 6. The Upper Tribunal should generally be reluctant to detect error of law
    where the argument has not been squarely put to the First-Tier Tribunal
    Judge; but, on the other hand, procedure should  not  be  unnecessarily
    multiplied in a case which has been going on for a very long  time  and
    which is now capable of a clear resolution.

 7. The determination of the First-Tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.   On  the
    evidence produced, and on consideration of  the  case  in  the  correct
    light, the appellant meets  the  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    respect of long residence, and his appeal is allowed.

 8. No anonymity order has been requested or made.





            [pic]


            2 December 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman



