
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44596/2014
                                                               IA/44607/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 April 2016                     |On 28 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     ORO
                                    SJAOF
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Adeolu, legal representative, David and Vine
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department's  appeal
         against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  R  Cooper
         who, on 11 February 2015, allowed the appeals  of  the  Respondents
         against a refusal, dated 21 October 2014, to grant  them  leave  to
         remain on the basis of their family and  private  life  rights.  In
         summary, the  Judge  found  that  the  Respondents'  removal  would
         constitute  a  disproportionate   interference   with   Article   8
         separating as it would the 1st Respondent from her eldest  son  and
         the 2nd Respondent from his father and brother, both of  whom  were
         lawfully resident in the UK pursuant to EEA free movements  rights.
         The Appellant essentially contends that the Judge  failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for concluding  that  the  1st  Respondent  had  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  her  eldest  son
         given her findings that the son only began to reside with  the  1st
         Respondent after the appealed decision was made.

Background

      2. The Respondents are both nationals of Nigeria. The  1st  Respondent
         was born on [.] 1978 and is the mother of the 2nd  Respondent,  who
         was born on [.] 2011 in the UK.  The  1st  Respondent  entered  the
         United Kingdom as a student on 06 August 2004 with leave to  remain
         until 30 January 2006. She gave birth to her eldest son, AF, on  28
         January 2006. It was not in dispute before the First-tier  Tribunal
         (see paragraph 24), or before the Upper Tribunal at  the  error  of
         law hearing, that AF was lawfully resident in the United Kingdom on
         the basis of his rights as a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
         exercising Treaty  rights  within  the  terms  of  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. There was nevertheless a
         degree of uncertainty as to the full circumstances surrounding AF's
         lawful residence. According to the Reasons For Refusal Letter dated
         21 October 2014 AF held an EEA  residence  permit.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal decision (paragraph 3) indicated that this was valid until
         30 November 2016. There  was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal in relation to the immigration status of AF's father  (who
         is also the father of the 2nd Appellant). The  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge presumed (paragraph 31) that AF derived his residence  permit
         from his father, who the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  believed  was
         either married to or lived with an EEA national  exercising  Treaty
         rights.

      3. The 1st Respondent applied for further leave to remain as a student
         and this was granted until 21 October 2007. AF was, at this time, a
         dependent on his mother's application. The 1st  Respondent's  leave
         to remain was however revoked on 01 July  2006  as  she  failed  to
         attend her course of studies.

      4. On 28 September 2012 the 1st Respondent applied for Leave To Remain
         on the basis of her family and private life rights,  with  the  2nd
         Respondent as her dependent. On 26 February 2013 the 1st Respondent
         was convicted of an offence involving false or improperly  obtained
         ID documents and she received a 12 month sentence of  imprisonment.
         It was unclear  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  whether  this
         sentence was  suspended,  and  it  remains  unclear  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal. No deportation action was however initialised against the
         1st Respondent. Her application for Leave To Remain was refused  on
         18 September 2013 but, following the initiation of judicial  review
         proceedings, the  decision  was  reconsidered  and  refused  on  21
         October 2014.

      5. In her 2014 decision the Appellant considered the 1st  Respondent's
         conviction and refused the application on the basis  that  the  1st
         Respondent did not meet the suitability requirements  of  Appendix-
         FM. The Appellant was  not  satisfied  the  1st  Respondent  had  a
         genuine or subsisting relationship with AF because  she  failed  to
         supply evidence that she had contact with him (he was  living  with
         his father at the date of the decision who was his primary  carer).
         The Appellant proceeded to consider the  Respondents'  applications
         under paragraph 276ADE but was satisfied that the  requirements  of
         that paragraph were not met. The Appellant considered whether there
         were any 'exceptional circumstances' but  concluded  that  the  1st
         Respondent could maintain any relationship she had with AF  through
         remote forms of communication, and that the 2nd Respondent would be
         returned to Nigeria with his mother, who  would  ensure  his  well-
         being.

Decision of the First-tier Judge

      6. The Judge heard evidence from the 1st Respondent and considered the
         documents contained in the bundles prepared by  both  parties.  The
         Judge was not impressed with  the  1st  Respondent  as  a  witness,
         finding (paragraph 41) that she had been "less than straightforward
         in providing information to the [Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department] and the Tribunal." The Judge was  not  satisfied  there
         was much in the way of cogent evidence that AF had lived  with  the
         1st Respondent between 2009 and December 2014, though she did  find
         that AF had lived with the 1st Respondent from December 2014 up  to
         the date of the hearing. The  Judge  found,  contrary  to  the  1st
         Respondent's assertions, that  she  had  worked  illegally  in  the
         United Kingdom. The Judge found there was some evidence of the  1st
         Respondent's involvement in AF's  school  life  and  that  the  1st
         Respondent 'may' have been  living  with  the  father  of  her  two
         children for periods, including 2009  to  2012.  The  Judge  stated
         (paragraph 43) that she gave particular weight to the fact that the
         1st Respondent, in her written statement, provided  no  details  of
         her life with AF save for  one  reference  to  taking  him  to  and
         picking him up from school when he lived with his father. The Judge
         did  not  accept  that  the  1st  Respondent  had  been   primarily
         responsible for AF's care since 2012. At paragraphs 38 and  57  the
         Judge stated that AF's residence with the 1st Respondent 'may' have
         been made for immigration reasons.

      7. The Judge nevertheless found (at paragraphs 52 and 66) that the 1st
         Respondent's relationship with  AF  constituted  family  life,  and
         found that the 2nd Respondent's relationship with his father and AF
         also constituted family life. Having found that the 1st  Respondent
         had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  AF,  and  having
         previously found that it would be unreasonable  for  AF  to  go  to
         Nigeria (in light of his settlement at school and his  relationship
         with his father), the Judge concluded that it would not be  in  the
         public interest, notwithstanding the 1st Respondent's  breaches  of
         both immigration and criminal laws, for  her  to  be  removed.  The
         Judge consequently allowed the appeals.

Grounds of appeal

      8. The Appellant contended that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  failed
         to  give  adequate  reasons  for   finding   that   it   would   be
         disproportionate to remove the Respondents. It was  argued  that  a
         'proper global consideration of the evidence' gave rise to a  clear
         inference that AF's cohabitation with the 1st Respondent was solely
         or primarily for immigration reasons. Given that AF had  previously
         lived with his father it was submitted that he  could  remain  with
         his father again and that removal of the Respondents  would  entail
         'little  disruption'  as  the  status  quo  would  effectively   be
         maintained. The Appellant stated, "while it may not  be  reasonable
         for the 1st [Respondent's] eldest child to leave the  jurisdiction,
         it is submitted that this is a choice for the parties to make."

      9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  arguable
         the First-tier Tribunal gave inadequate reasons  in  light  of  its
         factual findings.

Submissions of the parties

     10. At the outset of the hearing Mr Avery indicated that, although  the
         EEA residence cards issued to AF and his father had been withdrawn,
         the Appellant's decision to do so had itself  now  been  withdrawn.
         This was confirmed in a letter from David & Vine Solicitors,  dated
         16 February 2016, that an appeal  (IA/26659/2015)  issued  by  AF's
         father was withdrawn following the  withdrawal  of  the  challenged
         decision. In the absence of any  further  evidence  or  submissions
         from the Appellant to the contrary,  and  with  no  objection  from
         either representative, the error of law  appeal  proceeded  on  the
         basis that, at the date of the First-tier Tribunal's decision, both
         AF and his father were lawfully  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom
         pursuant to EU rights of free movement.

     11. Mr Avery adopted the reasoning contained in the grounds of  appeal.
         There was said to  be  an  'odd'  disconnect  between  the  Judge's
         findings and her conclusions. It was  accepted  by  Mr  Avery  that
         there was, between the 1st Respondent and AF,  a  'relationship  of
         sorts', but it was submitted that, on the  Judge's  findings,  this
         was 'not  particularly  strong.'  In  these  circumstances  it  was
         submitted that the Judge's reasoning in support of her finding that
         there was a genuine and subsisting relationship between the AF  and
         the 1st Respondent was inadequate.

     12.  Mr  Adeolu  submitted  that  the  grounds  were  no  more  than  a
         disagreement with conclusions that the Judge was entitled to reach.
         It was submitted there  was  sufficient  contact  between  the  1st
         Respondent and her eldest son to establish a genuine and subsisting
         relationship  and  that  the  Judge's  reasoning  was  adequate.  I
         reserved my decision.

Discussion

     13. It is clear from the Judge's decision that she did not find the 1st
         Respondent an impressive witness. Nor was she  impressed  with  the
         documentary evidence adduced in support of the  appeal.  The  Judge
         nevertheless concluded the 1st Respondent did "... have a  parental
         relationship with [AF], albeit not one to  the  extent  claimed  by
         her." Holistic consideration of the Judge's decision shows reasoned
         findings that do support  this  conclusion.  It  was  not  disputed
         before the First-tier Tribunal that  AF  had  lived  with  the  1st
         Respondent for the first three years of his life. The  Judge  found
         (paragraph 36) that AF had been  living  with  the  1st  Respondent
         since December 2014. The Judge accepted  that  the  1st  Respondent
         took AF to school and collected him, and that  she  did  have  some
         involvement in his school life in light of her signature on two  of
         AF's school reports for the year 2012/2013. The Judge also accepted
         (paragraph 44) that AF's father did have some contact with the  2nd
         Respondent. At paragraph 59 the Judge found that the 1st Respondent
         did have contact with AF when he was living with his father and was
         listed as a 'parental contact' for him  at  school,  and  that  she
         recently attended a parent-teacher event.

     14. The Judge's conclusion must also be  considered  in  light  of  the
         unchallenged evidence that AF is the son of the 1st Respondent  and
         the brother of the 2nd Respondent. It is settled law that from  the
         moment of a child's birth and the fact of it, there exists  between
         a child and his parents a  bond  amounting  to  family  life  which
         subsequent events cannot break except in exceptional  circumstances
         (Gul v Switzerland 1996) 22 EHRR 93, at 32). Mr Avery accepted that
         the 1st Respondent had a 'relationship of sorts' with AF.  Although
         the Judge found that AF's father had 'primary  responsibility'  for
         AF, this  does  not  logically  exclude  the  1st  Respondent  from
         nevertheless  still   maintaining   a   'genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship'.  Such  a  relationship  does  not  require  the  1st
         Respondent to  have  'primary  responsibility'.  For  example,  one
         parent separated or divorced  from  the  other  may  still  have  a
         'genuine and subsisting parental relationship'  with  the  couple's
         child even if the other parent has primary responsibility  for  the
         child's care.

     15. Mr Avery submitted that the relationship between the 1st Respondent
         and AF was 'not particularly strong.' This may be so, but  it  does
         not  logically  exclude  the  existence  of  a   genuine   parental
         relationship. The same can  be  said  in  respect  of  the  Judge's
         finding that AF's residence with the 1st Respondent 'may' have been
         made for immigration purposes. I  am  satisfied  that  the  Judge's
         reasoning in support of her finding that the 1st Respondent  had  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship with AF was adequately
         reasoned and was a finding she was rationally entitled to  make  on
         the evidence before her.

     16. In assessing the proportionality of the removal decision the  Judge
         applied paragraph  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002. For the reasons already given I am  satisfied  the
         Judge was entitled to find the 1st Respondent enjoyed a genuine and
         subsisting parental relationship with her eldest son. There was  no
         challenge to the Judge's finding that it would be unreasonable  for
         AF to leave the United Kingdom either in the Appellant's grounds of
         appeal or in Mr Avery's submissions. Given that AF and  his  father
         were lawfully present in the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  EU  free
         movement  rights,  and  given  that   the   father   had   'primary
         responsibility' for AF, this was clearly a conclusion the Judge was
         entitled to reach.

     17. In Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674  (IAC)
         The President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC) found that  section  117B
         (6) was a reflection of the distinction which Parliament has chosen
         to make between persons  who  are,  and  who  are  not,  liable  to
         deportation. In any case where the conditions enshrined in  section
         117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  are
         satisfied, the section 117B(6) public interest  prevails  over  the
         public interests identified in section 117B (1)-(3). On  the  basis
         of the evidence presented to both the First-tier Tribunal and Upper
         Tribunal it appears that the  1st  Respondent  was  not  liable  to
         deportation. The Judge, in any event, clearly  accorded  weight  to
         the  factors  contained  in  section  117B,   including   the   1st
         Respondent's illegal status in the United Kingdom, and specifically
         stated that she gave "substantial weight" to the fact that the  1st
         Respondent has a criminal conviction for dishonesty.

     18. Whilst another Judge may have been entitled to  reach  a  different
         conclusion in  respect  of  the  nature  of  the  1st  Respondent's
         relationship with her eldest son, I can detect no  legal  error  in
         the  approach  adopted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In   these
         circumstances I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  has  not
         committed a material error of law.

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.


[pic] 27 April 2016

Signed:     Date:
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Respondents  in
this appeal are granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondents.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
