
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44091/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |        Decision and Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                         |
|On 5 August 2015                          |        On 14 August 2015           |
|                                          |                                    |


                                   Before

                           UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARKUS QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR MD MANZURUL KADIR
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Respondent:    Ms E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Appellant:     Mr B. Halligan, Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The respondent is a national of Bangladesh. He appealed to the First-
   tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 20
   October 2014 refusing to issue a residence card as confirmation of a
   right of residence as an extended family member of an EEA national under
   Regulation 8(1) and (2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The
   First-tier Tribunal allowed the appeal.


2. The relevant provisions of regulation 8 are:


    "(1) In these Regulations "extended family member" means a person who
    is not a family member of an EEA national under regulation 7(1)(a), (b)
    or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or
    (5).


    (2) A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person is
    a relative of an EEA national, his spouse or his civil partner and-


    (a) the person is residing in a country other than the United Kingdom
    and is dependent upon the EEA national or is a member of his household;




    ... or


    (c) the person satisfied the condition in paragraph (a), has joined the
    EEA national in the United Kingdom and continues to be dependent upon
    him or to be a member of his household."


3. The Secretary of State appeals on the grounds that the evidence was not
   capable of satisfying the requirements of regulation 8(2)(a) prior to
   joining the EEA national in the UK.


4. For the purpose of this appeal there is no challenge to the First-tier
   Tribunal's findings of fact. I set them out in summary. The EEA national
   on whom the respondent claimed to be dependent is his cousin, Mr Hoque.
   The respondent's and Mr Hoque's families had lived together in a joint
   family unit in Bangladesh.  The respondent had been financially dependent
   upon Mr Hoque from 2002 to date. Mr Hoque went to Portugal in 2005.  He
   continued to send money to Bangladesh to maintain the extended family.
   Mr Hoque gained Portugese nationality in 2011. The same year he returned
   to Bangladesh to set up in business.  In May 2014 Mr Hoque came to work
   in the UK.


5. In the meantime, the respondent had left Bangladesh to come to the UK,
   lawfully, in 2008.  After that he was granted a student visa.  While he
   was a student in the UK, Mr Hoque had maintained him.  The respondent
   travelled to Bangladesh for a few weeks in 2009 for a wedding.  He
   returned again in 2012 and 2013, once for Mr Hoque's wedding and once for
   the wedding of Mr Hoque's brother, for around one month on each occasion.
   During those visits, he lived at the same address as Mr Hoque. While he
   was in Bangladesh for those two visits he was maintained by Mr Hoque and
   was dependent upon him.


6. The Tribunal Judge concluded that the respondent was financially
   dependent on Mr Hoque while they were living in Bangladesh in the same
   household from 2011 onwards, and that since 2014 he has lived in the same
   household as and is financially dependent on Mr Hoque in the UK.


7. The issues which the First-tier Tribunal had to determine under
   regulation 8(2) was whether, prior to joining Mr Hoque's household in the
   UK in 2014, he had satisfied the conditions in regulation 8(1)(a), ie
   that he had resided in Bangladesh and during that time had been dependent
   upon Mr Hoque or a member of his household. Those conditions must have
   been satisfied while Mr Hoque was a Union citizen.   That is clear from
   the wording of Article 3(2) of Directive 2004/38/EC, to which the 2006
   regulations give effect.  In this case, that means that the conditions in
   regulation 8(1)(a) had to be satisfied on or after 2011.


8. The respondent was not resident in Bangladesh on or after 2011.  On the
   Judge's findings, he went there for two relatively short visits to attend
   weddings.  That does not amount to residence. Therefore the conditions in
   regulation 8(1)(a) could not have been satisfied at any time after Mr
   Hoque became a Union citizen.


9. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the
   decision must be set aside.  On the evidence, and the First-tier
   Tribunal's findings of fact, there can be only one outcome which is that
   the respondent was not an extended family member within regulation 8 of
   the EEA Regulations.  Accordingly we re-make the decision and refuse the
   appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State.



Signed:                                          Date 7 August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Kate Markus QC
