
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44032/2014
                                                               IA/44035/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MOHAMMAD SHAHRIAR NIPUN
                               FARHANAZ DEEBA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M. Iqbal, Counsel instructed by Burney Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically  the  Secretary  of
    State is the appellant in the appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    On 31 March 2011 the first  appellant  ("the  appellant")  applied  to
    vary and extend his leave to remain to  that  of  a  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant with his wife as his dependent. The respondent did not  make  a
    decision in response to the application in  good  time.  The  appellant
    sent a Pre-action Protocol letter to the respondent regarding the delay
    in decision making. The appellant says that the respondent refused  the
    application in a notice of decision dated 02 January  2013  because  it
    was alleged that he  had  produced  false  documents  relating  to  his
    employment with a company called Awdry Enterprises. He  says  that  the
    appeal was adjourned on 14 May 2013  because  the  respondent  produced
    documents at the hearing. At the resumed hearing on 25  July  2013  the
    respondent withdrew the immigration decision. There does not appear  to
    be anything in the evidence currently before the Tribunal to  show  why
    the decision was withdrawn.

3.    The appellant says that there was further delay in decision making.  A
    fresh  decision  was  not  made  until  01  September  2014,  when  the
    respondent refused the application in the following terms:

         "In your application, you submitted  wage  slips,  P60,  P45,  HMRC
         letter and a letter from Awdry Enterprises covering the  period  of
         28 February 2010 to 31 January 2011.

         Following HMRC verification, I am satisfied that Awdry  Enterprises
         have not demonstrated that they have participated in any legitimate
         trade.

         As  false  documents  have  been  submitted  in  relation  to  your
         application,  it  is  refused  under  paragraph  322(1A),  of   the
         Immigration Rules."

4.    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  asked  for  the
    matter to be dealt with on the papers. In response  to  directions  the
    respondent submitted a bundle of documents, which  included  copies  of
    the documents relating to his employment with Awdry Enterprises and two
    witness statements from an employee of HMRC called  Catherine  McGovern
    (18/7/13 & 08/01/14). In the first statement Ms McGovern also  referred
    to an earlier statement  made  on  11  December  2012,  which  was  not
    included in the bundle.

5.    In  response  to  this  evidence  the  appellant  prepared  a  witness
    statement, a skeleton argument and a bundle  of  supporting  documents.
    The skeleton argument expressly dealt with  the  issues  raised  in  Ms
    McGovern's statements.

6.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey allowed  the  appeal  on  the  limited
    ground that the decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law.  He
    concluded that the respondent was under a duty to make  the  appellants
    aware of Ms McGovern's evidence before refusing the application, should
    have afford them an opportunity to comment and should  have  taken  any
    comments into account before making  a  decision.  He  found  that  the
    respondent's failure to do so rendered the decision unlawful.  He  went
    on to consider whether he should consider the  evidence  but  concluded
    that it was not appropriate to do so.

7.    The First-tier Tribunal granted the respondent  permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on the ground that it was arguable that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge should have either adjourned the  matter  to  allow
    the appellant time to deal with the evidence or should have decided the
    case on the basis of the available evidence.

8.    On 10 December 2015 the respondent applied to adduce further  evidence
    under rule 15(2A) of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008. The evidence consisted of a further statement from an employee of
    HMRC  (Wendy  Gilbert)  dated  10/12/15  listing  the  appellant's  tax
    records. Mr Iqbal was not notified of the evidence until the morning of
    the hearing  and  initially  applied  for  an  adjournment,  which  was
    unopposed by Mr Whitwell.

9.    After further discussion as to the merits of the  grounds  of  appeal,
    and  after  having  considered  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  I
    suggested that the best way forward would be to find an error of law in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision and remit the case for a fresh hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal so that any  further  evidence  and  any
    evidence produced in response could be considered in full. Both parties
    agreed to this course of action.

10.   It is apparent from the course of events outlined above why the First-
    tier Tribunal decision contains an error of law. The respondent refused
    the application in the normal way, albeit only with outline reasons why
    it was alleged  that  false  documents  had  been  submitted  with  the
    application. The evidence relied upon was served  in  the  respondent's
    bundle in February 2015  and  the  appellant  responded  with  evidence
    served in March 2015. At the date when the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    decided the case the appellant had more than sufficient time to respond
    to the evidence relied upon by the respondent.

11.   The whole purpose of an appeal is for a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to
    make findings of fact in relation to disputed  issues.  The  course  of
    events in this case was  no  different  to  any  other  appeal  against
    refusal of leave to  remain.  Aside  from  the  evidential  flexibility
    provisions contained in paragraph 245AA of the immigration rules, which
    do not apply in the  circumstances  of  this  particular  case,  it  is
    unclear how the judge could reasonably have concluded that the decision
    making process was procedurally unfair (setting aside the  obvious  and
    no doubt frustrating delays). The judge should have gone on to consider
    the evidence and make a decision in relation to the matters in dispute.
    As such I find that the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
    error on a point of law and I set aside the decision.

12.   Mr Iqbal accepted the further evidence produced by the respondent  was
    now served. He noted that the earlier statement made by Ms McGovern  on
    11 December 2012 was not included in the evidence.  On  behalf  of  the
    respondent Mr Whitwell undertook to serve the statement by  31  January
    2016, or at the very least, to notify the appellant if the evidence was
    not available. Whilst there was some further discussion  about  further
    directions I declined to make directions at this stage because that  is
    a matter for the First-tier Tribunal. It was agreed  that  it  was  now
    appropriate to list the case for an oral hearing.

13.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law. The decision is set aside and  the  case
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the case for a fresh hearing  before  the
First-tier Tribunal


Signed      [pic]      Date 14 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

