
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44617/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 1 September 2015                  |On 10 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Md dider hossain
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim, instructed by Uzma Law Ltd, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 5 July 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly granted  the  appellant
    Secretary of State  permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  and
    reasons statement of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manyarara  that  was
    promulgated on 6 May 2015.

The grounds of appeal

 2. The grounds of application are adopted as the ground  of  appeal.   The
    first ground argues  that  Judge  Manyarara  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for finding that Article 8(1) of the  human  rights  convention
    was engaged.  The second ground develops from  this  point  and  argues
    that even if Article 8(1) was engaged, the judge has failed to properly
    assess proportionality  because  she  failed  to  evaluate  the  public
    interest or to weigh it against Mr Hossain's particular  circumstances.
    This point is explored further in the third and  fourth  grounds.   The
    third ground argues that the judge took into  consideration  immaterial
    matters when assessing the proportionality of the immigration  decision
    and the fourth ground alleges that the judge failed to have  regard  to
    the statutory provisions regarding public interest  considerations  set
    out in s.117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as
    amended by the Immigration  Act  2014),  particularly  in  relation  to
    s.117B(5) regarding the precarious nature of Mr  Hossain's  immigration
    status whilst he established private life in the UK.

 3. Mr Avery's submissions did little to amplify these grounds, other  than
    to remind me  that  Judge  Manyarara's  consideration  of  whether  the
    immigration rules had been applied fairly relied on the assumption that
    no decision had  been  reached  on  the  application  of  Mr  Hossain's
    entrepreneurial  partner.   Mr  Avery  submitted  that  in  fact   that
    partner's application had been refused for wholly different reasons and
    therefore the judge's assumption was a material misdirection.  Mr Avery
    also reminded me of developments  in  case  law  regarding  s.117B,  in
    particularly taking me to AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC).

Mr Karim's submissions

 4. Mr Karim relied on the detailed rule 24  response  of  24  August  2015
    which he adopted as  his  skeleton  argument.   He  submitted  that  as
    explained in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT  85
    (IAC) it was for Judge Manyarara to consider what weight to  attach  to
    the evidence and that is all he had done.

 5. Mr Karim relied on Shizad and other authorities cited in  the  skeleton
    argument to submit that it was accepted that a judge did  not  have  to
    give detailed reasons for every finding and that it is  permissible  to
    infer from a decision and reasons statement  as  a  whole  to  identify
    whether enough had been done by the judge.  Mr Karim  took  me  through
    Judge Manyarara's decision and reasons in  order  to  show  me  why  he
    thought the judge had considered all the evidence and relevant law.  In
    so doing he enhanced those parts of the skeleton argument which did the
    same.

 6. Turning to the other allegations in the grounds  of  appeal,  Mr  Karim
    relied on the skeleton arguments.  He pointed out that  the  judge  had
    recognised that Mr Hossain had been treated unfairly by  the  Secretary
    of State because the Home Office had failed to give Mr Hossain a proper
    opportunity to deal with the full parameters of the case  against  him.
    This was clearly a material issue in relation to proportionality.

 7. As to the last ground of appeal, Mr Karim reminded me of the  case  law
    Judge Manyarara cited in paragraph  25  of  his  decision  and  reasons
    statement which correctly identified that he could consider  Article  8
    directly.  Mr Karim had little to say on this point and merely reminded
    me that the threshold to engage Article 8 is not particularly high.

Errors of law

 8. After discussing the competing arguments with Mr Avery and Mr Karim,  I
    reached the conclusion that Judge Manyarara had failed to give adequate
    reasons in relation to the second and fifth Razgar questions.  Although
    in paragraphs 25 to 30 Judge Manyarara correctly identified that he had
    to consider Article 8 directly and that in so doing he must follow  the
    five step approach in Razgar, at paragraph 31 he  gave  no  reason  for
    finding that the first  two  questions  were  to  be  answered  in  the
    affirmative. Judge Manyarara simple made a bald assertion.  Although  I
    accept Mr Karim's submission  that  a  judge  does  not  have  to  give
    detailed reasons for every finding and even taking into account the low
    threshold to engage Article 8(1), the failure to give any  reason  must
    be an error of law because the parties do not know how the  judge  came
    to his conclusion.

 9. In reaching this decision, I am satisfied that nothing can be  inferred
    from paragraphs 25 to 30 as to Mr  Hossain's  private  of  family  life
    rights.  The second Razgar question is whether an immigration  decision
    will cause such interference to have consequences of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.   Apart  from  having
    held leave to enter and remain in the UK and  the  evidence  about  the
    activities Mr Hossain had undertaken since arriving in  the  UK,  there
    was nothing to  indicate  why  the  immigration  decision  would  cause
    interference of such gravity, particularly given the case law regarding
    private life rights such as Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25
    (IAC).  There was  nothing  to  indicate  why  Mr  Hossain's  moral  or
    physical integrity might be undermined by the immigration decision  and
    the mere fact that the immigration decision might bring the appellant's
    private life to an end in  the  UK  is  not  enough  to  say  that  the
    consequences are particularly grave.

10. In addition, I am unable to accept that I can infer from  paragraph  30
    that Judge Manyarara had proper regard to the provisions of s.117B when
    assessing the proportionality of the immigration decision.   These  are
    statutory provisions  and  each  must  be  addressed.   Although  Judge
    Manyarara made findings in respect of the economic wellbeing of the  UK
    and that he had not remained in the UK unlawfully, there is no  finding
    in relation to private life being established at a  time  when  the  Mr
    Hossain's immigration status was precarious.  Even though the judge did
    not have the benefit of AM it should have been clear  to  him  that  he
    needed to make  a  finding  as  to  whether  Mr  Hossain's  status  was
    precarious or not.  The absence of a finding on a material matter is an
    error of law.

Remaking the decision

11. Because of the nature of the errors, the decision and reasons statement
    cannot stand.  I have found that the decision in relation to Article  8
    is infected with legal errors and has to be remade.  As there has  been
    no challenge to Judge Manyarara's finding that  Mr  Hossain  could  not
    succeed under the immigration rules the remaking  of  the  decision  is
    limited to the Article 8 grounds.

12. After discussing with the parties how I  might  correct  these  errors,
    although Mr Avery wished the case to remain in the  Upper  Tribunal,  I
    decided that it would be appropriate to remit the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  This was because the extent of  the
    errors means this case falls  within  those  that  should  be  remitted
    because of otherwise Mr Hossain would be deprived of  potential  rights
    of appeal.

Directions

13. With regard to the rehearing of the appeal, I direct that it is limited
    to a consideration of Article 8 only and that the  structured  approach
    established in Razgar should be followed.   No  step  is  conceded  and
    findings will be required on each step.  In that respect,  the  parties
    are at liberty to submit  further  evidence  although  any  documentary
    evidence must be filed and served at least  14  days  before  the  next
    hearing. The appeal can be before any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other
    than Judge Manyarara

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge  Manyarara  contains  errors  on
points of law and is set aside.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  subject  to  the  directions
above.




                               Signed        Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
