
[pic]
IAC-UT

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44311/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 February 2016                   |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                           MANJINDER SINGH KANDOLA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Richardson, instructed by Louis Kennedy,
solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Malone)  dismissing  his  appeal  against   the
    respondent's decision made on 6 November  2014  refusing  to  vary  his
    leave to remain as a Tier 4  student  and  to  remove  him  by  way  of
    directions under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006.

Background

2.   The background to this appeal can briefly  be  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant is a citizen of India born on 1  July  1990.  In  October
    2009 he was granted entry clearance as a student  valid  until  31  May
    2013. He arrived in the UK on 23 January 2010.  On  30  April  2013  he
    applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Migrant  and
    submitted a CAS for studies at Grenville College London. However, on 14
    April 2014 UK Visas and Immigration decided  to  revoke  the  college's
    licence.

3.   On 8 August 2014 the respondent wrote to the  appellant  notifying  him
    of the revocation and indicating that the CAS he had submitted  was  no
    longer valid and that his application would fall to be refused  but  in
    line with the rules and guidance consideration of the application would
    be suspended for the period of 60 calendar days. On 6 November 2014 the
    appellant made a further application for  leave  to  remain  to  pursue
    studies at  Edwards  College.  This  application  was  treated  by  the
    respondent as void.  She went on to consider the  original  application
    which was refused for the reasons set out in the decision letter  dated
    6 November 2014, that the appellant had failed to provide a  valid  CAS
    in support of this application.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

4.   The appellant appealed against that decision  arguing  that  his  first
    application was made in time and supported by a valid CAS. His  college
    licence was revoked during the currency of his section 3C leave and  he
    had submitted a variation of application which was not accepted by  the
    respondent but which was open to him under the rules. He asked for  his
    appeal to be determined on the papers without an oral hearing.

5.   The judge noted that the appeal before him related to  the  application
    of 30 April 2013. The CAS submitted in support was no longer valid.  He
    noted that the application in relation to Edwards College was  "voided"
    by the respondent for reasons of which he was unaware. As there was  no
    CAS in relation to the decision under appeal, the judge found that  the
    respondent's decision was in accordance with the law and the rules  and
    that the appeal must be dismissed.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

6.   In his grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  the  appellant  argued
    that there was no suggestion that the college licence was  revoked  due
    to any fault of his or that he had been given  a  fair  opportunity  in
    accordance with the respondent's policy to find  another  college.  The
    grounds refer to the  decision  in  Naved  (student-fairness-notice  of
    points) Pakistan [2012] UKUT 14 and also seek to rely on the  issue  of
    procedural fairness set out in Patel (revocation  of  sponsor  licence-
    fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211 and  Thakur  (PBS  decision-common  law
    fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 151.

7.   Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Finch) for the following reasons:

         "... in his grounds  of  appeal  he  also  explained  that  he  had
         submitted a variation of his application and there  is  a  copy  of
         this application in the home office bundle. In his original grounds
         of appeal the appellant had said that  this  application  had  been
         voided because he already had an outstanding application.

         The appellant now argues that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  erred
         in law as he failed to take into account  the  respondent's  "Patel
         guidance". The First-tier Tribunal judge found  that  the  guidance
         had been complied with as the appellant had been able to apply  for
         further  leave  to  study  at  another  college.  However,  as  the
         application was voided, this is not the case and the respondent did
         not comply with her own policy.

         Therefore the respondent has not acted in accordance with  the  law
         and the appellant's appeal should have been allowed on  this  basis
         in order for the respondent  to  provide  the  appellant  with  the
         opportunity to apply to vary his application for a  Tier  4  leave.
         (This ground of appeal was still available as  he  had  applied  to
         vary his leave prior to 20 October 2014.)

         Therefore, I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  made
         an arguable error of law in his decision and reasons and find  that
         permission to appeal should be granted."

8.   In her response to the grounds the respondent makes the point that  the
    appellant chose to opt for a hearing on the papers and the  information
    before the judge was therefore limited. The author of the response  did
    not have access to the original  appeal  but  said  that  it  would  be
    surprising if it contained an assertion that he had not been given  the
    60 day period to find another college because records  showed  that  by
    letter dated 8 August 2014, he has been  given  that  opportunity.  The
    response enclosed a copy of the letter.

9.   At the hearing before me in response to the  question  why  the  second
    application had been treated as void, Ms Isherwood  produced  a  letter
    addressed to the appellant dated 6 November 2014 informing him that his
    application was voided due to the application from 30 April 2013  still
    being open.

10.  Mr Richardson, who had been unaware of the letters  of  8  August  2014
    and 6 November 2014 until the date of hearing, submitted that there had
    been an error of law in that the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  had  been
    unaware of the basis on which the second  application  was  treated  as
    void or of the fact that the second application had followed  from  the
    grant of the 60 day period enabling the appellant to obtain a new  CAS.
    There may have been some confusion  arising  from  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had answered "no" to the question on the application form "do
    you currently have any other applications with UK visas and immigration
    on which you are awaiting a decision?" However, it was now  clear  that
    the appellant had submitted what was in  substance  an  application  to
    vary in accordance with the letter of 8 August 2014 and that would have
    been obvious on even the most cursory look at the respondent's records.

11.  Ms Isherwood submitted that the respondent had been entitled  to  treat
    the second application as void. The obligation was on the appellant  to
    make an application to vary his grounds  and  to  make  it  clear  what
    application was being made. He had submitted a  fresh  application  and
    the respondent was  entitled  to  refuse  it  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant had failed to declare that there was a  pending  application.
    In response Mr Richardson argued that this  clearly  raised  issues  of
    procedural fairness as  the  appellant  had  simply  responded  to  the
    opportunity of obtaining another CAS.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

12.  The first issue I have to consider is whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside. The  appellant
    opted for an appeal without an oral hearing and the judge had  to  deal
    with the appeal on the basis of the evidence before him. It can only be
    in exceptional circumstances that further evidence not before the judge
    can be relied on to establish an error of law. However, in the  present
    case, I am satisfied that  the  judge  through  no  fault  of  his  own
    proceeded on a fundamental misapprehension of the facts of  this  case.
    Both Judge Malone and Judge Finch were clearly unaware that the 60  day
    period under the policy had been granted to the appellant and  that  he
    had submitted an application, having obtained a valid CAS  during  that
    period. Further, the assertion that the second application was intended
    to be an application to vary the first  application  was  made  in  the
    grounds to the First-tier Tribunal but the judge failed to identify and
    deal with that issue. These errors of law are such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.

Re-making the decision

13.  The judge  took  the  view  that  appeal  before  him  related  to  the
    application dated 13 April 2013 whereas in fact the issue  was  whether
    the subsequent application was a variation  of  that  application.  The
    respondent treated later application as void because of the failure  to
    declare  that  there  was  an  outstanding  application.  Ms  Isherwood
    submitted that the onus was on the appellant to make it clear that  the
    later  application  was  an  application  to  vary   that   outstanding
    application. Mr Richardson's submission was that even if the  appellant
    could be faulted for not making it clear that the late application  was
    a variation, the fact remained  that  the  respondent  knew  about  the
    previous application  and  a  60  day  letter  had  been  sent  to  the
    appellant. If there was a failure to tick the right box or to  identify
    the application  as  a  variation,  this  was  not  a  case  where  the
    respondent could  say  that  there  was  any  prejudice  and  when  the
    situation was looked at as a whole it was, so he argued, a  clear  case
    where fairness required the  respondent  to  make  a  decision  on  the
    application as amended.

14.  In R (Raza) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 36, the Court of Appeal confirmed that what fairness  required  was
    necessarily fact and context specific  and  that  while  there  was  in
    general no duty to give notice of what was believed to be a  deficiency
    in a CAS before making an adverse decision did not mean that there  may
    not be some cases where fairness demanded that the Secretary  of  State
    should not refuse the application without further enquiry [31]. In that
    appeal the court was dealing a situation with there was  a  failure  to
    provide a valid CAS whereas in the present case there was a failure  to
    appreciate that the later application was in fact a variation. It  must
    also be emphasised that fairness in this context  relates  specifically
    to procedural fairness. On the particular facts  of  this  appeal,  now
    that the factual position has been confirmed, I am satisfied that  this
    is a case where procedural fairness required clarification  of  whether
    the appellant's intention was to submit a fresh application or to  vary
    the previous application. If that enquiry had been made it  would  have
    been clear that the intention  was  to  make  a  variation  application
    within the time limits set out in the guidance  given  in  the  60  day
    letter.

15.  I am therefore satisfied that the proper course is to allow the  appeal
    but only to the extent that the application as  varied  remains  to  be
    decided  by  the  respondent.  There  has  been  no  decision  on  that
    application and the Tribunal is not in a position to make that decision
    without it first being considered by the respondent.

Decision

16.  I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  such  that  its
    decision should be set aside. The appeal is allowed to the extent  that
    the application as varied is remitted to the respondent for decision.


Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter  Date: 15 February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

