
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44482/2014
                                                               IA/44488/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 November 2015                  |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     A B
                                    P A-K
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Karim (Menson Associates Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are the appeals of A B (born 3 July 1974) and her daughter P  A-K
    (born 16 September 2006), both citizens of Ghana, against the decisions
    of 20 October 2014  to  make  removal  directions  against  them  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 having refused  their
    applications for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

 2. A is the daughter of P, and the application was made on the basis  that
    the former had lived in the United Kingdom all her  life,  and  was  in
    education here, the country where all her family and social  ties  were
    established, given her mother's limited  connections  in  Ghana  having
    coming here on 11 June 2002; her natural father  had  died  before  she
    left the country. They lived here with the  First  Appellant's  mother,
    stepfather and sister. Their application had been made on 22 April 2014
    and was refused on 13 June 2014,  without  the  right  of  appeal,  but
    subsequently following judicial review proceedings  it  was  agreed  by
    consent that the decisions would be reconsidered. Upon  the  re-refusal
    of the applications, removal directions  were  issued,  so  ensuring  a
    right of appeal.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal assessed the evidence before it, accepting  the
    core facts underlying the human rights claim which were  in  any  event
    unchallenged by  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  finding  that  P  had
    progressed well with her schooling, lived in a family unit with various
    close female relatives, and had no contact  with  her  natural  father;
    there were no immediate relatives living in Ghana and the family  owned
    no property there.

 4. Applying the criteria set  out  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, the First-tier Tribunal noted  that  A
    had deliberately overstayed, she and her mother having freely  admitted
    as much, and noted this weighed in the balance, rendering her  presence
    precarious. She spoke English well and her  previous  work  as  a  care
    assistant boded  well  for  her  prospects  of  financially  supporting
    herself.

 5. Directing itself that sub-section  117B(4)  meant  that  little  weight
    should be afforded A's relationship with her mother who was  a  British
    citizen and thus a qualifying partner, it went on to  find  that  there
    was family life between mother and daughter and that P was a qualifying
    child, given that her best interests militated against her removal from
    a settled  school  environment  to  more  difficult  living  conditions
    abroad. There would be a real lack of financial support if  mother  and
    daughter had to rely on remittances from their relatives here,  because
    whereas in the United Kingdom the family  unit's  three  salaries  were
    sufficient to ensure they lived  together  very  economically,  sharing
    housing and food costs, it would require significantly greater sums  of
    money to re-establish and maintain them abroad. Thus their removal  was
    contrary to the public interest as expressed in section 117B(6). At the
    date of application P had lived here  for  more  than  seven  years,  a
    period of residence which  had  been  identified  by  Parliament  as  a
    substantial and important benchmark of integration here.

 6. As A was solely responsible for her child's  upbringing  and  had  sole
    parental  responsibility  for  her,  and  whilst  here  in  breach   of
    immigration laws was nevertheless the parent of a  seven-year  resident
    child whose removal she had found unreasonable, she qualified under the
    Immigration Rules addressing eligibility for limited leave to remain as
    a parent.

 7. Grounds of appeal contended that the ratio of Azimi-Moayed had not been
    fully understood by the First-tier Tribunal, which had cited it without
    regard to the fact that P had not lived here for seven years after  the
    age of four, and had given inadequate reasons for  why  the  disruption
    caused to P's education trumped the interests of  immigration  control.
    Furthermore it had overlooked the fact that the  claim  by  the  adults
    that they could not support the Appellants abroad amounted to a  choice
    by them as to their relatives' place of  residence:  the  judge  should
    have considered whether it was objectively reasonable  for  the  family
    here to withhold support. Additionally the decision  had  not  made  it
    clear whether the appeal was being allowed wholly under the Immigration
    Rules or under Article 8 ECHR beyond those Rules.

Findings and reasons

 8. The Immigration Rules provide, materially, that:

         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant: ...

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or ....

         Appendix FM

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         (a) (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship with a child who-

         (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of 18 years
         when the applicant was first granted leave on the basis that this
         paragraph applied;

         (bb) is in the UK;

         (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK continuously for
         at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of application;
         and

         (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the
         UK; ...

         Section E-LTRPT: Eligibility for limited leave to remain as a
         parent

         E-LTRPT.1.1. To qualify for limited leave to remain as a parent all
         of the requirements of paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2. to 5.2. must be met.

         Relationship requirements

         E-LTRPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-

         (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application, or where
         the child has turned 18 years of age since the applicant was first
         granted entry clearance or leave to remain as a parent under this
         Appendix, must not have formed an independent family unit or be
         leading an independent life;

         (b) living in the UK; and

         (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK; or

         (d) has lived in the UK continuously for at least the 7 years
         immediately preceding the date of application and paragraph EX.1.
         applies.

         E-LTRPT.2.3. Either-

         (a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility for the
         child or the child normally lives with the applicant and not their
         other parent (who is a British Citizen or settled in the UK);or

         (b) the parent or carer with whom the child normally lives must be-
         (i) a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

         (ii) not the partner of the applicant (which here includes a person
         who has been in a relationship with the applicant for less than two
         years prior to the date of application); and

         (iii) the applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave to
         remain as a partner under this Appendix.

         E-LTRPT.2.4.

         (a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either- (i)
         sole parental responsibility for the child, or that the child
         normally lives with them; or

         (ii) direct access (in person) to the child, as agreed with the
         parent or carer with whom the child normally lives or as ordered by
         a court in the UK; and

         (b) The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking, and
         intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's
         upbringing."

 9. Given the finding by the First-tier Tribunal that  P's  departure  from
    the  United  Kingdom  would  be  unreasonable,   she   satisfies   Rule
    276ADE(iv). There is no error of law identifiable within the  reasoning
    of the First-tier Tribunal as to  it  being  unreasonable  for  her  to
    relocate away from her relatives here. It is true that in  Azimi-Moayed
    and Others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
    197 (IAC) the Tribunal stated that "seven years from age four is likely
    to be more significant to a child than the first seven years of  life",
    but that must be read in the context of the other guidance found in the
    headnote, that

         "It is  generally  in  the  interests  of  children  to  have  both
         stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision  and
         the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to
         which they belong.

         Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin  can
         lead to development of social, cultural and educational  ties  that
         it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of  compelling
         reason to the contrary."

10. The First-tier Tribunal clearly accepted that the lengthy residence  of
    the child in a family unit composed of several close female  relatives,
    as well as her educational prospects, represented the ties  with  which
    interference would be disproportionate so rendering  relocation  abroad
    unreasonable. It was entitled to find that  the  best  interests  of  P
    pointed strongly in favour of her remaining here in a family unit which
    could afford to secure her welfare  in  this  country  but  might  well
    struggle to do so if she and her  mother  had  to  sustain  a  separate
    household unit abroad. Those findings are perfectly compatible with the
    guidance given by Christopher Clarke LJ in EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874:

         "35.     A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
         will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)  the
         length of time that they have been here; (c)  how  long  they  have
         been in education; (c) what stage their education has reached;  (d)
         to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed that they return; (e) how renewable their connection
         with it may be; (f) to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic,
         medical or other difficulties in adapting to life in that  country;
         and (g) the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
         their family life or their rights (if they  have  any)  as  British
         citizens."

11. In this appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  gave  clear  reasons  for  its
    conclusions, wholly consistent with EV  (Philippines)  in  relation  to
    age, length of residence, the stage of education reached and  the  ties
    in the United Kingdom and the  consequences  of  breaking  those  ties;
    there were no relevant considerations  left  out  of  account.  It  was
    therefore perfectly appropriate to conclude that P's removal  would  be
    incompatible with Rule 276ADE(iv), and that, in turn, A qualified under
    the parent route within Appendix FM as the sole parental  carer  taking
    an active role in the upbringing of a child to whom  the  exception  in
    the  Appendix  (which  essentially  mirrors  the   criteria   in   Rule
    276ADE(iv)) applied.

12. True it is that the First-tier Tribunal made reference to the statutory
    public interest factors found in section 117 of the  NIAA  2002,  which
    are apposite to a consideration of a case conducted wholly outside  the
    Rules, but that does not detract from the fact  that  the  findings  it
    made clearly established that both Appellants could succeed within  the
    Rules themselves.

13. I find no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal which
    accordingly stands.



Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error
    of law.

    The appeal is dismissed.


[pic]
Signed:     Date: 13 November 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes

