








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44246/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 3 November 2014                           |On: 21 November 2014         |
|Prepared:  19 November 2014                   |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                          Mr Matthew Omotayo Anofi
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S Sharma, counsel (instructed by Ada Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to the appellant as the
      secretary of state and the respondent as the claimant.
   2. The claimant is a national of Nigeria, born on 10 July 1984. His
      appeal against the secretary of state's decision dated 10 October 2013
      refusing his application for further leave to remain in the UK and to
      remove him from the UK by way of directions under s.47 of the
      Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was allowed by First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Petherbridge in a decision promulgated on 23 July 2014.
   3. The Judge found at paragraph 40 of his determination that there was no
      evidence that the claimant could show that he was in a durable
      relationship with his sponsor at the date of the decision refusing his
      application for further leave to remain. The secretary had requested
      full details and documents supporting such an assertion.
   4. The Judge then referred to other evidence before him including his
      partner's alleged mental health problems following the birth of her
      child.
   5. He did not accept that the evidence supported a finding that the
      claimant is the main carer of his son.
   6. The Judge found that the appellant's partner was engaged in studies
      five days a week and to enable her to continue with those studies, the
      claimant looks after their child [42].
   7. The Judge then stated at paragraph 43 that he had to consider the
      claimant's application "with regard to paragraph EX.1 of the
      Immigration Rules."  Having considered the claim with reference to
      that paragraph, he was satisfied that there was a genuine and
      subsisting relationship between the claimant and his son and that he
      met the requirements of paragraph EX.1. It was upon that basis that
      the appeal was allowed.
   8. On 18 September 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade granted the
      secretary of state permission to appeal as it was arguable that the
      eligibility requirements had not been satisfied.
   9. Mr Whitwell submitted that the Judge found that there was no evidence
      that the claimant was in a durable relationship with his partner; he
      had thus not met the eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a
      partner. He also failed to meet the eligibility requirements as a
      parent as he did not have sole responsibility for the child.
  10. Mr Whitwell also submitted that the claimant was in the UK with leave
      granted for a period of only six months. He thus failed the
      immigration status requirement at E-LTRP.2.1 (b).
  11. The Judge erred in law by applying EX.1 as a "stand alone provision."
      The consideration of the claimant's Article 8 rights fell within
      Appendix FM. Paragraph EX.1 does not form an independent basis for an
      appeal to succeed.
  12. Having found that the claimant did not meet the rules, he could not
      succeed under Article 8 as no compelling or exceptional circumstances
      were identified.
  13. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Sharma, who represented the claimant
      before the First-tier Tribunal, submitted that even if there is a
      material error of law, the First-tier Tribunal Judge should have gone
      on to consider the appeal and allowed it under Article 8. She
      submitted that the same arguments resulting in a positive finding
      under the rule meant that the Judge would inevitably have allowed the
      appeal.
  14. The skeleton argument prepared on behalf of the claimant had been
      placed before the First-tier Tribunal. It also relied on Article 8 of
      the Human Rights Convention.
  15. Mr Whitwell submitted that it was "a difficult submission to make"
      that the Judge would have gone on to consider Article 8. On the face
      of it, there had been no application to amend the grounds of appeal
      before him. The Judge was thus restricted to a consideration of
      Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the rules.
  16. In any event, he submitted that there has been no attempt made by the
      claimant to "cross appeal" against the alleged failure of the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge to consider a grant of discretionary leave to
      remain under Article 8.
Assessment
  17. I have had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in the appeal
      of Sabir (Appendix FM-EX.1 not free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC).
      It was held in that case that it is plain from the architecture of the
      rules as regards partners that EX.1 is "parasitic" on the relevant
      rule within Appendix FM that otherwise grants leave to remain. If EX.1
      was intended to be a free-standing element, some mechanism of
      identification would have been used. The structure of the rules as
      presently drafted requires it to be a component part of the leave
      granting Rule. That is made plain by the respondent's guidance dated
      October 2013.
  18. It was accepted by Ms Sharma that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had in
      the circumstances erred in law in finding that EX.1 was a free
      standing paragraph to be considered irrespective of the other
      requirements of Appendix FM.  There has thus been a material error of
      law.
  19. I thus set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
  20. In re-making the decision, I find that the claimant cannot meet the
      immigration rules as set out in Appendix FM. The finding of the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge in that regard has not been challenged.
  21. Nor has the claimant made an application for permission to appeal
      against the asserted failure by the First-tier Tribunal Judge to
      consider his appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the Human Rights
      Convention.
  22. In any event, I do not accept the submission that the First-tier Judge
      would inevitably have allowed the appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the
      Human Rights Convention.
  23. There has been no attempt made to bring a proper application under the
      rules by way of a counter appeal.
  24. As indicated, I do not find it to be "Robinson obvious" that the
      Article 8 claim was bound to succeed. Other considerations, including
      the secretary of state's policy requiring a person to apply under the
      immigration rules from abroad would have to be weighed up in her side
      of the balance. Nor is it evident that expecting the claimant to make
      an application for entry clearance from abroad would amount to
      unreasonable or harsh consequences contrary to his right to respect
      for family and private life.
Decisions
The determination of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an
error on a point of law.
Having set aside it aside, I re-make the decision and dismiss the
claimant's appeal.




                               Signed                 Date   19/11/2014
                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





