


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44629/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 30 September 2014                        |On 7 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before


                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between


                               ADAMAKA NWOLOKO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Uzoechina of Patterson & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria born on 1 February  1970,  appeals  with
permission against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hawden-Beal
dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision of  13  August  2013
to refuse to issue her with a  residence  card  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA
national under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
("the EEA Regulations").

The history of the appeal is relevant for reasons which shall become  clear.
On 28 September 2010 and 29 June 2011 the appellant was refused a  residence
card. She applied for a third time, on 29 December  2011,  for  a  residence
card as confirmation of a right to reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
spouse of Helio Pina Da Cruz, a Portuguese national whom she had married  on
7 February 2009. The application was refused on 14 June 2012 on the  grounds
that the  respondent  considered  the  appellant  to  have  entered  into  a
marriage  of  convenience  and  was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  was
exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  basis  for   the
conclusion that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience,  aside  from  the
appellant's history of failed  applications,  was  that  the  appellant  had
provided, with a passport application form which she  had  produced  to  the
UKBA, the name of a next-of-kin who was not the EEA national,  but  yet  had
declared in her marriage certificate that she was single and  had  not  been
married previously.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Hanes on 24  September  2012.  Judge  Hanes  heard  from  the
appellant and her husband. She was  satisfied  that  there  were  reasonable
grounds for suspecting a marriage of convenience, but on the basis that  the
respondent had not  invited  the  parties  for  an  interview  and  had  not
provided them with an opportunity to respond to the  allegations  made,  she
considered that there had been a failure by the  respondent  to  follow  the
procedures set out in Papajorgji (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)
Greece [2012] UKUT 00038. She concluded,  in  the  circumstances,  that  the
matter had to go back to the Secretary of State in order  for  the  relevant
procedures to be followed and for a lawful decision then to be made.

Rather than ending her determination at that point, Judge Hanes went  on  to
make adverse credibility findings  against  the  appellant  leading  to  her
conclusion that she could not be satisfied that the marriage was not one  of
convenience. On the basis that the  respondent  had  failed  to  follow  the
procedures set out in Papajorgi, she  allowed  the  appeal  to  the  limited
extent that the decision was not in accordance with the law.

Permission was sought by the appellant  to  appeal  that  decision.  It  was
asserted that the judge, having found the decision not to be  in  accordance
with the law, should not have gone on to make substantive  findings  on  the
merits of the appeal and that once she did so and found that the  respondent
had not discharged the burden of  proof,  she  ought  to  have  allowed  the
appeal outright.

Following a grant of permission,  the  matter  came  before  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Craig on 15 February 2013. UTJ Craig found  that  the  judge  had  not
erred in law and that she had been entitled to determine the appeal  as  she
did.

The case was then remitted to the Secretary of State. The appellant and  her
husband were interviewed and a new decision was made by  the  respondent  on
13 August 2013  refusing  the  application  again,  on  the  same  basis  as
previously, namely that the marriage was one of convenience.

The appellant appealed against that decision and her  appeal  was  heard  by
Judge Hawden-Beal in the First-tier Tribunal on 28 May 2014.  Judge  Hawden-
Beal had before her, and referred in her findings to the decisions of  Judge
Hanes and UTJ Craig. She recorded the appellant's submission that UTJ  Craig
had made it clear that any reference  to  Judge  Hanes'  findings  would  be
unfair,  but  noted  that  there  was  no  such  comment  in   UTJ   Craig's
determination. She found the evidence of the appellant  and  sponsor  to  be
lacking in credibility and was not satisfied that  they  had  addressed  the
evidence justifying the reasonable suspicion that the marriage  was  one  of
convenience. She found the respondent's decision to be  in  accordance  with
the EEA Regulations and dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  appellant  on
the grounds, inter alia, that Judge Hawden-Beal had erred in law  by  having
regard to the determination and findings of Judge Hanes; by failing to  take
account of documentary evidence produced by the appellant; and  by  applying
the wrong burden of proof.

Permission to appeal was granted on 24 June 2014.

Having heard detailed submissions from  both  parties  we  find  that  Judge
Hawden-Beal's determination is materially flawed and has to be set aside  in
its entirety.

We consider Mr Uzoechina's argument, that the judge erred by  having  regard
to Judge Hanes' findings, to be little more than an attempt to re-argue  the
error of law issue already determined by UTJ Craig. UTJ Craig  upheld  Judge
Hanes' approach to the appeal before her and upheld  her  adverse  findings.
His decision was not  subsequently  challenged  by  the  appellant.  In  the
circumstances the appeal before Judge Hawden-Beal was not  a  remittal  from
the  Upper  Tribunal,  as  the  grounds  assert,  and  thus  there  was   no
requirement that there ought to be no  reference  to  the  findings  of  the
previous judge.

However, we find merit in the assertion in the grounds  that  Judge  Hawden-
Beal failed to have regard to the documentary evidence before her  and  thus
failed to make a full and proper assessment of  the  evidence  as  a  whole.
When hearing  the  appeal  she  had  before  her  not  only  the  bundle  of
documentary evidence that had  been  before  Judge  Hanes  (referred  to  at
paragraphs 13 and 20 of Judge Hanes' determination) but also,  Mr  Uzoechina
told us, a further bundle  of  documentary  evidence  containing  additional
documents relevant to the question  of  cohabitation.  It  is  not  entirely
clear to us precisely what  documentary  evidence  was  available  to  Judge
Hawden-Beal, but Mr Bramble in any event did not challenge  the  claim  that
there was evidence appertaining to that issue. What is clear to us  is  that
Judge Hawden-Beal did not make any findings on that evidence, other than  by
relying upon the adverse findings previously made by  Judge  Hanes.  In  the
light of documentary evidence suggesting that the appellant and sponsor  had
cohabited for some five years it was plainly incumbent  upon  Judge  Hawden-
Beal to address that evidence and making findings thereon.  In  the  absence
of any record in her determination to confirm that she had done so,  and  in
the absence of any findings on that evidence, it cannot  be  concluded  that
her assessment of the relationship was a complete and thorough one.

In the circumstances we find that Judge Hawden-Beal's decision cannot  stand
and we therefore set it aside.

Whilst, as we have already stated, UTJ Craig's determination  has  not  been
challenged, we are mindful that this appeal arises out  of  a  new  decision
taken by the respondent on the basis of  further  evidence  adduced  by  the
appellant and that additional documents have since  been  submitted  to  the
Tribunal.

Accordingly it seems to us, in the interests of fairness, that  the  correct
course would be for this appeal to be determined afresh  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal, with no regard to the adverse findings of  Judge  Hanes  or  Judge
Hawden-Beal, but on the basis of a complete assessment of all  the  evidence
that has been  adduced.  Such  evidence  will  include  the  record  of  the
appellant's and sponsor's interview as well  as  the  oral  and  documentary
evidence  before  Judge  Hanes  and  Judge  Hawden-Beal,  although  not  the
findings made   thereon.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(a),
to be dealt with afresh by a different judge.


   Directions

   The appellant's representatives  are  to  produce  a  new  appeal  bundle
   consolidating all previous bundles and  containing  all  the  documentary
   evidence relied upon.


   Any documentary evidence relied upon by either party is to be filed  with
   the Tribunal and served upon the other  party  no  later  than  ten  days
   before the hearing date.















                               Signed                                  Date


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
