
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44933/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th July 2014                               |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                          miss Shade Makkada Booth
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Timpson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 26th September 1989.  She
    entered the United Kingdom on 13th July 2002 and was granted  leave  to
    remain as a visitor until 12th August 2002.  On 13th  August  2002  she
    became an overstayer.  Some ten years later on 22nd November  2012  she
    applied for indefinite leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    purpose not covered by the Immigration Rules.  On 4th  October  2013  a
    decision was made to refuse the application for leave to remain on  the
    grounds that removal would not place the United Kingdom  in  breach  of
    its obligations under the Human Rights Act 1998 and to give  directions
    under paragraph 10A of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration  Act  1971  for
    removal from the United Kingdom.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Law sitting at Manchester on 12th February  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 26th February 2014 the Appellant's  appeal
    against the refusal of  further  leave  was  allowed  on  human  rights
    grounds.

 3. On 6th March 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds  contended   that   whilst   the
    Immigration Judge had allowed the appeal under Article 8 and  that  the
    Appellant had been living in the United Kingdom for about thirteen  and
    a half years without lawful leave, the judge found that  the  Appellant
    had no ties to Jamaica, the Appellant having left Jamaica at the age of
    8.  The Secretary of State submitted that the Appellant  did  not  have
    ties to Jamaica, that she continued to have relatives  there  and  that
    there was no objective evidence that  whatever  crime  the  Appellant's
    uncle is alleged to have committed, that remained a matter  that  would
    hinder the Appellant's ability to re-establish herself in Jamaica.   It
    was further submitted that as the Appellant's mother also had no  valid
    leave it was arguable that her return to Jamaica could be supported  by
    her mother's possible removal.

 4. Secondly it was contended that the  Immigration  Judge  had  failed  to
    identify any compelling circumstances before going  on  to  assess  the
    merits of the Appellant's Article 8 rights.

 5. On 10th April 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Holmes granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge Holmes noted that ultimately the  Appellant  did  not
    dispute that she did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM  and  in
    particular the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.  He considered that it
    was arguable  that  the  judge  had  misunderstood  or  misapplied  the
    guidance to be found in Patel, Nasim  and  Gulshan  as  to  the  proper
    approach to an Article 8 appeal  pursued  on  "private  life"  grounds.
    Judge Holmes noted that the Appellant was now an adult and neither  she
    nor her mother faced a risk of harm upon return  to  Jamaica  and  that
    they both retained family links to Jamaica and were  both  overstayers.
    He considered that arguably the Appellant's position should  have  been
    considered on the basis that her mother  was  perfectly  well  able  to
    accompany her to Jamaica and that there was no need for the Appellant's
    appeal to be considered on the assumption that she  had  to  return  to
    Jamaica alone.  Even if she did, he considered it was arguable that the
    judge had failed to identify  any  adequate  reasons  for  finding  (if
    indeed that was an implicit finding - because it is not expressed) that
    the Appellant's circumstances were sufficient  to  render  the  removal
    decision unjustifiably harsh.

 6. It is on that basis that this  matter  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This is an appeal by the Secretary of State
    but for the purpose of continuity throughout proceedings the  Secretary
    of State is referred to herein as the Respondent and Miss Booth as  the
    Appellant.  Miss Booth is represented by Mr  Timpson.   Mr  Timpson  is
    familiar  with  this  matter  having  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
    Officer Mr Diwnycz.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Diwnycz indicates that the Secretary of  State's  position  is  best
    described within the Grounds of Appeal and the grant of permission both
    of which are recited above.  His initial contention  is  that  at  some
    stage the Appellant must have returned  to  Jamaica  because  her  last
    passport  is  issued  from  there.   After  discussion  between   legal
    representatives Mr Timpson confirmed that the Appellant  had  not  been
    back to Jamaica and the Appellant  advising  that  she  handed  in  the
    relevant documents in the UK when  they  were  sent  to  Jamaica.   The
    position that she has not returned is therefore accepted.

 8. Mr Diwnycz refers to the submissions made by Mr Dillon on behalf of the
    Secretary of State before the First-tier Tribunal Judge which  are  set
    out in some detail by Judge Law at paragraph 22 of  his  determination.
    Mr Timpson confirms that those submissions were made (he himself having
    been present before the First-tier Tribunal) and points out that  Judge
    Law has given due and proper consideration to the decision in  Gulshan.
    He asked me to allow the appeal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings

11. Judge Law has carried out a very thorough and detailed analysis of both
    the factual history in this matter and the application of the law.   He
    has given a very thorough consideration of all of the  evidence,  noted
    that whilst the Appellant may be an overstayer she arrived in the UK as
    a minor and that all her connections have been with this  country.   He
    has made findings of fact that the Appellant does not  have  ties  with
    Jamaica which he was entitled to and he has given his reasons.  He  has
    made findings accepting the premises set out in  paragraph  24  of  his
    determination on Mr Timpson's submissions and those are  findings  that
    he was entitled to make.  He has accepted that the Appellant had no-one
    in Jamaica that she could call a relative or friend and  that  she  has
    strong connections with friends in  the  Manchester  area  and  has  an
    extremely strong private life and  also  a  family  life.   To  use  Mr
    Timpson's phrase in his submissions to me,  the  Appellant  is  to  all
    intents and purposes "a Manchester girl".

12. Judge Law has analysed the word "ties" and attached the normal  meaning
    to the word and concluded that there were no ties in existence and that
    the only ties the Appellant has other than family ties are with friends
    and associates within the United Kingdom.  He has concluded that  there
    is no equivalent in Jamaica or elsewhere for the Appellant to attach to
    and in making such findings has balanced this against the fact that the
    Appellant has for all bar one month in her life been an  overstayer  in
    the United Kingdom on an unlawful basis.  Further at  paragraph  36  in
    the final assessment of the appeal the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    concluded that the Appellant has lived all her adult  life  within  the
    United Kingdom with the severance of all connections with  Jamaica  and
    that there is in existence a  private  life  and  a  rendering  of  all
    contact with Jamaica which would enable her to claim to be accepted  as
    having established a private life in the United Kingdom.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is well-constructed  and  well-
    reasoned.  The judge has given due consideration to the  relevant  case
    law and has made findings which he was perfectly entitled to.   He  has
    identified the compelling circumstances in this matter and gone  on  to
    assess the merits of the Appellant's Article 8 rights.  He has  further
    given a very detailed analysis in  reaching  his  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant does not have ties with Jamaica.  In such  circumstances  the
    decision discloses no material error of law and  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is upheld and the appeal of the Secretary of  State
    is dismissed.

14. This appeal was heard on 28th July 2014.  That was  the  day  on  which
    Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  came
    into force within the terms of Section 19 of the Immigration Act  2014.
    Of relevance is Section 117B which states:

    (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
         interest.

    (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)  Little weight should be given to-

         (a)  a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.

    (6)  In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.

15. The Act was not in force when this matter came  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  and  no  reference  is  made  to  it  by  either  legal
    representative.   I  acknowledge  the  content  therein  in  particular
    paragraph 4(a) that little weight  should  be  given  to  private  life
    established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully and (5) that little weight  should  be  given  to  a
    private life established by a  person  when  the  person's  immigration
    status is precarious.  Despite those factors  which  effectively  bring
    into statute the previous general principles of law I am  satisfied  in
    this matter that the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    does not disclose a material error of law and that the  decision  which
    is fully reasoned explains the situation that arose relating to a young
    women from Manchester who was brought to this country as an  8-year-old
    child and has spent all her formative years both as a minor  and  as  a
    young adult in the UK.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error of law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

