
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/44937/2013
                                                               IA/44946/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 14 April 2015                     |On 6 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                         KIMBERLEE KIMESHA MORRISON
                        AARON ANTONIO ISAAC MORRISON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Adams counsel instructed by Cleveland Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A Aisha Broklesby-Weller


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Buckwell promulgated on 2 September 2014 which dismissed
    the Appellants  appeals  against  a  decision  dated  10  October  2013
    refusing leave to remain on the basis of their family and private life.

Background

 3. The Appellants are a mother and son was born on 8 August  1985  and  31
    May 2006 respectively and they are nationals of Jamaica.

 4. The first Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  20
    January 2002 when she was 17 years old. She then had leave as a student
    until 30 September 2006. In June 2010 the first Appellant with her  son
    as dependent applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the
    basis of  her  human  rights  by  reference  to  Article  8  ECHR.  The
    application was refused on 28 July 2010 with no right of appeal. It was
    reconsidered and again refused on 8  May  2013.Pursuant  to  a  Consent
    Order it was further reconsidered but was again refused on  10  October
    2013 and directions were made for the removal of the  Appellants  under
    section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum act 1999.

 5. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

 6. The first Appellant could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM as a
    Parent as her child had not lived in the United  Kingdom  for  7  years
    prior to the date of application; also the first  Appellant  could  not
    meet the eligibility requirements as she had  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of immigration laws since 2006. The second  Appellant
    could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM for  leave  as  a  child
    because his mother did not meet the eligibility  requirements;  he  did
    not meet the requirements of EX.1 because  he  had  not  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for 7 years  prior  to  the  date  of  application.  The
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE were considered.  It  was  not  accepted
    that the Appellant had no ties with Jamaica.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Buckwell  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision. The Judge found :

    (a)    The Appellants could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

    (b)    The first Appellant had ties to Jamaica.

    (c)    The second Appellant had not lived in the United Kingdom  for  7
         years at the date of the application.

    (d)    The Judge considered Article 8 outside the Rules and in relation
         to the best interests of the second Appellant who is a  minor  took
         account of the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

    (e)    The Judge concluded that it would  not  be  disproportionate  to
         remove them.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing in essence that :

      a) The Judge failed to have regard to the Immigration Rules.

      b) The Judge failed to take into account the  best  interests  of  the
         child.

      c) In determining that the  Appellants  could  enjoy  family  life  in
         Jamaica the judge failed to take into  account  the  factual  basis
         against which their life would be pursued.

      d) Removal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

 9. On 11 February 2015 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  gave  permission  to
    appeal stating that  notwithstanding  the  generalised  nature  of  the
    grounds of appeal it was arguable that the judge  had  failed  to  make
    specific  findings  in  relation  to  his  assessment  of  whether  the
    Appellant had lost her ties to Jamaica as  required  by  paragraph  276
    ADE(vi)

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Adams  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) The Judge had failed to make findings in relation  to  whether  the
         Appellant had lost her ties to Jamaica given that she was  a  minor
         when she left.

11. Ms Brockelsby Weller on behalf of the Respondent submitted that :

      a) The Judge set out at  paragraph  53  that  he  had  considered  the
         evidence and concluded that the Appellant had ties to Jamaica:  the
         Appellant had given evidence that she left the country when she was
         17 but paragraph 24 records her evidence that she had relatives  in
         the country and this was re iterated in the Respondents submissions
         at paragraph 38.

      b) The Judge provides brief but adequate reasons  for  her  conclusion
         that the Appellant had ties to Jamaica.

      c) The Article 8 assessment took into account the  best  interests  of
         the child Appellant.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. The grounds of appeal as advanced by those representing  the  Appellant
    focused on what it considered  to  be  the  inadequacy  of  the  Judges
    Article 8 assessment in particular in relation to the best interests of
    the children. The permission by contrast suggested  that  the  decision
    recorded the evidence of a dispute as to whether the Appellant had ties
    to Jamaica and granted permission on that basis.

14. I am satisfied that the evidence of the Appellant as  recorded  by  the
    Judge at paragraph 24 against which  she  made  her  assessment  as  to
    whether the Appellant had ties to Jamaica was :

         "The Appellant referred to her relations in Jamaica  being  certain
         aunts and uncles from her father's side.  ... There were cousins in
         Jamaica but most of her friends she  had  known  when  she  was  in
         Jamaica had now migrated."

15. Therefore the Appellant's own evidence was that she was aware that  she
    had aunts, uncles and cousins in Jamaica. It is also clear  that  while
    she states that 'most' of her friends had left Jamaica  the  inevitable
    inference was that she still had  friends  there.  While  not  explicit
    about it the Judge would have been entitled to conclude that given  she
    had both family and social  friends  in  her  home  country  the  adult
    Appellant had the choice of approaching such people  for  support  when
    she returned to Jamaica.

16. I am therefore satisfied that against this factual background the Judge
    was entitled to conclude as she did at  paragraph  53  that  given  her
    evidence was that she had both family and  social  ties  that  she  was
    aware of in Jamaica she had ties that met the requirements of paragraph
    276 ADE (vi).

17. The Judge's assessment of the Appellants' case under Article  8  is  at
    paragraphs 54-59. I am satisfied that her assessment is adequate  given
    that the starting point must be the neither of the Appellants meets the
    requirements of the Rules which must be given weight in  the  balancing
    exercise. I am satisfied that the Judge directed herself  appropriately
    in relation to the best interests of the child taking into account  the
    most up to date caselaw in  paragraph  57.  The  conclusions  that  she
    reached were open to her.

18. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set
    aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
    sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1): "Although
    there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the conclusions on
    the central issue on which an appeal is determined, those reasons  need
    not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having  regard
    to the material accepted by the judge."

19. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and while brief they  must
    be assessed against the evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  which  she
    accepted.

CONCLUSION

20. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

21. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 2.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
