
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/44059/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at UT (IAC) Employment Tribunal |                   Decision & Reasons |
|Birmingham                            |Promulgated           On 18 November  |
|                                      |2015                                  |
|Prepared 14 September 2015            |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LI TING ZHANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss R Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bircumshaw, Solicitor, Coventry Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision, the Appellant is referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of the People's Republic  of  China,  date  of
    birth 25 February 1989,  appealed  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision, dated 4 November 2014, to refuse  an  application,,  dated  9
    September 2014, to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  and  to  make
    removal directions under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The basis for the refusal of the Claimant's application was  that  with
    reference to paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules she had spent
    more than five years in the UK as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  studying
    courses which consisted of degree level study.

4.   Her appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain (the judge) who, on 13 February 2015,  allowed  the  Claimant's
    appeal under paragraph 245ZX  of  the  Immigration  Rules  on  the  re-
    calculation of the years of actual study in the UK.

5.   The Secretary of State on 20 February 2015 applied  for  permission  to
    appeal.   On  13 April  2015,  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    MacDonald gave permission to appeal.

6.   On one calculation of the period of course length by Claimant, she  had
    spent studying at degree level at Leeds University  from  21  September
    2009 to 29 June 2012, c. two years ten months; and at the University of
    Bedfordshire from 1 October 2013 to 3  (?30) July  2014,  ten  months;
    making in total three years eight months.  Accordingly the  course  she
    sought to undertake in  Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineering  (MSc)
    commencing on 22  September  2014  (excluding  later  graduation)   and
    completing that stage on  30 September 2015, effectively  one  year  in
    length, meant that the Claimant would have a  total  period  of  actual
    study undertaken of c. four years and eight months i.e. under the  five
    years limit.

7.   On  another  calculation,  it  was  said  for  the  Claimant  that  she
    undertook study from 21 September 2009 at Leeds University a course  of
    study, with an extension of leave, which should have finished on 1 July
    2013, i.e. c.3 years 9 months 10 days. But the Director of  Studies  at
    Leeds University had terminated the Claimant's attendance from 29  June
    2012.i.e.  after  c.2  years  10  months.   In  this  calculation   the
    Claimant's period of actual study, including the ten months ( 1 October
    2013 to 31 July 2014),  was c. 3 years 10  months:  Significantly  less
    than the leave which had been  granted  to  her.   In  the  event,  the
    further  period  of  study  undertaken  by  the  Claimant  at  Coventry
    University began on 22  September  2014  and  was  to  complete  on  30
    September 2015, a total of one year  and  eight  days  Thus  the  total
    period of actual study was 4 years 8 months 8 days.  On the calculation
    advanced on behalf of the Claimant, the additional eight days makes  no
    difference to the overall calculation of under five years of study.

8.   Miss Petterson  for  the  Secretary  of  State  argued  that  the  true
    calculation should include the total periods of  leave  granted  rather
    than only the actual period of study undertaken. These were entry as  a
    student on 13 September 2009 and the Claimant started at the University
    of Leeds 23 September 2009 to 1  July  2012,  extended  to  1  November
    2013.c. 4 years  1  month  7days.  The  course  at  the  University  of
    Bedfordshire was 9 months 2 days (from 1 October 2013 to 3 July  2014).
    The Coventry University  Course  was  from  22  September  2014  to  30
    September 2015, (1year and 8 days). Mrs Petterson emphasised that  with
    the cessation of studies from 29 June  2012  until  the  acceptance  of
    study at the University of Bedfordshire on 1  October  2013,  that  the
    whole period of leave to study should be counted  in..   Therefore,  on
    any view, Mrs Pettersen argued the 4 years 1 month + 1 year 8 days  was
    more than five years of leave to study in the United Kingdom however it
    came to be calculated.

9.     So far as I can tell the Claimant was granted LTR as a  T4  (General)
    student from 7 October 2013 to 30 September  2014.The  period  exceeded
    the period of actual study  at  the  University  of  Bedfordshire.  She
    further applied on 29 September2014 for further LTR as a  T4  (General)
    student: The refusal of which was the subject of the appeal.

10.  The judge in  considering  the  matter  accepted  a  calculation  which
    excluded the months of study lost between 29  June  2012  and1  October
    2013; the commencement of the Claimant's further studies.

11.  The provisions of paragraph 245ZX(ha)  of  the  immigration  rules  are
    that:

         "If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of  leave  to
         remain the applicant is seeking must  not  lead  to  the  applicant
         having spent more than 5 years in the UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
         Migrant, or as a Student, studying courses at degree level or above
         unless ..."

12.  There are various  qualifications  to  that  paragraph  which  are  not
    directly pertinent.    The Secretary of State relied upon the  case  of
    Islam (Paragraph 245(ha) five years' study) Bangladesh [2013] UKUT  608
    (IAC).  It  is  clear  that  the  wording  of  paragraph  245(ha)   was
    essentially the same to the later wording of paragraph 245ZX.

13.  The analysis of the Vice President, Mr  Ockelton,  and  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Grubb, who drafted the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal,  reached
    the view on the wording of the rules that it is  the  period  of  leave
    granted not the actual study  undertaken  which  was  the  measure  for
    calculating the period spent in the UK imposed by paragraph  245ZX(ha).
    The reasoning of the Tribunal was clearly  along  the  lines  that  the
    wording of the Rule was unequivocal and thus all the time in respect of
    which leave was granted was to be counted  in  working  out  the  total
    period of five years as a student in the UK.

14.  There has been no relevant change to the Rules  in  their  format  from
    then to now in this respect, but, what had happened since that time was
    that in July 2014 the Secretary of  State  published  policy  guidance,
    which in part addressed the Islam  point,  to  inform  as  to  how  she
    intended to apply the immigration rules, with  reference  to  paragraph
    245ZX Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant Guidance,  stated  at  paragraph
    109:

         "In calculating the maximum amount of time that you spend  studying
         at or above degree level, we will only include the  length  of  the
         course and will not take into account  the  additional  periods  of
         leave granted before or after your main course of  study  that  are
         referred to in the table at paragraph 98."

15.  It was common ground that there was no table at paragraph  98  and  no-
    one  identified,  anywhere  else  in  the  PBS  provisions  within  the
    immigration rules that a paragraph 98 existed or one which assisted  in
    calculating time spent in study

16.  Therefore at the date of the Respondent's decision  an  Applicant  such
    as the Claimant, being aware  of  the  rules  and  then  aware  of  the
    guidance, would have been left in the position that there  appeared  to
    be a contradiction over how the Secretary of State  intended  to  apply
    the rules in calculating the five year period: Particularly in relation
    to the  time  before  the  course  started  or  after  the  course  was
    completed.  The Secretary of State did not refer to the guidance in her
    decision on the Claimant's application.

17.  The guidance in this form can only have been  directed  to  calculation
    of the permitted length of study.  It seemed to me that  the  Secretary
    of State's construction of paragraph  245ZX  in  practice  limited  the
    period of leave to  study  to  more  than  five  years  as  a  student.
    However, I take 'the period of study'  in  the  Guidance  to  mean  the
    period which covered the course applied for; whatever its outcome might
    ultimately be if not completed.  I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  the
    calculation of the period of study did not stop running on 29 June 2012
    to be reset when a further course was applied  for:  Rather  the  study
    period reflected the expectation of the course being completed  in  the
    given time; absent of any additional  extensions  being  granted  as  a
    matter of discretion by the Secretary of State. I do not know what,  if
    any, period of time in the extension to 1 November 2013 was to cover  a
    period after the completion of the course  e.g.  to  await  results  of
    finals/ exams.

18.  Therefore, I am satisfied that the judge made a material error of  law.
     I find the Claimant by undertaking the  further  course  of  study  at
    Coventry University for a year and 8 days was in fact and  had  applied
    to undertake a course which took her over  the  five  years  of  actual
    study. Mrs Pettersen had calculated (5 years 1 month and 15  days.  The
    outcome is the same or similar because the periods of actual study  and
    the periods of leave exceed the 5 year limit.

19.   Mr Bircumshaw drew my attention to a material differences, as  he  put
    it, between paragraphs 245ZX(ha) and (hb).  The latter  states  if  the
    Applicant has completed a course leading to the award of a PhD  in  the
    UK, the grant of leave to remain the Applicant is seeking must not lead
    to the Applicant having spent more than eight years in the UK as a Tier
    4 (General) Migrant, or as a student.

20.  I agree that the wording is not exactly the same and that  may  reflect
    the fact of the complexities of timing the completion of a  PhD  and  a
    greater latitude to enable someone to do so.  It is not ultimately  for
    me to recast the Rules.  I apply them as it seems clear to  me  it  was
    intended they should be read, as qualified by the Secretary of  State's
    guidance to Applicants as to how she would calculate a period of study.

21.  In the circumstances of the case, given the  time  that  the  Applicant
    has actually been given leave to undertake courses in the UK, it seemed
    to me that this was not a case where the matter needed to be considered
    again by the  Secretary  of  State  with  reference  to  her  published
    guidance which still stands.  As a fact the position was  the  previous
    periods of studies, and that of the additional course, the basis of the
    appeal, took the  period  of  time  in  the  UK  over  the  five  years
    contemplated by paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules in respect
    of both the length of permitted stay and periods of study.

22.  The Original  Tribunal,  therefore,  made  an  error  of  law  and  the
    decision cannot stand.

23.  In the light of the judge's findings, the submissions and  the  periods
    of study given to me in submissions made, it is clear to  me  that  the
    Claimant could  not comply with the provision of paragraph 245ZX(ha) of
    the immigration rules.  In those circumstances, there  being  no  other
    material arguments which relate to the calculation of that period, I am
    satisfied that the appeal of the Claimant fails.

Notice of Decision

24. The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The  following  decision
    is substituted.

25.   The Claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules  is  dismissed.  The
    appeal of the Claimant against removal directions is dismissed.

Anonymity

26.  No anonymity order was imposed nor is one required or necessary.


Signed                                  Date 13 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

