
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45776/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 August 2015                    |On 28 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 CHERNO SOWE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mohzam (Burton and Burton Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a decision of First-tier
         Tribunal Judge PJM Hollingworth dated  15  May  2015  in  which  he
         allowed the respondent's appeal on Article 8 grounds.

      2. In grounds of appeal the SSHD  submitted  that  Judge  Hollingworth
         misdirected himself when considering the public  interest  question
         in a number of ways, set out in more detail below.  On 16 July 2015
         Judge AD Baker granted permission to appeal on this basis observing
         that  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  misdirected  himself   in
         concluding that private life outweighed the public interest.

      3. The matter now comes before me to  consider  whether  the  decision
         contains an error of law.

      4. Mr McVeety relied  upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  as  drafted.   I
         indicated to Mr Mohzam that I did not need to hear from  him  as  I
         would be dismissing the appeal for reasons to follow in writing.

      5. As the SSHD  relies  upon  a  number  of  reasons  to  support  the
         submission that the Judge misdirected himself when considering  the
         public interest question, I deal with each in turn.

      6. It is first  submitted  that  the  Judge  has  not  considered  the
         appropriate  question,   i.e.   are   there   unjustifiably   harsh
         consequences emanating from  exceptional  circumstances?  The  SSHD
         relies upon a number of authorities to  support  this  proposition,
         the most recent being SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.   This
         decision clearly sets out at [33] that in a case such as this,  the
         correct question is whether there are compelling circumstances  and
         not the higher test set out in the grounds of appeal.  When I  drew
         this to Mr McVeety's attention he accepted my analysis.   When  the
         decision is read as  a  whole  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  has
         identified compelling circumstances and applied the  correct  test,
         even if this has not been done explicitly.

      7. The SSHD also points out that the Judge has wrongly considered  the
         reasonableness of expecting the appellant's spouse to  return  with
         him to the Gambia. Under Strasbourg case-law that  is  the  correct
         test to be employed when considering whether in relation to  Art  8
         of the ECHR, a spouse can be expected to leave the UK and the Judge
         was entitled to reach the factual findings he did on this issue.

      8. It is submitted  that  the  Judge  employed  the  wrong  test  when
         considering whether or not the appellant's immigration  status  was
         precarious. Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
         Act 2002 (as amended) does not directly address the  weight  to  be
         attached to family life established  when  a  person's  immigration
         status is precarious,  as  opposed  to  unlawful.   As  Mr  McVeety
         accepted AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  is  of  limited
         assistance because it addresses the definition  of  precarious  for
         the purposes of section 117B in the context of private life.   This
         is a case  much  more  predicated  upon  family  life  between  the
         appellant and his spouse who cannot reasonably be expected to leave
         the UK.  This issue has been addressed in  Strasbourg  authorities.
         In Rodrigues da Silva v Netherlands [2007] 44  EHRR  34  the  Court
         said [39]:

             "Another important consideration will also be  whether  family
             life was created at a time  when  the  persons  involved  were
             aware that the immigration status of one of them was such that
             the persistence of that family  life  within  the  host  state
             would from the outset be precarious. The Court has  previously
             held that where this is the case it is likely only  to  be  in
             the most exceptional circumstances that the removal of the non-
             national family member will constitute a violation of Art.8."

      9. Although the Judge has not considered the Strasbourg test expressly
         it is clear that he has applied it properly.  At [31] he found that
         the appellant and his spouse were entitled to consider that, as  he
         had leave to remain and they should be able to  meet  the  relevant
         Rules, persistence of family life in those  circumstances  was  not
         done at a time  when  his  immigration  status  could  be  properly
         described as precarious.

     10. The Judge has properly and fully given weight to the fact that  the
         public interest is set out in the Rules [32].  The Judge  expressly
         acknowledged that the  fact  that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
         substantive financial requirements of the  Rules  was  insufficient
         and no more than a factor to take into account [29].

     11. The submission that the Judge failed to consider the  circumstances
         relevant the SSHD's alleged curtailment of the appellant's leave is
         a mere disagreement with the Judge's factual findings. The case was
         adjourned to get more evidence on this issue [6].  At the adjourned
         hearing the SSHD accepted that no curtailment letter had been  sent
         and therefore the appellant's marriage application was made when he
         had extant leave  [13].   In  those  circumstances  the  Judge  was
         entitled for the reasons he provided  to  treat  the  appellant  as
         having extant leave when he made his marriage application.

Decision

     12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making
         of a material error of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date: 26 August 2015
