
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45687/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2016                   |On 13 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     KB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal, born on 9 January 1979.  On  11
    November 2014 a decision was made to make a deportation  order  against
    him pursuant to the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("the EEA Regulations").  That decision was made as  a  result  of
    the appellant's convictions on 12 November 2009 for offences  of  false
    imprisonment, rape of a male, wounding with intent and robbery.  On  12
    January 2010 he was made subject to a hospital order under sections  37
    and 41 of the Mental Health Act 1983 (as amended).

 2. His appeal against the respondent's  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Miller ("the FtJ") on 8 March 2016, following  which  he
    dismissed the appeal under the EEA  Regulations  and  on  human  rights
    grounds.  Permission to appeal having been  granted,  the  appeal  came
    before me.

    The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 3. Ground 1  contends  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  applying  s.117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act")  when
    considering the appeal under the EEA Regulations.  Reference is made in
    the grounds to the decision in Badewa (ss 117A-D and  EEA  Regulations)
    [2015] UKUT 00329 (IAC).  It is argued that the  FtJ's  decision  under
    the EEA Regulations was affected by his consideration of s.117.

 4. Ground 2 contends that there was inadequate consideration by the FtJ of
    the medical evidence which it is argued is relevant to  the  issues  of
    integration and risk of reoffending.  Furthermore, the FtJ  had  failed
    to provide any analysis of  a  senior  social  worker's  report  and  a
    nursing report.

 5. Ground 3 alleges a failure on the part of  the  FtJ  to  give  adequate
    consideration to background evidence in relation to the availability of
    treatment in Portugal.

 6. In submissions, Ms Solanki relied on the grounds.  It was accepted that
    s.117 was applicable, but only in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR.

 7.  It  was  submitted  that  the  FtJ  had  concentrated  solely  on  the
    appellant's behaviour up to October 2013 but there was  evidence  which
    postdated that period which the FtJ had failed to  take  into  account.
    It was argued that there was an absence of consideration of the  senior
    social worker's report and the nursing report which, to paraphrase  the
    submissions, showed positive engagement on the part  of  the  appellant
    with his treatment.  These were key to the issues of rehabilitation and
    the level of threat that the appellant could be said to pose.

 8. It was submitted that the FtJ  needed  to  consider  the  prospects  of
    rehabilitation.   In  the  UK  there  is  an  established   course   of
    rehabilitation that the appellant is undertaking.  There was nothing in
    the background evidence showing that a similar level  of  treatment  or
    rehabilitation would be available  in  Portugal.   I  was  referred  to
    aspects of the background evidence that was put before the FtJ.

 9. Mr Melvin submitted that it was only necessary for the FtJ to  consider
    the availability of treatment but not the specific treatment  that  the
    appellant is benefiting from now.  The evidence was that  treatment  is
    available in Portugal.  Notwithstanding that the information before the
    FtJ was to the effect that there could be more mental health provision,
    it is not the case that there is no treatment available.  The  FtJ  was
    not required to quote large sections of the  background  evidence.   It
    was a matter for him what he made of that evidence.

10. It was submitted that the FtJ had  made  a  finding  on  the  issue  of
    rehabilitation and integration.  He had explained why he concluded that
    the appellant still represented a risk.  He had made clear findings.

11. The reference by the FtJ to s.117 of  the  2002  Act  at  [39]  of  his
    decision is not material given the findings of fact made under the  EEA
    Regulations.  Given his conclusions in relation to the EEA Regulations,
    there is no material error of law in his consideration  of  Article  8.
    Read holistically, there are clear  findings  on  all  aspects  of  the
    appeal.

    My Conclusions

12. I am not satisfied that  there  is  any  error  of  law  in  the  terms
    expressed in Ground 1, which could be summarised as the contention that
    the FtJ conflated the considerations under  the  EEA  Regulations  with
    those under s.117 of the 2002 Act.

13. I readily accept the proposition, as  explained  in  Badewa,  that  the
    correct approach is  first  to  decide  if  the  person  satisfies  the
    requirements of the EEA Regulations, and in which consideration ss.117A-
    D have no application.  The paragraph of the FtJ's decision about which
    complaint is made in this respect is [39].   The  opening  sentence  of
    that paragraph states as follows:

         "Against  the  findings  referred  to  above,   I   turn   to   the
         considerations which I must  take  into  account  under  Regulation
         21(6)".

14. Reg 21(6) provides as follows:

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin".

15. It can be seen from reg 21(6) that there are a number of considerations
    which the FtJ was required to examine.   Immediately  after  the  first
    sentence of [39] he referred to  the  appellant's  age,  where  he  had
    lived, his qualifications, the fact that he  speaks  English,  and  his
    state of health.  He referred to his family in Portugal, his  financial
    prospects, the support he might expect from family in Portugal, and his
    prospects of employment.  He found that there was  little  evidence  of
    social and cultural integration, referring to his offending  from  soon
    after coming to the UK, and having been in prison or hospital for  most
    of his time since his arrest in 2009.

16. He then went on to state as follows:

         "This is clearly relevant  when  considering  Section  117  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002".

17. The FtJ then repeated that although it was said that the appellant  had
    not spent long in Portugal, he nevertheless had  close  family  members
    there, and indeed close family members in Angola, where he grew up  and
    where he also has children.  He stated that there would  be  no  reason
    why, if he did not wish to remain in Portugal, he could not  return  to
    Angola.  He then, in the same paragraph, turned  consideration  to  reg
    21(5) and the principle of proportionality, undertaking a consideration
    of the issues to be decided under reg 21(5).

18. At [40] he stated as follows:

         "In the light of all that I have said, I find that the respondent's
         decision is in accordance with the Regulations, and that the appeal
         must accordingly fail".

    He then turned his consideration expressly to Article 8.

19. I cannot see that in the FtJ's analysis of the ground of  appeal  under
    the EEA Regulations there was any impermissible consideration of  s.117
    of the 2002 Act.  All that the FtJ was saying at [39] was  that  social
    and cultural integration was a relevant factor under  s.117,  which  it
    is.  That, it seems to me, was merely a passing reference to  an  issue
    that would require later consideration.  It  is  clear  that  [39]  was
    firmly focused on the relevant provisions of the EEA Regulations.

20. I am similarly not satisfied that there is any  error  of  law  in  the
    FtJ's consideration of the medical evidence.  In the grounds at [13] it
    is said that Dr Rudzinski "confirmed much more than the  IJ  refers  to
    and considers".  There is  a  summary  of  Dr  Rudzinski's  conclusions
    expressed in her two reports.   The  summary  in  the  grounds  refers,
    amongst other things,  to  the  appellant  in  the  UK  having  "family
    support" and the risks that would accrue without the continued  support
    that he is receiving.

21. However, in the first place, the FtJ expressly referred to  the  report
    dated 29 August 2014, at [34], quoting from it.  The FtJ also quoted in
    detail from the report dated 28 August 2014.  Those are  not  the  only
    references to the medical evidence from  Dr  Rudzinski.   The  FtJ  was
    plainly aware of everything that Dr Rudzinski  had  to  say  about  the
    appellant's present circumstances and the prognosis.

22. It is inaccurate to suggest that the FtJ only  focused  on  the  period
    between August 2009 and 2013, which incidentally the FtJ  noted  showed
    that there were no fewer than  46  incidents  of  verbal  and  physical
    aggression between August 2009 and October 2013.  He referred to a more
    recent report from Dr Joseph Mondeh, dated 15 April 2015, quoting  from
    it to the effect that the appellant  had  made  great  strides  in  his
    treatment, management and his rehabilitation.  The FtJ also  added,  at
    [34], that he was sure that the appellant would not have  been  allowed
    to attend the hearing before him, unaccompanied, had those in charge of
    his treatment been concerned regarding his stability.  The FtJ,  in  my
    judgement, was fully aware of, and took into account, the whole span of
    the medical evidence, not limiting his consideration to what  could  be
    said to be adverse factors in relation to his behaviour.

23. As regards the reports from the senior social worker, Michelle  Rogers,
    and the nursing report dated 4 September 2014, from Charles Neil, it is
    true that there is no reference to these reports in the FtJ's decision.
     It is argued on behalf of the appellant that in relation to the report
    from Michelle Rogers, a senior social worker, dated 26 August 2014  and
    her letter dated 20 April 2015, they indicate that  the  appellant  had
    made progress in hospital and displayed  a  willingness  to  work  with
    staff and access all therapeutic opportunities offered.  In her  letter
    there is reference to the appellant having  attended  placements  at  a
    residential home, six hours twice weekly with a view  to  being  placed
    there soon.  The nursing report refers  to  the  appellant  having  had
    several periods of unescorted leave from March 2013 and that there  had
    been no incidents of being absent without  leave  or  absconding.   The
    report also refers to there not  having  been  any  anti-social  verbal
    aggression, that the appellant has  shown  good  self-care  skills  and
    complied with medication and that drug screenings  had  been  negative.
    There was also no evidence of alcohol abuse according  to  the  report.
    All of the  issues  in  those  reports  are  said  to  be  relevant  to
    rehabilitation, as well as to the appellant's health, and progress.

24. So far as the social circumstances report  is  concerned,  this  was  a
    report prepared for the Hospital Managers, for a  forthcoming  hearing.
    It is not a report prepared for the hearing before the FtT.  That  does
    not undermine the  contents  of  the  report  but  it  is  nevertheless
    important to put the report's remit into context.  Although the  social
    worker's report states  that  the  appellant  continues  to  display  a
    willingness  to  work  with  staff  "and  access  all  the  therapeutic
    opportunities"  that  are  offered  to  him,  that  statement  must  be
    qualified with reference to what it said at Section 4 of the report  to
    the effect that "To date he  remains  unwilling  to  discuss  with  his
    Social Worker the  issues  surrounding  his  index  offences".   It  is
    reasonable to assume that therapeutic opportunities would include  work
    around his criminal offending.  Similarly, at  page  6  of  the  report
    under the heading "Conclusion" it again refers  to  the  appellant  not
    fully acknowledging responsibility for the offences.

25. As already indicated, the FtJ did accept that there was  evidence  that
    the appellant had  made  progress  in  his  treatment,  management  and
    rehabilitation, at [34].  I cannot see that the material relied  on  in
    the social worker's report adds anything of substance to  the  evidence
    to which the FtJ referred.

26. So far as the nursing report is concerned, the  FtJ  acknowledged  that
    the appellant had  been  allowed  to  attend  the  hearing  before  him
    unaccompanied, which would not have been permitted had those in  charge
    of his treatment been concerned about his mental  stability.  Again,  I
    cannot see that the information in the nursing report adds much to  the
    information that was before the FtJ.

27. It was not necessary for the FtJ to refer specifically to every  aspect
    of the evidence put before him.  It is plainly not the  case  that  the
    FtJ only looked at  the  appellant's  circumstances  from  a  one-sided
    perspective.   It  was  acknowledged  that  the  appellant   had   made
    significant progress.  I am not satisfied that there is  any  error  of
    law in the FtJ's failure to  refer  to  the  social  circumstances  and
    nursing reports.  If it was an error of law it  is  not  one  that  was
    material to the outcome.

28. As regards the FtJ's consideration of background evidence  in  relation
    to the availability of treatment and rehabilitation  in  Portugal,  the
    reports referred to in the appellant's  grounds  were  evidently  taken
    into account by the FtJ at [36].  He refers to one of the reports being
    10 years old at the date of the hearing and both reports being  general
    in their approach, and admitting to the limited value of  the  research
    informing the reports.

29. Although it could be said that there  was  some  inconsistency  in  the
    FtJ's criticism of Dr Mondeh's report for its brevity and lack  of  in-
    depth analysis and yet his reliance on it  in  terms  of  treatment  in
    Portugal, I am not satisfied that there is any  error  of  law  in  the
    FtJ's assessment of the availability of treatment in  Portugal.   Those
    conclusions are, in part, informed by the FtJ's assessment that he  did
    not think that the degree of care that he would require  is  such  that
    there was likely to be much difference between  Portugal  and  the  UK,
    given that the appellant is living in supported accommodation  and  was
    allowed to attend the hearing on his own.

30. In addition, the FtJ referred to the risk of the appellant returning to
    taking cannabis or drinking alcohol as being dependent to  some  extent
    on the level of support that he has in  the  UK  or  in  Portugal.   He
    pointed out at [37] that such support in the  UK  would  appear  to  be
    minimal, if non-existent.  He referred to the fact that no-one came  to
    the hearing to give him support, as might be expected.  Although  there
    was a letter from his  father,  it  was  a  one-page  document  clearly
    prepared by someone else on his behalf, and was in any event inaccurate
    in that it stated that the appellant has no close family, just cousins,
    in Portugal.  The appellant was unable to say whether his father  still
    lives with his  partner  or  not,  and  indicated  that  they  did  not
    currently have a close relationship at all.  The appellant had told the
    FtJ that he had some half-siblings in the UK.  They, however,  did  not
    attend the hearing or provide statements.  His brother in the  UK  does
    not even know where he lives, the FtJ noted.   He  concluded  therefore
    that the appellant has no significant family help upon which  he  could
    rely in the UK.

31. That, however, was in contrast to the position in Portugal, as the  FtJ
    set out at [38].  He referred to his having three children aged 13,  14
    and 15, as well as a half-cousin there.  It is  apparent  that  he  was
    close to his children in Portugal, talking to them two to three times a
    week.  There was no  evidence  that  the  children's  mother  was  ill-
    disposed towards him.  Whereas he did not believe  that  the  appellant
    would derive any help from his family in the UK, he considered it  more
    likely that he would receive  such  help  in  Portugal.   The  FtJ  was
    entitled to take into account the availability  of  family  support  in
    terms of its effect on his rehabilitation, and indeed the relevance  of
    family support is evident from the reports of Dr Rudzinski.

32. It is clear from the FtJ's analysis from [36] onwards that he was  well
    aware of the importance of the issue of rehabilitation.  I am satisfied
    that his conclusions in relation to the risk of  further  offending  in
    the context of rehabilitation were conclusions that were open to him.

33. In summary, I am not satisfied that the grounds establish any error  of
    law on the part of the FtJ in any respect.




    Decision

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds therefore stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        13/12/16


