
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/45535/2014
                                                               IA/45557/2014
                                                               IA/45558/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 April 2016                     |On 25 April 2016                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                              BashARAT HUSSAIN
                                IRSHAD MUMTAZ
                                    [E B]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Mahmud, Counsel instructed by Emazon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. These are appeals against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal E B Grant who,  on  22  July  2015,  dismissed  the  various
       appeals brought against the decisions  of  the  respondent  dated  28
       October 2014 refusing the 1st  Appellant's  application  for  further
       leave to remain as a Tier  4  (General)  Student  and  the  remaining
       Appellants  applications  for  further  leave  to   remain   as   his
       dependents.

Relevant Background

    2. The Appellants are nationals of Pakistan. The 1st Appellant's date of
       birth is 25 May 1977. His wife, who is the 2nd Appellant, was born on
       02 August 1980. The couple have a child, who is the 3rd Appellant.

    3. On 17 January 2007 the 1st Appellant was granted entry  clearance  to
       study a NQF Level 7 Post Graduate degree in Management at the  London
       College of Management and IT. On 27  February  2009  he  was  granted
       further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (post study work) Migrant. On  05
       September 2012 the 1st Appellant was granted further leave as a  Tier
       4 (General) Student in order to study an MBA, which was also  at  NQF
       Level 7. The 1st Appellant then made an in-time application to  study
       an  NQF  Level  7  Extended  Diploma  in  Marketing   Management   at
       Westminster Academy. The  1st  Appellant  attended  an  interview  in
       relation to this application on 02 October 2014.

    4. In reliance on answers provided by the 1st Appellant in the interview
       the Respondent  refused  the  application.  The  Respondent  was  not
       satisfied the 1st Appellant was a genuine student  because  he  could
       not give the number of modules of his chosen course,  had  failed  to
       provide a satisfactory explanation as to why he was now embarking  on
       a third NQF Level 7 course of  study,  and  because  his  answers  in
       relation to his chosen course were said to be  'notably  indistinct',
       although no further explanation or example was provided in respect of
       this third criticism. The Respondent maintained that it was not clear
       how the 1st Appellant would benefit from undertaking a further course
       at the same level as his previous courses.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    5. The First-tier Tribunal judge made general  reference  to  a  witness
       statement prepared by the 1st Appellant for his appeal  hearing,  and
       to other 'evidence'. The typed Record of Proceedings  indicates  that
       the 1st Appellant was asked to adopt his statement and  that  he  was
       asked (it is unclear by whom)  a  single  question  relating  to  his
       current studies. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out the core facts
       relating to the 1st Appellant's immigration and  educational  history
       at paragraphs 3 and 4 of her decision. The judge indicated  that  she
       had taken into account the evidence contained in the 1st  Appellant's
       witness statement which, inter alia, gave more  detailed  information
       about his proposed course.

    6. In paragraph 6 of her decision the judge attached  little  weight  to
       the evidence contained  in  the  witness  statement  "...because  the
       Appellant has had the time to research the course." The judge did not
       find it credible that the  1st  Appellant  would  undertake  a  third
       course at the same level as his previous two courses and  found  this
       did not represent academic progress. I pause at this  point  to  note
       that the Respondent did not refuse the application on the basis  that
       the 1st Appellant was not making academic progress  but  because  she
       was not satisfied that his application for further Leave To Remain as
       a student was genuine.

    7. The judge stated, "I find that the appellant has chosen to  enrol  on
       another level 7 course in order to remain in the United Kingdom where
       he works part-time for Domino's Pizza." Although  the  1st  Appellant
       indicated in his interview that he worked for the pizza company  this
       did not form any  part  of  the  Respondent's  reasoning.  The  judge
       concluded by agreeing with the reasons given by the Respondent in her
       refusal decision and found that the 1st Appellant did  not  genuinely
       intend to study in the United Kingdom.

The Grounds of Appeal and the Upper Tribunal hearing

    8. The various grounds settled on behalf of the Appellants  contend,  in
       essence, that the judge attached weight to  irrelevant  matters  (the
       1st  Appellant's  employment),  that  the   judge's   reasoning   was
       inadequate, contained as it was in a decision that was barely 3 pages
       long, and that the  judge  failed  to  engage  with  the  explanation
       offered by the 1st Appellant for undertaking a third course of  study
       at the same level as his two previous courses.

    9. Mr Mahmud expanded upon these grounds in his oral submissions arguing
       that the First-tier Tribunal's decision was inadequately reasoned and
       speculative in light of the explanation offered by the 1st Appellant.
       It was pointed out that the 1st  Appellant's  interview  answers  did
       identify the actual  modules  he  was  studying.  The  1st  Appellant
       explained in his statement that his first NQF level  7  qualification
       was no longer recognised and that, as a  result,  he  had  to  obtain
       another NQF level 7 qualification, which he did. I  was  referred  to
       the  actual  explanation  provided  by  the  1st  Appellant  in   his
       interview, which he expanded upon in his statement, setting  out  why
       he now wished to undertake a third NQF level 7 qualification. The 1st
       Appellant had decided to commence a PhD in marketing but was  advised
       that, as he had only studied one module in marketing in his  MBA,  he
       should study a further NQF level 7 course in marketing to give him  a
       more in-depth knowledge as he may otherwise struggle  to  pursue  his
       PhD.

   10. Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's
       decision, while brief, was legally adequate. There was no independent
       evidence that the  description  of  the  modules  given  by  the  1st
       Appellant in his interview were the same as  those  he  was  actually
       studying.

Discussion

   11. For the following reasons I  am  satisfied  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       judge made a material error of law by  failing  to  engage  with  the
       explanation given by the 1st Appellant for undertaking a third course
       of study at the same level as his previous courses and by failing  to
       support her conclusion with adequate reasons.

   12. In his interview the 1st Appellant was asked (Qs  19  &  21)  why  he
       chose his new course and how it related to his  previous  courses  of
       study. He explained that he  had  only  studied  a  single  marketing
       module in his MBA and that he wished to eventually undertake a PhD in
       marketing.  He  explained  that,  following  a  conversation  with  a
       college, he was informed that undertaking another NQF Level 7 course,
       one that specialised in marketing, would help him in his  PhD  as  he
       would  otherwise  struggle.  The  1st   Appellant   reiterated   this
       explanation in his statement, indicating  that  a  PhD  in  marketing
       could enhance his future employment prospects.

   13. This explanation was not, on its face, an unreasonable  one.  It  was
       not, for  example,  inherently  implausible.  It  therefore  required
       engagement by the judge. While the First-tier Tribunal judge was  not
       obliged to find the explanation credible she could not simply  ignore
       it given that it was one of the central reasons for the  Respondent's
       decision. The judge however made no  reference  to  the  explanation.
       There was simply no attempt to engage with it. Nor did the judge make
       any findings in respect of the 1st Appellant's claim that  his  first
       NQF level 7 award was no longer recognised.

   14. It cannot be said  that  this  failure  was  incapable  of  making  a
       material difference to the judge's ultimate  conclusion.  Whilst  the
       First-tier Tribunal judge was entitled to attach little weight to the
       further information provided by the 1st Appellant  in  his  statement
       relating to his studies, it remains the case that the  1st  Appellant
       did give details of the modules he was studying in his  interview  (Q
       20). The 1st Appellant was also  able  to  give  a  number  of  other
       details of his college and his studies (Qs 23 to 26).

   15. In these circumstances  it  is  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
       remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, before a judge  other  than
       Judge E B Grant, to be decided afresh, all issues open.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal made a  material  error  of  law.  The  appeals  are
allowed to the extent that they are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for
a complete rehearing.


[pic]    21 April 2016

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
