
[pic]
IAC-F-NL1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45097/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |16 November 2015                     |
|Oral judgment delivered on 28 October|                                     |
|2015                                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HOLGATE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    MSNL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Senior Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Siri, Counsel instructed by SBG Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 3 June 2015, but  it
    is convenient if we continue to refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described in the Tribunal below.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal of his  application  for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    partner on human rights grounds under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. Mr Jarvis had only very  shortly  before  the  hearing  been  asked  to
    present the appeal on behalf of the Respondent. When the hearing  began
    he told us straight away that the Secretary of State would  not  pursue
    either of the two grounds set out in the application for permission  to
    appeal  because  they  are  unarguable.  We  concur  with  Mr  Jarvis's
    concession. It accords with the provisional view that we had formed  on
    reading the papers beforehand. Indeed, we express  some  surprise  that
    permission to appeal was granted by a judge of the First Tier  Tribunal
    on either of the  two  grounds  as  set  out  in  the  application  for
    permission.

 4. Nonetheless Mr Jarvis prepared a skeleton argument in which  he  sought
    to raise three additional points. During oral  submissions  he  reduced
    these points to one single criticism of the judge's  determination.  Mr
    Siri, who appeared for the Appellant opposed the  introduction  of  new
    grounds of appeal at the hearing for which leave was required. He  said
    that he had not had a  proper  opportunity  to  consider  the  skeleton
    argument and deal with the new point.

 5. Had there been  any  potential  unfairness  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    Respondent's new point being argued as an additional ground of  appeal,
    or any necessity to adjourn the hearing so as to enable  the  Appellant
    to deal with that point, it is virtually certain  that  we  would  have
    refused  the  Respondent's  application  for   leave   to   amend.   No
    explanation, let alone a sufficient one, was put forward to justify  an
    amendment of the grounds of appeal at such a late stage. The fact  that
    (once Mr Jarvis had considered the papers) the  Respondent  had  formed
    the view that the two grounds which  formed  the  basis  for  obtaining
    permission to appeal were unarguable, could not justify an amendment so
    as to raise a new ground of appeal at such a late stage. A party to  an
    appeal, whether an Appellant or a Respondent,  has  an  expectation  of
    coming to a hearing knowing properly in  advance  which  arguments  are
    going to be raised, so as to be able to  prepare  to  deal  with  those
    points and, by the same token an expectation that other matters are not
    under challenge. The same applies to this Tribunal, so that the members
    of a panel are able to prepare for the hearing and the finite resources
    of the Tribunal devoted proportionately and fairly to each case.

 6. However, in this instance the additional point that Mr Jarvis sought to
    argue turned out to be a very short one indeed and allowing  it  to  be
    pursued did not give rise to any unfairness to the Appellant. For those
    reasons, most exceptionally, we granted leave for the new point  to  be
    raised at the hearing and have dealt with it.

 7. The Respondent's new complaint is that in the  course  of  the  judge's
    reasons dealing with the Article 8 claim he said at paragraph  62  when
    referring to the Appellant's partner, a British citizen, that:

         "He had health problems and although appropriate treatment might be
         available in Sri Lanka, there is no guarantee  that  the  treatment
         that he would receive would be as good as he  gets  in  the  United
         Kingdom where he also receives it free under the NHS."

    The legal point which Mr Jarvis seeks to extract from that  passage  is
    that the language "there is no guarantee" indicates that the judge  was
    not applying the  civil  standard  of  proof,  namely  the  balance  of
    probabilities.

 8. Mr  Jarvis  accepted  that  this  argument  depends  upon  reading  the
    paragraph as if the judge was directing himself that unless  there  was
    something equivalent to a guarantee or  certainty  that  the  treatment
    receivable by the Appellant's partner in Sri Lanka would be as good  as
    that available in the United Kingdom, then this particular  factor  had
    to be treated as a factor supporting the Article 8 claim (or could  not
    be disregarded in that context).

 9. On any fair reading of the judge's decision it is impossible to  accept
    this new line of argument. The judge was not indicating any  divergence
    from the civil standard of proof. He was  simply  expressing  the  view
    that there was no certainty that the treatment would be received to the
    same standard in Sri Lanka, in the straight forward  sense  that  there
    was a risk that it might not be. He  was  not  putting  the  point  any
    higher than that. He therefore attached the weight he considered to  be
    appropriate to that factor and that is not a matter which  is  open  to
    legal criticism in this Tribunal.

10. Mr Jarvis, having thought  very  carefully  about  the  merits  of  the
    original grounds and indeed the other additional grounds  that  he  had
    been seeking at one  stage  to  put  forward  in  his  recent  skeleton
    argument, told the Tribunal very candidly that the  point  set  out  in
    paragraph 7 above was the only matter which he would wish the  Tribunal
    to determine in this appeal.

11. Because the Respondent's case at the hearing was  limited  to  the  one
    very short point which we have rejected,  there  is  no  need  in  this
    decision for us to refer to the several, strong findings  made  by  the
    judge in the Appellant's favour leading him to allow the  appeal  under
    Article 8. The  brevity  of  our  reasoning  should  not,  however,  be
    misconstrued as indicating that  the  judge's  decision  to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal simply turned on the passage quoted in  paragraph  7
    above.

Decision

12. Having rejected that single point it must follow that the  Respondent's
    appeal to this Tribunal is dismissed. We conclude that the decision  of
    the judge on the Appellant's appeal did not involve any  error  of  law
    and that decision must stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 2 November 2015

The Hon. Mr Justice Holgate



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no  fee  award.  The
decision made by the First-tier Tribunal stands. The  Judge  made  no  order
for a fee award.


Signed   Date 2 November 2015

Mr Justice Holgate
