
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45228/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2014                               |On 23rd July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                               MR KASTURI LAL
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Awan, Solicitor from Mayfair Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Wiseman
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 14th March 2014.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 10th February 1981.

 3. On 7th June 2005 he married Thraso Elia, a citizen of Cyprus.  On  13th
    April 2007 he was granted an EEA family permit and came to the UK.   He
    was subsequently issued with a residence document under  Regulation  17
    from 10th April 2008 to 10th April 2013.

 4. On 3rd April 2013 he applied for a permanent  residence  card  but  was
    refused on 12th October 2013.   His  wife's  registration  certificate,
    which had been issued on 4th October 2007, was revoked.

 5. The Secretary of State refused to  issue  a  permanent  residence  card
    because she was not satisfied that the Appellant had  established  that
    his EEA Sponsor had been exercising treaty  rights  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of  five  years  as  a  self-sufficient  person.  The
    Appellant's case was that he was entitled to rely on his  own  earnings
    and resources to establish his EEA national wife's self-sufficiency.

 6. The issue before the  judge  was  whether  the  decision  to  refuse  a
    residence card was in accordance with  the  law  and  the  Regulations,
    which required a decision to be made as to whether the Sponsor had been
    exercising treaty rights  for  a  period  of  five  years  as  a  self-
    sufficient person.

 7. Unfortunately the judge made no clear decision as to whether she was or
    was not.

 8. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to make relevant findings, failed to make  any  findings  in
    relation to Article 8, failed to make a fee award  and  had  improperly
    failed to call upon the representative to make  oral  submissions.   He
    had said that he was content to rely upon the written  submissions  but
    then complained in the  determination  that  there  were  a  number  of
    matters which required clarification which could have  been  determined
    had a representative been present.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nicholson on 7th May 2014.

10. At the hearing both parties accepted that the judge had  erred  in  law
    and that the decision would have to be remade.

The Hearing

11. Mr Awan submitted that the  Appellant's  EEA  national  wife  had  been
    exercising treaty rights as a self-sufficient person for  the  relevant
    period.  It had been accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  comprehensive
    sickness cover.  It was also  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    working and that he had been continuously  employed  in  the  UK  since
    2007.  He was entitled to rely on Regulation 4(2) which states that:

         "For the purposes of paragraph 1(c) where  family  members  of  the
         person concerned reside in the UK and  their  right  to  reside  is
         dependent upon there being family members of that person -

         (a)  the requirement for that person to have  sufficient  resources
             not to become a burden on the social assistance system of  the
             UK during his period of residence shall only be  satisfied  if
             his resources and those of the family members  are  sufficient
             to avoid him and the family members becoming such a burden;

         (b)  the requirement for that person to have comprehensive sickness
             insurance cover in the UK shall only be satisfied  if  he  and
             his family members have such cover.

         4(3)     For the purposes of paragraph 1(d) where family members of
             the person concerned reside in  the  UK  and  their  right  to
             reside is dependent upon there being family  members  of  that
             person,  the  requirement  for  that  person  to  assure   the
             Secretary of State that he has  sufficient  resources  not  to
             become a burden on the social  assistance  system  of  the  UK
             during his period of residence shall only be satisfied  if  he
             assures the Secretary of State that his resources and those of
             his family members are sufficient to avoid him and his  family
             members becoming such a burden.

         4(4) For the purposes of paragraphs 1(c) and (d) and  paragraphs  2
             and 3  the  resources  of  the  person  concerned  and,  where
             applicable,  any  family  members,  are  to  be  regarded   as
             sufficient if -

             (a)  they exceed  the  maximum  level  of  resources  which  a
                  British citizen and his family members may possess  if  he
                  is to be come eligible for social assistance under the  UK
                  benefit system; or

             (b)  paragraph (a) does not apply but, taking into account the
                  personal situation of  the  person  concerned  and,  where
                  applicable, any family members, it appears to the decision
                  maker  that  the  resources  of  the  person  or   persons
                  concerned should be regarded as sufficient."

12. Mr Awan pointed to the resident stamp in the Appellant's passport which
    said that employment and business  activities  were  allowed.   He  had
    therefore been working in the  UK  lawfully  and  his  EEA  spouse  was
    entitled, as  his  family  member,  to  rely  upon  those  earnings  to
    establish her self-sufficiency.

13. Furthermore removal would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
    private life since he had been employed  here  consistently  since  his
    arrival, had relatives here and had always anticipated making his  home
    here.

14. Ms Everett relied on the cases of AG  &  Others  (EEA  jobseeker  self-
    sufficient person proof) Germany [2007] UKAIT 00075 and  GM  &  AM  (EU
    national; establishing self-sufficiency) France [2006] UKAIT 00059  and
    submitted that the Appellant was not entitled  to  rely  upon  his  own
    earnings in order to establish his wife's self-sufficiency.

15. With respect to Article 8, the Appellant had come  to  the  UK  on  the
    basis of his wife's  ability  to  exercise  treaty  rights,  which  was
    essentially a temporary purpose, and the refusal to issue  a  permanent
    residence card is not disproportionate.

Findings and Conclusions

16. The cases relied on by Ms Everett make the position clear.

17. In AG & Others the Tribunal held that, to satisfy the  self-sufficiency
    requirement of the EEA Regulations under Regulation 4(4), the resources
    of a family member cannot be aggregated with those of the EEA  national
    where those resources are derived from past employment of  that  family
    member.

18. The Tribunal said

         "Neither this judgment nor the judgment in Chen  can  be  taken  to
         support the quite different proposition that  self-sufficiency  can
         be established by income earned by the family  member  of  a  Union
         citizen - irrespective of whether that income was  earned  lawfully
         and on the basis of an independent right to work (see GM  &  AM  at
         52)."

    And again at paragraph 82

         "That does not assist a family  member  whose  employment  is  only
         legal if the right to reside of the Union citizen has been shown to
         exist on the basis of his/her personal self-sufficiency."

19. GM & AM was concerned with the rights  of  a  EU  national  child.   At
    paragraph 63 the Tribunal wrote

         "What is being said in this case is quite different.   Here  it  is
         said that the parent/carer is entitled to be in  the  UK  and  work
         because only then will  the  child  be  self-sufficient  and  hence
         establish her EU right of  residence.   Thus  the  family  members'
         presence in the UK (and a right to work)  is  relied  upon  not  in
         order to avoid a "clog" or "chill" on the exercise of the right  of
         the EU national child but rather in order to create that very right
         itself - the right from which  the  family  member  then  seeks  to
         derive his own right to reside as her carer/parent.   Only  if  the
         parent/carer resides in the UK with the EU national child can it be
         said that the child has an EU right at all.  The argument  is  then
         exposed  for  what  it  is  -   entirely   circular.    Even   more
         problematically it is a circular argument that begins in the  wrong
         place because it begins with a person who has  no  right  to  begin
         with, unlike in Chen.  There is nothing in the Court  of  Justice's
         jurisprudence, in particular in Chen or anything in principle which
         should cause us to decide that a non-EU  family  member  should  be
         able to reside in the UK with a EU national child (not to allow  it
         to exercise an existing right but rather) in order to establish the
         right in the first place.  Any right of the family member  must  be
         derived from an existing right of the EU national which he  or  she
         has individually and separately.  That is simply not the case."

20. Here the Appellant is attempting to use his own work in order to create
    his right to work on the basis of his EU wife's  self-sufficiency,  but
    his wife has not individually and separately established personal self-
    sufficiency.  The Appellant's rights are derived from hers.

21. Accordingly, since he cannot show that his EEA national spouse has been
    exercising treaty rights for a period of five years, the  Appellant  is
    not entitled to a permanent right of residence in the UK.

22. The Appellant is not of course facing removal since no removal decision
    has yet been made.  However there is  nothing  in  the  evidence  which
    establishes that it would be a disproportionate interference  with  his
    private life.  No evidence of that private life, save for his work, has
    been adduced.  There are no  children  of  the  marriage.   He  has  no
    independent right to remain in the UK, save as a dependant of his  wife
    and there is no evidence that she is exercising treaty  rights  in  the
    UK.

23. Mr Awan accepted  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  no  jurisdiction  to
    consider the issue of fee awards.

24. The issue of procedural irregularity as pleaded in the grounds was  not
    pursued because the decision has been set aside on other grounds.

Decision

25. The judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   The  appeal  is
    dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


