
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45484/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 July 2016                                |On 12 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                              maulikbhai patel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a citizen of India born on  18  May  1986,  appeals  the
    determination of a First-tier Judge on  24  July  2015  dismissing  his
    application for further leave to remain.  The  respondent  refused  the
    application on 27 October 2014.
2.   The appellant did not attend the hearing before the  First-tier  Judge.
    The appellant's representatives had sent a letter dated  16  July  2015
    requesting the appeal to be determined on the  papers  only.   Reliance
    was placed on a witness statement dated 16 July 2015.

3.   The proceedings before me took a similar turn  in  that  there  was  no
    appearance on behalf of the appellant and a  similar  letter  had  been
    sent to the Upper Tribunal as had been sent to the First-tier  Tribunal
    requesting the  appeal  to  be  determined  on  the  papers.   Further,
    reliance was placed on the appellant's earlier witness statement.

4.   The appellant's difficulties stem from a failure to  complete  part  of
    the application for leave to remain form where claimants were asked  to
    identify the category in which they were applying for an  extension  of
    stay in the United Kingdom.  He stated in that section:

         "Please  refer  to  our  covering  letter,  for  reasons  for  this
         application we will forward to you shortly".

5.   The letter enclosed was scarcely more helpful and stated:

         "The grounds of the application we will send you shortly."

6.   The respondent refused the application on  27  October  2014  with  the
    grounds of the  application  still  not  having  been  submitted.   The
    refusal was under paragraph  322(9)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which
    provides that leave should normally be refused where there has  been  a
    failure  by  an  applicant  to  produce  within   a   reasonable   time
    "information, documents or other evidence required by the Secretary  of
    State to establish his claim to remain under these Rules ..."

7.   The judge remarks in paragraph 11 of  his  decision  that  the  grounds
    were not particularised and "were as unhelpful  as  the  appellant  was
    unco-operative."

8.   The grounds had  first  been  identified  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement of 16 July 2015 as being  an  application  for  discretionary
    leave to remain on the basis of nine years' long residence outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

9.   The judge observes that there was no reason why, if that had  been  the
    basis of the application, it could not have been stated either  in  the
    application form or in the grounds of appeal.

10.  While the appellant had referred to  the  obtaining  of  a  replacement
    Indian  passport  the  judge  did  not  consider  that   a   sufficient
    explanation since the appellant could have made it clear what ground he
    was relying on and explained  that  the  passport  would  be  forwarded
    later.  The determination continues as follows:

         "13.  The  appellant  argues  that   the   respondent,   in   email
             correspondence gave him until 3  November  2014  in  which  to
             supply the grounds for his application but proceeded to make a
             decision on 27 October 2014  instead.   The  appellant  states
             that he gathered all the documents required  as  part  of  his
             application and sent them to his solicitors by 30 October 2014
             with a view to them forwarding them to  the  respondent  by  3
             November 2014.  The fact that the no such documents have  been
             forwarded to the tribunal in support of his appeal  causes  me
             to doubt the veracity of this assertion.


         14.  So far as the appellant being  misled  by  the  respondent  is
             concerned, I have examined the email  correspondence.   It  is
             undoubtedly the case that emails from the respondent prior  to
             22 October 2014  gave  the  unambiguous  impression  that  the
             information required should be provided by  3  November  2014.
             However this changed in the email from the respondent  to  the
             appellant's  solicitors  dated  22  October  2014   when   any
             ambiguity was removed in the main body of the email  where  it
             was said


         15.  "Thank you for your letter dated  21  October  2014.   However
             this letter did not contain the  reason  why  your  client  is
             applying for leave to remain in the UK.  If the reason is  not
             submitted by the (sic) 24 October 2014, the  application  will
             be considered outside the Immigration Rules".


         16.  It is true that the line at the  bottom  of  the  email  still
             stated that it is:


              "Essential that you reply by 3 November 2014"


         17.  However any ambiguity caused by this was removed by  the  body
             of the email quoted above.  In any event,  if  there  was  any
             confusion the appellant's solicitors could simply have emailed
             back to confirm the date that they were working to.  They  did
             not do so.  I do not therefore accept that  the  appellant  or
             his solicitors were misled by the reference to the 3  November
             2014 date."

11.  The judge then turned to the Article 8 issue raised in the  appellant's
    witness statement.  The judge notes that as the decision had been  made
    on 27 October 2014 it was caught by the changes made to the 2002 Act by
    the Immigration Act 2014.  This precluded the Tribunal from considering
    a matter that the respondent had  not  previously  considered.   As  no
    Article 8 or indeed any other new ground had previously been raised the
    judge considered he was precluded from considering the new matter.   He
    also referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Lamichhane  v
    Secretary of State [2012] EWCA Civ 260 and concluded that  it  was  not
    necessary for him to deal with Article 8 as  the  appellant  might  not
    raise before the Tribunal any ground for the grant of leave  to  remain
    different from that which was  the  subject  of  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State appealed  against.   In  any  event  there  were  no
    compelling or exceptional circumstances requiring the judge to consider
    Article 8.  The judge also considered,  having  referred  to  Razgar  v
    Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27 that the respondent's decision  would
    not be disproportionate.  He further referred to Section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act and concluded:

         "26. The appellant only had leave to remain initially as a  student
             and then as a Tier 1 post study worker knowing that without  a
             permanent right to remain, he faced the prospect of having  to
             return to India.   I  therefore  give  little  weight  to  any
             private life established in the United  Kingdom.   Further  it
             would not be unreasonable for the appellant to be returned  to
             India.  Contrary to his assertion in his witness statement, he
             still has ties to India through his parents  as  confirmed  in
             his application form.  Just as he has been able to establish a
             private life in the United Kingdom as he asserts, he would  be
             able to do so again in India with the help of his parents.  He
             would be able to obtain employment with the experience that he
             has obtained in the United Kingdom as well as  an  MBA  degree
             from the University of Wales.  It would not be unreasonable to
             expect him to return to India."

12.   The  judge  found  that  the  appellant's   removal   would   not   be
    disproportionate and dismissed the appeal.

13   There was an application for permission  to  appeal.   The  application
    was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,  finding  the  grounds  to  be
    poorly drafted.  The application was renewed to the Upper Tribunal.   A
    deputy judge considered  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning was inadequate to deal with the ambiguity  in  the
    emails and in the circumstances this amounted to an arguable  error  of
    law.

14.  The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge had referred to Ukus [2012] UKUT  00307
    (IAC).

15.  Mr Melvin submitted that it was difficult to  see  why  permission  had
    been granted.  The First-tier Judge had dealt with the ambiguity  point
    in paragraph 17 of the determination.  It appeared that  the  appellant
    was simply attempting to draw out the appeal as long as possible.   The
    judge had referred in paragraph 13 of the determination to no documents
    having been forwarded to the Tribunal and Mr  Melvin  said  there  were
    none in his file either.

16.  It is somewhat surprising that permission to appeal  has  been  granted
    in this case.  The approach of the First-tier Judge was correct.  I set
    out the relevant parts of the determination.  He explains in  paragraph
    12 why he took the view that there was nothing to prevent  the  grounds
    having been furnished at an earlier stage.  He takes into  account  the
    explanation given by the appellant and the action  that  the  appellant
    says he took which the judge refers to in paragraph 13.  As  the  judge
    points out, no documents were forwarded to the Tribunal in  support  of
    the appellant's appeal which caused him to question the  truth  of  the
    claim made by the  appellant  that  documents  had  been  sent  to  his
    solicitors.  The judge went into the email  chain  with  care.  He  was
    entitled to take the view that the body of the email dated  22  October
    2014  made the  deadline  clear  and  any  confusion  could  have  been
    clarified by the appellant's representatives.  It was open to the judge
    to find that neither the appellant nor  his  representatives  had  been
    misled as claimed.

17.  The position before the Upper Tribunal is  the  same  as  the  position
    before the First-tier Tribunal - the  appellant  does  not  attend  and
    relies on the same material.  It appears  to  me  that  the  First-tier
    Judge did not err in law in concluding as he did with  respect  to  the
    appellant's case under paragraph 322(9) of the Rules.   He  went  fully
    into the ambiguity issue and indeed  all  other  relevant  issues  both
    under the Rules and in respect of Article 8.

18.  There appears to be no basis for an argument that the respondent  erred
    in the exercise of discretion.  The body of the email  referred  to  by
    the First-tier Judge was quite clear and the representatives could have
    taken up any point based on the date set out at the bottom of the email
    and it was amply open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  neither  the
    appellant nor the representatives had been  misled.   Further,  as  the
    judge points out there was no reason for not volunteering  the  grounds
    earlier.  The judge dealt with  all  issues  under  the  Rules  and  in
    relation to Article 8.  It is said in the grounds that he did not  deal
    with the appellant's witness statement and submissions.  The  judge  in
    fact dealt with all matters before him and indeed had doubts about  the
    truthfulness of what was being put forward as he says in paragraph  13.
    Further he did not find that a sufficient explanation  had  been  given
    for the failure to submit grounds.  Despite a  diligent  search,  I  am
    unable to find any merit in this appeal.  The judge's comments that the
    grounds of appeal  were  as  "unhelpful  as  the  appellant  was  unco-
    operative" sums the position up.

19.  The decision of the First-tier Judge contained  no  material  error  of
    law and the decision is confirmed.

20.  Appeal dismissed.

21.  The judge made no anonymity order and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The judge made no fee award and I make none.



Signed                                  Date 11 July 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

