
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA459192014
                                                                 IA459282014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th February 2016                         |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                       ranjit singh (first appellant)
                     lucie koprivova (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    HUMD solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwncyz, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of the  late  Judge
    Upson made following a hearing at Bradford on 18th May 2015.

 2. The first appellant was born on 1st May 1984 and is a citizen of India.
     The second appellant is his wife, born on  27th  October  1984  and  a
    national of the Czech Republic.

 3. On 13th June 2014 Mr Singh made an application for a residence card  as
    the spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the  UK.   He
    provided evidence that he had married Ms Koprivova on 13th May 2014.

 4. On 17th October 2014 a "pastoral visit" was arranged and the appellants
    were interviewed separately.  Reference to those interviews was made in
    a letter of 20th October 2014, refusing the application on the  grounds
    that the Secretary of State believed  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience.

 5. On 10th November  2014  Ms  Koprivova  was  served  with  Form  IS.151A
    informing her of her status under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006 and of her liability to detention and removal.  She  was  informed
    that it was believed that she had abused her rights under the treaty in
    seeking to assist Mr Singh in his application  and  that  she  was  not
    exercising her treaty rights.

 6. The Judge considered the evidence and the submissions.  He set out  the
    law in relation to where the burden of proof lies  where  there  is  an
    allegation that the marriage under consideration is one of convenience.
     He was satisfied that there was sufficient  evidence  upon  which  the
    Secretary of State could suspect the genuineness of the  marriage.   He
    considered all of the documentary and oral evidence and concluded  that
    this was not  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  and  that  the
    appellants had failed to provide evidence that  he  could  rely  on  to
    dispel the suspicion of the decision maker that this was a marriage  of
    convenience.

 7. The appellants had submitted that the interviews were not conducted  in
    accordance with the proper  procedures  as  set  out  in  the  European
    Commission Handbook and  that  the  appellants  had  not  been  treated
    fairly.  They relied on the decision in Miah  (interviewer's  comments:
    disclosure: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 which concluded  that  fairness
    requires that the affected person must  be  alerted  to  the  essential
    elements  of  the  case  against  him.   In  particular  the  President
    considered the issue of disclosure and said:

         "The document enshrining the interviewer's comments - Form ICV.4605
         - must be disclosed as a matter of course.  An appellant's right to
         a fair  hearing  dictates  this  course.   If  exceptionally,  some
         legitimate concern about disclosure for example the protection of a
         third party should arise this should proactively be brought to  the
         attention of the Tribunal for a ruling and directions.  In this way
         the principle of independent  judicial  adjudication  will  provide
         adequate safeguards for  the  appellant.   This  will  also  enable
         mechanisms such as redaction which in practice one would expect  to
         arise with extreme rarity, to be considered."

 8. The Judge did not accept the  argument  that  the  appellant  had  been
    treated unfairly and it was on this basis that leave to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was sought.

 9. Although permission was initially  refused  it  was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch who said:

         "The reasons for refusal letter merely included excerpts  from  the
         interviews  conducted  with  the  appellants  in  relation  to  the
         allegation that they had entered into a marriage of convenience and
         on 13th February 2015 the  appellants  were  sent  notes  of  their
         interviews. However in paragraph 13 of Miah,  the  President  noted
         that it is stated in the European Commission Handbook  relating  to
         marriages of convenience that "Contradictions inconsistencies  lack
         of detail and implausible statements which  are  relevant  for  the
         decision making should be identified  and  explicitly  put  to  the
         interviewed spouses." It is implicit that this should occur  within
         the interviewing process and not merely for  the  purposes  of  any
         subsequent appeal against a decision.  He then  goes  on  state  in
         paragraph 13 of his decision and reasons  that  "The  spotlight  is
         firmly on the pre-decision interview and that the interview is  the
         vehicle through which  this  discreet  duty  of  fairness  will  be
         discharged.  The interviews disclosed in this case did not indicate
         that this had been done."

10. Mr Diwncyz did not seek to argue that proper process had been  followed
    in this case.  He did however rely on the point made  in  the  Rule  24
    response which was that  permission  to  appeal  had  not  been  sought
    against the finding of the Judge that the EEA national sponsor was  not
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  Accordingly those findings  should
    stand.

11. The documents containing the interviewer's  comments  have  never  been
    disclosed to the appellant.  This is contrary to the decision  in  Miah
    and accordingly is not in accordance with the law.  The  decision  will
    have to be remade by the Secretary of State who will of course have the
    benefit of the unchallenged findings  of  the  Judge  that  the  second
    appellant was  not  exercising  treaty  rights  when  she  remakes  the
    decision as to whether to issue a residence card.

Decision

The original Judge erred in law and  his  decision  is  set  aside.   It  is
remade as follows.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is  remitted
to the Secretary of State for a fresh decision to be made on  the  issue  of
whether the first appellant entered into a marriage of convenience with  the
second appellant.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed[pic]                             Date 8 June 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
