
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45562/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 19th August 2014                             |On 1st September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                              AMIR SAEED SHEIKH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, instructed by Veja & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Pakistan,  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mayall,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 2nd  June  2014,  to  dismiss  his  appeal
    against refusal to grant to him a residence card as the  family  member
    of an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights  in  this  country.   The
    Appellant is married to a Lithuanian citizen.

 2. Following interview of the Appellant and the spouse the Respondent  did
    not accept that they were in  a  genuine  relationship.   It  was  also
    stated that the spouse had not  been  shown  to  be  exercising  treaty
    rights  but  that  point  appears  not  to  have  been  pursued.    The
    application was refused also with regard to the Appellant's  Article  8
    ECHR rights.  No removal decision was made.

 3. In his determination the judge concluded that the parties were not in a
    genuine marriage, which was said to be a marriage  of  convenience.  He
    found that they had not been living together as husband and wife.   The
    appeal was dismissed under the Regulations and under Article 8.

 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal.  It is asserted in  the
    grounds that the judge was selective in  the  parts  of  the  interview
    record he cited, had failed to give weight to  large  portions  of  the
    evidence given by the Appellant and his partner and that there were  in
    fact numerous answers which were consistent.   It  was  said  that  the
    judge had failed to set out relevant case law, particularly  concerning
    Article 8 and had failed to give adequate reasons for his  views.   The
    judge himself had asked some questions and it  was  said  that  answers
    given had not been properly taken into account.  The determination  was
    said to be incomplete.

 5. In granting permission Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ford noted that
    there was an omission from the determination at paragraph 46 where  the
    judge had apparently intended to set out the relevant  law.   She  said
    that was unfortunate as the Appellant's argument that the  findings  of
    fact were not sufficiently clear was not sustainable on  a  reading  of
    the determination as a whole.  She did not however restrict the Grounds
    of Appeal.

 6. At the hearing I clarified that all grounds could be argued  if  relied
    upon.  Mr Bellara said that he had been present at  the  first  hearing
    and it was material that part of the determination  was  missing.   The
    judge had pointed out inconsistencies but he submitted  that  the  oral
    evidence had not been considered carefully  and,  he  said,  the  judge
    appeared to ignore some of the evidence.  His  primary  submission  was
    that having made findings the judge had failed to  apply  the  relevant
    law and there had been no specific reference to cases on Article 8 such
    as Razgar.  There should have been some consideration of  private  life
    on the basis of the information before the judge.

 7. Mr  Smart  accepted  that  there  was  clearly  an  omission  from  the
    determination at paragraph 46 but he said that at  paragraph  34  there
    was an adequate exposition of the  relevant  law.   He  mentioned  that
    there had apparently been a ten week delay  between  the  appeal  being
    hard and promulgation of the determination but that did not  reach  the
    three months' guideline which  had  been  previously  accepted  as  the
    reasonable limit for promulgation of a  decision.   He  said  that  the
    judge had explained why he had  found  that  the  marriage  was  not  a
    genuine one.  The fact that paragraph  46  was  missing  could  not  be
    material.  Having found there was  no  family  life  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 could only relate to private life and there was  no  material
    in that respect.  The Appellant had arrived here as a student.

 8. Having considered the determination, the grounds and the submissions  I
    came to the view that there was in fact no material error of law in the
    determination of Judge Mayall and I briefly announced  my  reasons  for
    that decision, which I now set out.

 9. It was accepted at the hearing that the only question was  whether  the
    parties were in a genuine marriage or a marriage of  convenience.   The
    judge set out at paragraph 34 that the initial burden of  showing  that
    the marriage was one of convenience lay upon  the  Respondent  but  the
    evidential  burden  could  however  shift  if  the  Respondent  adduced
    material which suggested that the marriage was one of convenience.   It
    was accepted by the Appellant's Counsel that the evidential burden  had
    shifted to the Appellant and that the standard  of  proof  was  on  the
    balance of probabilities.  That statement  sufficiently  sets  out  the
    burden and standard of proof.  The judge heard oral evidence  from  the
    Appellant and his spouse  and  he  referred  in  the  determination  to
    elements of that oral evidence, in addition to the documentary evidence
    before him.  In  the  assessment  of  the  evidence,  which  begins  at
    paragraph 35 of his determination, he referred to inconsistencies, some
    of which were described as "glaring".  At paragraph 41 the judge stated
    that taking into account the whole of the evidence before him,  whether
    specifically referred to or not, and having been able  to  observe  the
    couple giving evidence he was satisfied  that  it  was  not  a  genuine
    marriage.

10. The judge gave adequate and comprehensible reasons for the view he took
    of the evidence.  His conclusions were not perverse or irrational.   He
    applied the correct burden and standard of proof.  Whilst it is  always
    conceivable that another judge might have taken a different view, Judge
    Mayall was entitled to take the view he did take on the evidence before
    him and he correctly directed himself.  He referred in some  detail  to
    the evidence and there is no indication that the  delay  of  ten  weeks
    between the hearing and  promulgation  of  the  decision  affected  his
    conclusions.

11. There is clearly a lacuna at paragraph 46 which reads  "[Mr  Mayall  to
    paste in the relevant law and private life]".  The judge having reached
    his decision under the EEA Regulations that section can only relate  to
    his decision under Article 8.  He had already stated, at paragraph  44,
    that there could be no question of the decision being a breach  of  the
    Appellant's right to a family life.  He went  on  at  paragraph  45  to
    state as follows:

         "as I am satisfied that the Appellant has not  told  me  the  truth
         about his circumstances in the UK I have no information as  to  his
         private life in the UK.  It is not stressed that he has  any  right
         to remain in the UK pursuant  to  any  other  Immigration  Rule  or
         policy or concession."

    Whilst the omission of the paragraph 46 which  the  judge  intended  to
    insert is certainly to be deprecated, given his findings as  to  family
    life and private life there was no prospect at  all  of  the  Appellant
    being able to succeed under Article 8 ECHR.  In the circumstances  that
    omission could not have been material to the outcome.

12. No removal decision was made.  If the Appellant and his spouse now have
    further evidence upon which they seek to rely no  doubt  the  Appellant
    will seek to make a further application.

Decision

There was no material error of law in the  original  determination  and  the
decision that the appeal be dismissed therefore stands.






Signed                              Dated 01 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

