
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45488/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th May 2015                     |On 19th June 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

                                 AHSAN RAFIQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Lotay, legal representative of Derby
                    Immigration Aid Consultants
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion, I shall continue to refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 22nd April 2015 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  Osborne  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal V A Cox in which she allowed the  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules against the decision of the respondent to  refuse
    leave to remain as a  spouse  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 284 and Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  and  paragraph
    276ADE of those Rules on private life  grounds.   The  appellant  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan born on 3rd May 1990 who entered the United Kingdom
    on 8th July 2012 with entry clearance as  a  spouse  expiring  on  14th
    September 2014.

Error on a Point of Law

 3. In the grounds of application the respondent contended that  the  judge
    was in error in making reference to section 3 of the respondent's  IDIs
    of April 2013 on the basis that this excluded the  application  of  the
    English language requirement set out in  paragraph  284(ix)(a)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  In particular, it is submitted that the  judge  had
    isolated her consideration of section 3 to the key points  set  out  in
    section 3.1. of the IDIs overlooking the overriding requirement of  the
    need to meet the provisions of paragraph 284 which included the English
    language provision.

 4. The grounds also contend that the judge's proportionality assessment is
    materially flawed as she failed to provide adequate reasons to  support
    the  finding  that  the  appellant's  wife  had  no  understanding   of
    traditional Pakistani culture and no connection to Pakistan despite the
    evidence.

 5. At the hearing Mr McVeety confirmed that the respondent relied  on  the
    grounds of application.  He added that, if the judge had  thought  that
    the respondent had not followed her own IDIs, then  the  appeal  should
    have been allowed to the limited extent that the decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and remitted the application back for  a  fresh
    decision.  He also emphasised that, in considering human rights issues,
    the judge should have applied the provisions of  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)  in  relation
    to the proportionality of the Respondent's decision.

 6. Mr Lotay reminded me  that  the  appellant  had  submitted  a  Rule  24
    response upon which he relied.  This contends that the  judge  was  not
    wrong to refer to the key point's paragraph of the IDIs as this omitted
    reference to the English language  requirement.   The  appellant  could
    therefore be regarded as someone whose circumstances  were  exceptional
    whether or not the matter was considered within the  Immigration  Rules
    or outside them.  In this respect he also contended that the  appellant
    had failed to meet the provisions of paragraph 284 of  the  Immigration
    Rules on a "somewhat technical basis" because he had taken  and  passed
    an English language test even if one not recognised by the Home Office.
     Mr Lotay also submitted that the judge was right to conclude that  the
    appellant's wife had no connection to Pakistan.

 7. The response also makes reference to  a  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    which followed a hearing at Manchester on 16th June 2014.   However,  I
    pointed out to Mr Lotay that the decision is not reported  and  creates
    no precedent in these proceedings.

 8. After I had considered the matter for a few moments, I announced that I
    was satisfied that the decision showed material errors on points of law
    such that the decision should be set aside and re-made.  My reasons for
    that conclusion follow.

 9. The judge's consideration of IDIs as a means  to  exclude  the  English
    language requirement specifically set out in  paragraph  284(ix)(a)  of
    the Immigration Rules is clearly flawed.  The key  points  set  out  in
    section 3.1. of the IDIs for April 2013 cannot be  read  in  isolation.
    The initial part of that section  reads as follows:

         "As stated above all of the relevant provisions must be referred to
         when considering applications for leave to remain in this category,
         but in general caseworkers need to be satisfied that: ...".

    The emboldened words in the section  quoted  are  in  the  respondent's
    original document a copy of which was handed to me at the hearing.  The
    preceding section 3 contains the following statement:

         "From 29 November 2010, applicants in this category  need  to  meet
         the new English language requirement for partners ...".

10. Thus, none of the guidance contained in the IDIs at section  3  in  any
    way qualifies the requirement for an English language test  certificate
    from a provider approved by the respondent.  From paragraph 33  onwards
    of the decision the judge erred in making the absence of any  reference
    to the English language requirement  in  the  key  points  section  the
    significant factor in allowing the appeal.  Further, although the judge
    finds that the respondent's decision is not, therefore,  in  accordance
    with the law it is not clear  that  the  appeal  was  allowed  on  that
    limited basis leaving it  open  to  the  respondent  to  make  a  fresh
    decision.  The decision suggests that the judge intended to  allow  the
    appeal outright on that basis.  This is a further error.

11. As to the second point, that the judge was wrong to conclude  that  the
    appellant's wife had no connection to Pakistan, I also  find  that  the
    judge erred.  It is concluded in paragraph 46 of the decision that  the
    appellant's wife "has absolutely no connection  with  Pakistan  and  no
    understanding of traditional Pakistani culture ...". But no reasons are
    given for this conclusion even though the evidence put before the judge
    showed that the appellant's wife is a British citizen who was  born  in
    Derby. There was other evidence, including photographs, which suggested
    that her family's origins are in Pakistan where the wedding between the
    parties took place on 18th July 2010. Cogent reasons  for  the  judge's
    conclusion were required but not given. This also amounts to an  error.



Re-Making the Decision

12. Both representatives agreed that the re-making of  the  decision  could
    proceed by way of submissions only.

13. Mr Lotay outlined the circumstances of the appellant's  marriage  which
    were conceded by Mr McVeety.  The  appellant  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom lawfully with leave as a spouse following an arranged  marriage
    between the parties in Pakistan.  The appellant's wife, Farzana Rehmat,
    is a British citizen who was born in Derby where she has lived with her
    parents.  The parties have a genuine and subsisting relationship.

14. As to the proportionality of the respondent's decision Mr Lotay pointed
    out that the applicant had an English language qualification which  had
    been taken on the advice  of  his  representatives  at  the  time.   He
    attended English classes and then  obtained  the  EDEXCEL  certificates
    which are  on  pages  B1  and  2  of  his  bundle  of  documents.   The
    certificate is dated March 2014.  Mr Lotay submitted that the appellant
    had been unable to take  a  further  test  with  an  approved  provider
    because the respondent still held his passport from  the  time  of  his
    application.  He contended that the appellant should not have to return
    to Pakistan and apply for re-entry bearing in mind that he had  already
    qualified for entry clearance in 2012 before his arrival here.

15. Mr McVeety made reference to the Upper Tribunal decision in R  (On  the
    Application of Chen) (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation  -
    proportionality) [2015] UKUT 00189 (IAC) on the basis that it would not
    be disproportionate for the appellant to return to Pakistan to  make  a
    fresh application for entry clearance.  He also made reference  to  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  550
    which emphasised the impact of a powerful public interest in what needs
    to be demonstrated  for  an  Article  8  claim  to  prevail.   He  also
    suggested that the parties could continue their family life in Pakistan
    a country  to  which  he  believed  the  appellant's  wife  had  family
    connections.

16. In conclusion Mr Lotay emphasised that there could be a long period  of
    separation if the appellant were forced to return to  Pakistan  bearing
    in mind that he could not, at present, meet the financial  requirements
    for entry clearance which would then be imposed upon him.

Conclusions

17. In immigration appeals the burden of proof is on the appellant and  the
    standard of proof is a balance of probabilities.  In this appeal, which
    involves  human  rights  issues,  I   take   into   consideration   the
    circumstances as at the date of hearing.

18. The respondent's refusal decision examines the appellant's  application
    under both paragraph 284 and Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.   I
    consider the appeal under these parts of the  Immigration  Rules  first
    before considering human rights issues.  I bear in mind that, following
    the comments of the Court of Appeal in MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 there  is
    no need for me to consider  any  intermediary  test  before  moving  to
    consider the appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds outside the Rules
    in the event that the Rules cannot avail the appellant.  In considering
    the  matter  outside  the  Rules  I  adopt  the  five  stage   approach
    recommended in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and I also refer, as necessary, to
    other case law where relevant, as indicated below.

19. The appellant cannot satisfy the provisions of  paragraph  284  of  the
    Immigration Rules even though it is accepted that he was granted  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom as the husband of his sponsor in  2012  and
    the respondent accepts that the parties intend to live permanently with
    each other as spouses and the marriage  is  subsisting.   No  issue  is
    taken  with  accommodation  or  maintenance  under  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 284.  However, the appellant falls foul of the provisions set
    out in sub-paragraph (ix)(a) of the Rule because he did not provide the
    respondent with an English language test certificate  in  speaking  and
    listening from an  English  language  test  provider  approved  by  the
    respondent.  The exceptions to the provision of such a  certificate  do
    not apply.  In particular it cannot be said that there are  exceptional
    circumstances which  would  prevent  the  applicant  from  meeting  the
    requirement.

20. The fact is that the applicant took an  unapproved  test  provided  the
    wrong test certificate.  Although he  blames  his  representatives  for
    misleading him in this respect, there is no evidence to suggest that he
    has taken any action against those representatives nor can  I  conclude
    that there are any other  circumstances  which  might  be  regarded  as
    exceptionally  compassionate  which  could   exclude   him   from   the
    requirement.  The applicant claims that he could not sit a test with an
    approved provider after he was aware of the refusal of his  application
    because the respondent held his passport which would have  been  needed
    to support the  test  application.   However,  the  appellant  has  not
    satisfied me that he took steps to contact the respondent to enable his
    passport to be provided so that he could make  an  application  or,  at
    least, to confirm his immigration status to an approved provider at the
    time.

21. As to the possibility that the appellant's application might meet  with
    approval under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules,  paragraph  EX.1
    only might apply as the applicant cannot meet  the  specific  financial
    requirements of section EX-LTRP.  Under EX.1 the applicant must have  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the United
    Kingdom and is a British citizen and there are insurmountable obstacles
    to family life with that partner continuing outside the United Kingdom.
      The  term  "insurmountable  obstacles"  under  the  rule  means  very
    significant difficulties which would be faced by the applicant or their
    partner in continuing their family life outside the UK and which  could
    not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
    or their partner (EX.2.).

22. It is suggested that there are such  insurmountable  obstacles  because
    the sponsor has no connections with Pakistan.   In  her  statement  the
    sponsor says that she cannot live in Pakistan as it is  a  country  she
    does not know about and she would not want to live  there  because  she
    was born and bred in the United Kingdom.  However, it is  difficult  to
    see how such a statement can amount to an insurmountable obstacle  when
    it is evident that  she  entered  into  an  arranged  marriage  with  a
    Pakistani national no doubt  at  her  parents'  request.  The  marriage
    ceremony took place in Pakistan and her husband is a Pakistani national
    with family members living there.  The photographs in  the  appellant's
    bundle do not suggest that the appellant and his sponsor are  a  couple
    who would in any way look unusual in Pakistani  society.   Indeed,  the
    photographs show the sponsor in traditional  Asian  dress.  It  is  not
    suggested that the appellant cannot speak  a  language  of  Pakistan  a
    country  which  she  has  evidently   visited   despite   her   British
    nationality.  I  do  not  conclude  that  there  will  be   significant
    difficulties in her continuing her family life  in  that  country  from
    where her own family originate.

23. As I am not satisfied that the appellant cannot meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules I consider the claim on human  rights  grounds
    outside them.  If the  parties  are  separated  because  the  appellant
    returns to Pakistan without his wife  then,  applying  the  five  stage
    Razgar tests, I conclude that removal  of  the  appellant  will  be  an
    interference with his family life which the respondent accepts  exists.
    It will also have consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage
    the operation of Article 8 because, in particular, I bear in mind  that
    the parties have lived together in UK for two years as husband and wife
    and the sponsor expresses no enthusiasm to  go  to  live  in  Pakistan.
    Bearing in mind that the respondent's decision is  in  accordance  with
    the law, the issue is, therefore,  whether  or  not  that  decision  is
    proportionate.

24. In reaching my conclusions about proportionality I have regard  to  the
    provisions of Section 117B of  the  2014  Act.   In  particular,  I  am
    required to consider that it is in the public interest  that  a  person
    who seeks to remain in the United Kingdom is  able  to  speak  English.
    Although the appellant has  shown  that  he  has  obtained  an  English
    language qualification, I cannot conclude that his standard of  English
    excludes the operation of Section 117B.  He has a  qualification  which
    is not approved by the respondent and has not taken steps to show  that
    he does have the required qualification.

25. However, I also have to consider that, if the appellant now returns  to
    Pakistan and has to make a fresh application, he will have to show that
    he complies with  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM,  particularly  the
    financial requirements, which he says he cannot meet  at  present.   He
    also asserts that it would be disproportionate to expect him to  return
    to Pakistan to make that entry clearance application on the  basis  set
    out in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40.  I have already indicated  that  I  am
    not satisfied that the parties have shown that it would be unreasonable
    to expect the sponsor to move to Pakistan so that the parties can enjoy
    their  family  life  there.   Additionally,  the  Upper  Tribunal   has
    commented on the application of Chikwamba in R (On the  Application  of
    Chen) acknowledging  that  there  may  be  cases  where  there  are  no
    insurmountable obstacles for  enjoyment  of  family  life  outside  the
    United Kingdom but where temporary separation may be  disproportionate.
    However, I do not conclude that this is one such case.   There  are  no
    children involved and the parties have known or  ought  to  have  known
    from the outset that there was no right for them to choose the  country
    in which their family life could be enjoyed.  I do  not  regard  it  as
    significant that the appellant claims it will be difficult for  him  to
    make a successful application to return to UK because of the  financial
    requirements which he concedes he cannot meet at present, when  it  has
    not been shown that the parties cannot continue to enjoy  their  family
    life in Pakistan.

26. The failure of the appellant  to  obtain  the  right  English  language
    qualification is  not  simply  a  technical  breach  of  the  Rules  as
    representative's claim because, unless an applicant takes the  approved
    test the required level of his knowledge of the English  language  will
    remain uncertain.  The reasons for the requirement to speak English are
    now set out in section 117 of the 2002 Act which makes it clear that  a
    refusal decision based on a failure to  show  that  an  individual  can
    speak English is in the public interest.

27. For the reasons I have given I dismiss the appeal  on  immigration  and
    human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on a  point  of  law.
I set aside the  decision  and  re-make  it  by  dismissing  the  appeal  on
immigration and human rights grounds.



Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested  nor  do  I  consider  it  appropriate  in  this
appeal.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal there can be no fees award.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
