
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45181/2014
                                                               IA/45187/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 October 2015                   |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                          (1) MR MUHAMMAD MUDDASSAR
                            (2) MRS NAZIA KHATOON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sharma, counsel, instructed by Maher & Co.
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity direction has been made in these proceedings and none  was
    requested. I therefore make no such order.

 2. The Appellants are husband and wife; they are citizens of Pakistan. The
    First  Appellant  had  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant  under  the  Points  Based  Scheme.  The  Second
    Appellant is his dependent.   They  appealed  against  the  refusal  of
    further leave to remain. Their appeals  were  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Britton under the Immigration Rules and on human  rights
    grounds. The Appellants were  granted  permission  to  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal.

 3. At a hearing on 11 August 2015, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  and  I
    found the First-tier Tribunal Judge had made an error  of  law  in  his
    approach to the marketing material adduced by the First  Appellant.  We
    found that the Judge had made a material error of law in  his  approach
    to that material.  We did not accept the  three  remaining  grounds  of
    appeal and, as a result, set aside the Judge's decision as regards  the
    marketing material and the Judge's findings at paragraphs 27 -  37  and
    39. We directed that the appeal against the refusal of further leave to
    remain, with specific reference to paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) of  Appendix
    A to the Immigration Rules, be heard  afresh  in  this  Tribunal.   The
    findings and decision with regard to Article 8 (paragraph 40)  and  the
    issue of fairness (at paragraph 38) were preserved.

 4. The matter therefore came before me on 13 October  2015  at  a  resumed
    hearing. The Appellant attended the hearing and gave oral evidence.  He
    was cross-examined by the  Respondent's  representative  and  his  oral
    evidence is noted in my record of proceedings. I  was  invited  by  his
    representative to take into account the documents which were before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge in making my findings on the issue of whether
    the First Appellant fulfilled the criteria in  paragraph  41-SD(e)(iii)
    of the Immigration Rules. I also  heard  the  submissions  of  the  two
    representatives.

 5. At the outset of the hearing, Mr Sharma, for the Appellants,  indicated
    that it would be helpful to know whether the constitutionality argument
    put forward at the First-tier Tribunal would  be  addressed  by  me.  I
    referred him to Judge Chalkley's and my reasons for finding an error of
    law (paragraph 3 of that decision) and indicated that  the  sole  issue
    before me was whether the First Appellant  fulfilled  the  criteria  in
    paragraph 41-SD.  He invited me to make further findings in  line  with
    s24(a) and(b) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act  2007.  This
    provides that  "in  acting  under  subsection  (2)(b)(ii)  [remaking  a
    decision], the Upper Tribunal .. may make any decision which the First-
    tier Tribunal could make if the First-tier Tribunal were re-making  the
    decision, and ... may make  such  findings  of  fact  as  it  considers
    appropriate".   Mr Sharma referred me to the guidance at  paragraph  39
    of R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33 and to Pankina v SSHD[2010] EWCA  Civ
    719.  He submitted that paragraph 41-SD(e) was not enforceable  because
    the Respondent had failed to lay the relevant changes to that paragraph
    before Parliament as required. This failure fell into  statutory  error
    and rendered the amended paragraph  unenforceable.  He  submitted  that
    s3(2) Immigration Act  1971  required  the  Respondent  to  follow  the
    "negative resolution procedure" and that, the Respondent having  failed
    to follow that procedure in this case, the changes to  the  Immigration
    Rules, insofar as they were relied upon by the Respondent to refuse the
    First Appellant's application, were unenforceable; he  argued  that  it
    was open to this Tribunal to make a finding that the decision to refuse
    the application under that paragraph was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law.  However, that submission takes no account of the fact that  Judge
    Chalkley and I have already made a finding that the error of  law  made
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge is limited  to  his  approach  to  the
    marketing material.   It is not therefore appropriate to  address  that
    issue again. This  decision  is  therefore  confined  to  remaking  the
    decision as to whether the First Appellant has demonstrated he  fulfils
    the criteria in paragraph 41-SD(d)(iii).

 6. The First Appellant's  oral  evidence  is  that,  with  regard  to  the
    advertising material at pages 33-34 of his bundle,  some  leaflets  had
    been delivered on 9 and 10 July 2014, the rest being  delivered  later.
    He had contracted with Samir Art on 10 July 2014.  He told  me  he  and
    his partner had previously printed about 200 leaflets on  their  office
    printer but they had  been  busy  preparing  contracts  with  potential
    clients and had thought it better to  hire  someone  to  print  further
    leaflets. He told me that Samir Art had provided  him  with  about  100
    leaflets on 10 July; they were unable to provide more leaflets on  that
    day because they were busy. The First Appellant had provided Samir  Art
    with the format used on their system and it was this which was used  to
    print the initial 100 leaflets on 10 July.

 7. It was pointed out to the First appellant that the  invoice  issued  by
    Samir Art stated that the proof would be ready on 11 July and  the  job
    ready on 13 July.  He  was  asked  to  explain  this,  given  his  oral
    evidence that copies had been provided on 10 July.  The First Appellant
    said that the format had already been printed in their office on 9 July
    and Samir Art had been asked to print using that existing format; as  a
    result they printed about 100.  The First Appellant had given  some  of
    those to Executive Services as they were distributing that day.

 8. The First Appellant said that the reference in the Samir Art invoice to
    the job being ready on 13 July 2014 had arisen because Samir  Art  were
    very busy and had been unable to  produce  all  the  leaflets  straight
    away; they had produced an initial batch of 100 and completed  the  job
    on 13 July.  The First Appellant said that the leaflets provided on  13
    July were slightly different to those provided on 10 July. Under cross-
    examination, it was pointed out to the First Appellant  that  his  oral
    evidence was that he had asked Samir  Art  for  100  leaflets  but  the
    invoice referred to providing 250.  The First Appellant told me that he
    had asked for 250 but that only 100 were provided on 10 July.

 9. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted  that,  with  regard  to  paragraph  41-
    SD(e)(iii)(1)  and  the  requirement  for  advertising  and   marketing
    material,  there  was  no  evidence  before   the   decision-maker   of
    advertising material being published or distributed. She submitted that
    the only evidence was flyers or advertising material (pages 33  and  34
    of the Appellants' bundle).  She submitted that,  to  comply  with  the
    Rules, the First Appellant had to  show  that  the  leaflets  had  been
    printed and distributed locally or nationally.  The First Appellant had
    not done this: he had given oral evidence  but  had  not  produced  the
    requisite documents. The evidence was that leaflets were distributed in
    Slough, the date of the invoice for distribution  being  9  July  2014.
    That invoice did not, she submitted, refer to the date of distribution.

10. As regard  the  online  advertisements,  the  parties'  representatives
    agreed  that  the  documents  submitted  by  the  Appellants  with  the
    application were not included in the Respondent's bundle.   Indeed  the
    First Appellant refers in his  witness  statement  to  these  documents
    being  missing  from  the  Respondent's   bundle.    The   Respondent's
    representative pointed out that  those  documents  in  the  Appellants'
    bundle were dated August 2014 and did not  cover  a  continuous  period
    starting prior to 11 July 2014. Nor was there  evidence  of  the  First
    Appellant's business website being in existence prior to 11 July 2014.

11. The Respondent's representative sought, in the  course  of  making  her
    submissions, to adduce evidence of an internet search undertaken by the
    Respondent in the course of making her decisions on  the  applications.
    This application should have been made earlier and certainly before the
    Appellants' case had been concluded. I therefore refused it.

12. The Appellant's representative submitted that the Respondent had  taken
    no point with regard to the contracts which had been  provided  by  the
    First Appellant. With regard to sub-paragraph (iii), he submitted  that
    the outcome of the appeal hinged on the definition of "published".   It
    could be defined as being to print and make available for  sale  or  to
    make public.  Alternatively,  it  could  be  defined  as  printing  and
    distributing the material. On the face of the two invoices,  the  First
    Appellant  had  provided   documentary   evidence   of   printing   and
    distribution prior to 11 July 2014.  The First Appellant had given oral
    evidence to explain the documents.  He submitted that it  was  relevant
    that the oral evidence of the First Appellant had not  been  tested  by
    the Respondent. It was accepted for the Appellants that the documentary
    evidence relating to website material post-dated  the  application  and
    could not  be  taken  into  consideration.  The  Appellants'  secondary
    submission  was  that  the  amendment  to  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    unconstitutional (see above).

13. Paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) requires that the applicant must  provide  "one
    or more of the following specified documents covering (either  together
    or individually) a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014  up
    to no earlier than three months before the date of his application".

14. It is not submitted for the Appellants that they have provided  any  of
    the material covered by sub-paragraphs (iii)(2), (3) and (4). The First
    Appellant  does  not  dispute  that  he  has  been  unable  to  provide
    contemporaneous evidence of "article(s) or online links  to  article(s)
    in a newspaper or other publication showing the applicant's  name  (and
    the name of the business if  applicable)  together  with  the  business
    activity, ... information from a trade fair, or  personal  registration
    with a UK trade body linked to the applicant's occupation".   There  is
    no such  material  pre-dating  11  July  2014  in  the  Appellants'  or
    Respondent's bundles; the only such material post-dates 11 July 2014.

15. I therefore focus on the issue of whether the First Appellant  provided
    with his application  any  of  the  material  listed  in  sub-paragraph
    (iii)(1).  The First Appellant was required to produce:

         (iii) one or more of the  following  specified  documents  covering
         (either together or individually) a  continuous  period  commencing
         before 11 July 2014 up to no earlier than three months  before  the
         date of his application:

             (1) advertising or marketing material, including printouts  of
             online  advertising,  that  has  been  published  locally   or
             nationally, showing the applicant's name (and the name of  the
             business if applicable) together with  the  business  activity
             or, where his business is trading online, confirmation of  his
             ownership of the domain name of the business's website."

16. In considering the evidence I bear in mind the guidance in Ahmed  &  Or
    (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365 (IAC).

17. The First Appellant submitted  with  his  application  advertising  and
    marketing material in the form of leaflets. It is not suggested by  the
    Respondent that these do not include the First  Appellant's  name,  the
    name of his business or the business activity. It is now  submitted  by
    the Respondent's representative that there is no  evidence  that  these
    documents were published locally or nationally prior to 11  July  2014.
    However, I note from the reasons for refusal that the Respondent listed
    various specific reasons why she did not  consider  that  the  evidence
    submitted in relation to marketing and  advertising  material  did  not
    cover a continuous period commending before 11 July  2014,  as  follows
    (and I summarise):

      i) The print-out from www.gumtree.com was dated 25 August 2014.

     ii) The print-out from www.friday-ad.co.uk was dated 25 August 2014 and
         the Respondent had  been  unable  to  find  the  First  Appellant's
         business when conducting a search on the website.

    iii) The Respondent was unable to determine the dates on which the First
         Appellant's advertising had been posted on the websites.

     iv) Although the business website showed  the  First  Appellant's  team
         member and business partner as the owner of the domain it  had  not
         been created prior to 11 July 2014.

18. It is specifically stated in the reasons for refusal letter that it was
    for the above reasons that the First Appellant had not demonstrated  he
    met the requirements of the Rules for the  award  of  points.   All  of
    thtese reasons relate to the lack of internet  material  pre-dating  11
    July 2014. There is no reference at all in the reasons for  refusal  to
    the existence of leaflets and the two invoices regarding  printing  and
    distribution although the Respondent's representative did  not  dispute
    that those leaflets and invoices were produced with the application.  I
    therefore find that they were so  produced.   The  inference  from  the
    absence of reference to these in the reasons for refusal letter is that
    either there was no issue with the advertising  material  or  that  the
    decision-maker had failed  to  note  the  material  and  take  it  into
    account.

19.  The  issues  are  whether  the  First  Appellant's  leaflets  cover  a
    continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014 and whether  they  had
    been published locally or nationally.  The Respondent's  case  is  that
    the documents do not demonstrate this. The First  Appellant  says  that
    some leaflets were printed by his business prior to 11 July, some  were
    also printed by Samir Art on 10 July and that leaflets  were  delivered
    in the Central Slough area by Executive Services prior to 11 July 2014.



20. The invoice issued by Samir Art is dated 10 July 2014 and refers to 250
    leaflets and a price of �25 which was paid in cash.  It states that the
    proof would be ready in the afternoon of 11 July 2014 and the job would
    be ready in the afternoon of 13 July 2014.  The  invoice  is  annotated
    with the word "email" adjacent to the "proof ready" box on the  invoice
    which  suggests  that  the  proof  was  to  be  emailed  to  the  First
    Appellant's business (which is the addressee on the invoice).  The "job
    ready" box on the invoice also contains the number "2" which  has  been
    circled; this is adjacent to a circle around "pm". No  explanation  has
    been given for this but it appears to suggest that  the  job  would  be
    ready at 2pm on 13 July 2014. The invoice has a standard annotation  as
    follows: "you must check the proof on the date above otherwise we  will
    be unable to complete the job on time".  The First  Appellant  told  me
    that Samir Art had printed 100 leaflets using the format which had been
    prepared by the First Appellant on his business premises and  that  the
    rest of the order comprised reformatted leaflets produced by Samir Art.
     However, there is no reference to this in the invoice issued by  Samir
    Art.  Indeed the content of the invoice points to  the  job  being  one
    single task, rather than, as the First Appellant claims, a job  in  two
    parts (ie the printing of 100 leaflets to the First Appellant's  format
    and the preparation of a proof and printing of further leaflets.   This
    invoice does not demonstrate that some of the leaflets had been printed
    and returned to the customer on 10 July 2014.   Given  the  content  of
    this invoice, the Respondent would have been entitled to conclude  that
    this document did not constitute documentary evidence of  the  printing
    of leaflets by Samir Art prior to 11 July 2014.  Whilst  I  accept  the
    First Appellant's evidence as to the printing of leaflets prior  to  11
    July 2014, this invoice does not  demonstrate  that  and  it  does  not
    therefore fulfil the  criteria  in  paragraph  41-SD  in  that  regard,
    notwithstanding his oral evidence.

21. The invoice issued by Executive Services  is  dated  9  July  2014  and
    addressed to the  First  Appellant's  business.  The  authenticity  and
    reliability of this invoice is not challenged  by  the  Respondent.  It
    states that the invoice was issued for  delivery  of  leaflets  in  the
    Slough area. Whilst it does not provide the date  of  delivery,  it  is
    dated 9 July 2014 and refers  to  delivery  in  the  past  tense  which
    suggests that delivery had already taken  place  by  the  date  it  was
    issued.  This is consistent with the First  Appellant's  oral  evidence
    that some leaflets had been delivered on 9 July  2014.  Given  this,  I
    find that the document is a reliable one and  that  some  leaflets  had
    been printed and distributed prior to issue of the invoice  on  9  July
    2014. This constitutes local publication.  For this reason, I find that
    the First Appellant had  complied  with  the  terms  of  paragraph  41-
    SD(iii)(1) in providing with his application advertising material which
    had been published locally prior to 11 July 2014.

22. Paragraph 41-SD(iii)(1) is drafted in  the  alternative  to  allow  for
    businesses  which  trade  online.  As  the  First  Appellant   provided
    marketing material published locally, there was no requirement  on  him
    to provide confirmation of ownership of the business' domain name.

23. For these reasons I am satisfied the First Appellant had fulfilled  the
    criteria  in  paragraph  41-SD(iii)(1)  of   the   Immigration   Rules.
    Therefore the refusal of the First Appellant's application for  failure
    to comply with that paragraph was in breach of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Second Appellant's appeal is dependent on the outcome of the  First
    Appellant's appeal, the Second Appellant being the partner of a  points
    based system migrant. Her appeal is therefore also successful under the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

24.  These appeals are allowed under the Immigration Rules.


Signed   Date 19 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeals  and  because  fees  have  been  paid  or  are
payable, I have considered making fee award and have  decided  to  make  fee
awards of any fees which have been paid or may be payable for the  following
reason: the appeals have been successful on the grounds in  the  notices  of
appeal.


Signed   Date 19 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

