
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45655/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14 December 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FREEMAN
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARKUS QC


                                   Between

                               DRITON ZHEGROVA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Symes, Counsel
For the Appellant:     Mrs Willocks-Briscoe


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal from a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  20
    April 2015, upholding a decision by the Secretary  of  State  dated  30
    October 2014 refusing the Appellant's application for a residence card.



 2. The Appellant had married a Slovakian national on 17 August  2007.   He
    was granted entry clearance to the UK as a spouse of an  EEA  national,
    from 10 October 2007 to 15 April 2008 and subsequently extended  to  26
    August 2014.  On 25 August 2014 the Appellant  applied  for  a  further
    residence card. By then he and his spouse had separated, having done so
    less than one year after he entered the UK.  They subsequently divorced
    on 28 October 2014.  The  Respondent  refused  the  application  on  30
    October 2014.  Amongst other grounds for refusal,  the  Respondent  was
    not satisfied that the Appellant's former spouse  had  been  exercising
    Treaty rights in the UK at the relevant time because the Appellant  had
    not provided any evidence that she had been working (this was the  only
    basis on which it was contended that she was exercising Treaty rights).



 3.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant's
    representative sought a direction that the Respondent make enquiries as
    to whether she had been working at the relevant time and to adjourn the
    hearing.  The First-tier Tribunal refused to do so, because  the  Judge
    decided that the Appellant should have made the application earlier.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the Appellant's appeal. The  tribunal
    concluded that it was unclear whether  the  Appellant  and  his  former
    spouse had ever lived together but that, even if they had, the marriage
    had broken down less than one year after he came to the UK  and  so  he
    had not resided with her in the UK for at least one  year  after  their
    marriage.  In any event, the Appellant had failed  to  prove  that  his
    former wife was exercising her Treaty rights in the UK at the  time  of
    the divorce.

 5. Permission to appeal was given by a judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    An appeal hearing took place before Upper Tribunal Judges  Freeman  and
    Markus  QC  on  6  August  2015.   Issues  arose  upon  which   further
    submissions were  required,  and  so  the  appeal  was  adjourned  with
    directions identifying the further issues as follows:

         "a.  EEA law  Was the judge right to  hold,  in  effect,  that  the
         appellant needed to establish at least one year's residence in this
         country with his former wife, as a condition precedent to getting a
         retained right of residence? (see  Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 [the EEA Regulations]  reg.  10  (5)(d)(i));
         and

         b.   Article 8    Was the judge right to hold  that  refusal  of  a
         residence card gave the appellant no right of appeal under  Article
         8, without any removal decision?"

 6. The adjourned hearing took place before Judges Freeman and Markus QC at
    the Royal Courts of Justice on 14 December 2015.   Certain issues  were
    by then agreed as follows:

          a) The Respondent conceded the one year's residence issue.

          b) The Appellant conceded that  the  decision  of  the  Court  of
             Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1233 resolved the Article  8  issue
             against him.

 7. In the light of the  Respondent's  concession  the  Appellant's  appeal
    would succeed if, and only if,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a
    material error of law in refusing to adjourn the hearing  in  order  to
    require the Respondent to make further  inquiries  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant's former spouse had been economically active at the  time  of
    their divorce.  If there  had  been  no  error  in  that  respect,  the
    tribunal's conclusion that she had not been economically  active  meant
    that the Appellant could not establish entitlement to a residence  card
    because his former wife was not at the relevant time a qualified person
    as required by regulation 10(5)(a).

 8. We therefore set out in a little more detail the factual background  to
    that aspect of this appeal.

 9. In the letter dated 21  August  2014  in  support  of  the  Appellant's
    application for a residence card, the Appellant's solicitor had written
    that the Appellant's former wife had worked in the UK at the time their
    marriage and continued to do so, but that they were not on  good  terms
    and he could not produce any evidence  regarding  her  employment.  The
    Respondent was referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  Amos
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 552  which
    was said to be authority for the proposition that the Respondent  would
    "have to consider assisting a retained rights of residence applicant to
    establish whether their estranged EEA spouse had been  and  remained  a
    qualified person. Reference is made in Amos to the power under s.40  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 to obtain  information  from  other  government
    departments, such as the Department of Work and Pensions."  The  letter
    then referred to Home Office policy, which was  to  make  enquiries  of
    other government departments in order to assist in establishing a right
    of residence, where the applicant has provided evidence that they  were
    the victim of domestic violence, and cannot provide  evidence  relating
    to  their  sponsor's  nationality  or  treaty  rights;  or  where   the
    relationship has ended acrimoniously, but the  applicant  has  provided
    evidence to show that they  have  made  every  effort  to  provide  the
    required documents.  The Appellant's solicitor requested the Respondent
    to make enquiries regarding his former wife's  employment,  as  he  had
    been unable to get the required evidence.

10. In the refusal letter, dated 30  October  2014,  the  Respondent  wrote
    "Whilst every attempt  has  been  made  by  the  UK  Border  Agency  to
    establish your EEA family member's employment the burden of proof rests
    with the applicant to provide such evidence and you have failed  to  do
    so."

11. The First-tier Tribunal hearing took place on 10 April 2015.   For  the
    first time, at the hearing, the Appellant sought a direction  that  the
    Respondent make enquiries of other government  departments  as  to  his
    former wife's employment.  The First-tier Tribunal refused  to  make  a
    direction, for the following reasons:

         "The Application was made  in  August  2014,  the  decision  on  30
         October  2014.   The  Appellant  was  still  represented  when   he
         submitted his Grounds of Appeal on 12.11.14 when he made no mention
         of a challenge to the Respondent's  assertion  that  she  had  made
         every attempt to establish his former wife's employment  situation.
         If he did not accept that assertion, that was the appropriate  time
         to challenge the Respondent  on  it  and/or  ask  for  evidence  of
         efforts made.  The Appellant had nearly 6 months since the  Refusal
         to raise this issue with the Respondent and he  had  known  of  the
         Hearing Date for 3 months.  No prior application  to  the  Tribunal
         was made for an adjournment, or for a direction to be made  to  the
         Respondent, the issue being realised for the first time on the  day
         of the Hearing itself. In  these  circumstances  I  concluded  that
         fairness and justice did not demand  that  I  make  Directions  and
         adjourn the case."

12. The tribunal  proceeded  to  make  its  findings,  including  that  the
    Appellant's former wife was not exercising her Treaty rights in the  UK
    at the time of the divorce.

13. In Amos the  applicant,  seeking  to  establish  a  retained  right  of
    residence, had been unable to obtain evidence that her husband had been
    exercising Treaty rights at the time of divorce.  The Court  of  Appeal
    rejected her contention that the Secretary of  State  was  required  to
    assist her to establish her case, saying at paragraph [34]:

         "The procedure in  appeals  before  the  tribunal  are  essentially
         adversarial; the applicant seeks to show that the decision  of  the
         Secretary of State was unlawful or otherwise wrong.  The  Secretary
         of State must present the facts as known to her fairly, and seek  a
         decision of the tribunal that accords  with  the  law,  but  to  go
         beyond those requirements would be irrational; it would be wrong to
         require the Secretary of State to take steps to prove that her  own
         decision was wrong."

14. In concluding that the tribunal had not  erred  in  law  the  Court  of
    Appeal took into account that the applicant could have  applied  for  a
    witness summons requiring her ex-husband to attend to give evidence, or
    could have sought a direction from the tribunal requiring the Secretary
    of State to provide information, but she had done neither.

15. The Court of  Appeal  rejected  the  applicant's  submission  that  the
    decision of  the  House  of  Lords  in  Kerr  v  Department  of  Social
    Development [2004] 1 WLR 1372 was authority for the proposition that it
    was for the Home Secretary to produce documentation available  to  HMRC
    and the Department for Work and Pensions which would establish that her
    former husband had worked.  Kerr concerned  a  social  security  appeal
    which, as Baroness Hale said in her speech, was not truly analogous  to
    a lis inter partes and required investigation by the Secretary of State
    to determine entitlement.  In any event, the judgment in Kerr  was  not
    authority for the proposition that one department is under  a  duty  to
    obtain information from a different department or authority.

16. Amos does not assist the Appellant in this appeal. On the  contrary  it
    establishes  that  there  is  no  duty  on  the  Respondent  to  obtain
    information from other government departments to establish  whether  an
    applicant's former spouse had worked.  The Respondent was not under  an
    obligation to make enquiries of other government departments  in  order
    to discover whether the Appellant's former spouse had been  working  at
    the relevant time.

17. It is true that the Respondent's policy was to seek such information in
    certain circumstances, but the refusal letter  in  the  present  states
    that the Respondent had  made  efforts  to  establish  the  Appellant's
    former spouse's employment.  The  Appellant's  complaint  is  that  the
    Respondent had not provided detail of the efforts and that should  have
    been taken into account by the First-tier Tribunal in deciding  whether
    to make the direction sought.  The Appellant relies on the Respondent's
    obligation under rule 24(1)(d) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal)(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014  to  provide  the
    Tribunal with "any other unpublished document which is referred to in a
    document mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) or which is relied upon by  the
    respondent".  The documents mentioned  in  sub-paragraph  (a)  are  the
    notice of decision and reasons.

18. We reject this submission.  The refusal  letter  did  not  mention  any
    other unpublished  document  regarding  the  Respondent's  attempts  to
    obtain information about the Appellant's former spouse's employment nor
    did the Respondent otherwise rely  upon  any  such  document.   In  any
    event, the First-tier Tribunal's reasons make  it  clear  that  it  was
    simply too late to complain about any failure by the Respondent  or  to
    seek a direction.  It does not  matter  that  the  tribunal  failed  to
    mention the specific rule under  which  information  should  have  been
    provided.  That was a decision which was open to the  tribunal  and  it
    did not err in law in refusing to  make  a  direction  or  adjourn  the
    hearing.

19. It follows that this appeal is dismissed.


Signed:  Date 13 January 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Kate Markus QC
