

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/45917/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester IAC                    |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 31st March 2016                         |On 7th April 2016              |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             AIDELOGIE IGHODARO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:     Mr J Holt, counsel, instructed by Westkin
Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. In a decision promulgated on 7th May 2015, First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      Levin allowed the appeal of Mr Ighodaro against the  decision  of  the
      SSHD refusing to grant him leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
      Migrant and to remove him to Nigeria under s47 Immigration and  Asylum
      Act 2006 dated 17th October 2014.


   2. Mr Ighodaro first arrived in the UK as a student on a visa valid until
      31st January 2012. He applied for and was  granted  further  leave  to
      remain on similar conditions until 31st May 2012. On 21st August  2012
      he was granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post study  work)  Migrant
      until 21st August 2014. On 21st August 2014  he  applied  for  further
      leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  and  it  is  the
      refusal of that application that led to this appeal. Mr  Ighodaro  was
      awarded 0 points for funds disposable in the UK (as oppose to  the  25
      claimed) on the basis that on the documents he had provided he did not
      qualify for points in that area. In particular, the SSHD  stated  that
      he had not submitted  a  letter  from  a  legal  representative  which
      validated his signature on the third party declaration of  Mrs  Agatha
      Egbeziemi  Obadan  and  had  therefore  not  submitted  the  specified
      evidence as listed under paragraph 41-SD to establish he had the funds
      he was claiming. As a consequence, the SSHD had not  awarded  him  any
      point for Attributes.

   3. The SSHD was  not  represented  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
      provided written submissions. In addition to the  reason  for  refusal
      set out in the decision she also relied upon a requirement  to  comply
      with paragraph 41-SD(d)(i)(3).

   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge considered the appeal in  three  stages.
      He made findings, which are not disputed, that the appellant  provided
      a declaration from a third  party  which  meets  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 41-SD (d)(i)(3). He found that the lawyers' letter confirmed
      the validity of the third party's signature but does not  confirm  the
      validity of the signature of Mr Ighodaro.  He then considered  whether
      paragraph 41-SD(d)(ii) required the legal  representative  to  confirm
      the validity of the signature of Mr  Ighodaro,  as  contended  by  the
      SSHD.


   5. The First-tier Tribunal correctly identified that this was a  question
      of construction. He set out the competing arguments and concluded that
      41-SD (d)(ii) did not require the legal representative to confirm  the
      validity of Mr Ighodaro's signature for the following reasons:

             22.  .....
             (a)  Firstly if  the  letter  were  required  to  confirm  the
             validity of the applicant's signature then I  find  it  should
             have been specified as one of the requirements of  the  letter
             listed in sub-paragraphs (1) to (7).
             (b)  Secondly, the Rules requires the  letter  to  be  from  a
             legal representative permitted  to  practice  in  the  country
             where the third party money is. Given that the third party and
             the money is in Nigeria and [Mr Ighodaro]  is  in  the  United
             Kingdom the requirement for the legal representative to verify
             [Mr Ighodaro's] signature makes no sense whatsoever.
             (c)  thirdly,  the  requirement  of  a  letter  from  a  legal
             representative to verify the  signature  of  the  third  party
             funding the application, particularly in  circumstances  where
             the third party is frequently abroad, is to  ensure  that  the
             funding is genuinely available and that the declaration of the
             availability of funding has been genuinely given by the  third
             party.  It  is  difficult  to  see  what  useful  purpose  the
             confirmation of [Mr Ighodaro's} signature can  serve  and  the
             Rules should be construed in as  purposeful  manner.  In  that
             regard I have followed the findings of the Upper  Tribunal  in
             the case of Durrani (Entrepreneurs; bank  letters:  evidential
             flexibility) [2014] UKUT 00295 (IAC).......
             (d) Fourthly, the Rule at best is  ambiguous  and  accordingly
             any ambiguity should  be  construed  against  its  author  and
             therefore in favour of [Mr  Ighodaro]  (the  so-called  contra
             preferentem rule).


   6. The SSHD in her grounds seeking permission to  appeal  relies  on  the
      following assertions:
        Re 22 (a) - the First-tier Tribunal gave a speculative  opinion  as
        to what he thinks the Rules should have said as oppose to what they
        do say;
        Re 22 (b) - that the First-tier Tribunal judge  should  have  dealt
        with the Rule as printed and not whether in  his  opinion  it  made
        sense;
        Re 22 (c) - the comparison with Durrani was misconceived and in any
        event a purposive interpretation of the  immigration  rules  was  a
        misdirection in law; and
        Re 22(d) the contra preferentem rule was based on contract law  and
        had no place in immigration law.


   7. Both parties accepted that the point before me was a very narrow  one;
      there was no challenge to the factual matrix as  found  and  the  only
      issue was whether the legal representative was required to verify  the
      validity of Mr Ighodaro's signature on the third party declaration. 41-
      SD(d)(ii) is written in very specific terms:

         A letter from a legal representative, confirming the validity of
         signatures on each third-party declaration provided, which confirms
         that the declaration(s) from the third party or parties contains
         the signatures of the people stated. It can be a single letter
         covering all third-party permissions, or several letters from
         several legal representatives. It must be an original letter and
         not a copy, and it must be from a legal representative permitted to
         practise in the country where the third party or the money is. The
         letter must clearly show the following:
            (1) the name of the legal representative confirming the
            details,
            (2) the registration or authority of the legal representative
            to practise legally in the country in which the permission or
            permissions was or were given,
            (3) the date of the confirmation letter,
            (4) the applicant's name (and the name of the applicant's team
            partner's name where relevant) and, where (b) applies, that the
            applicant is a director of the business named in each third-
            party declaration,
            (5) the third party's name (which cannot be the legal
            representative themselves),
            (6) that the declaration from the third party is signed and
            valid, and
            (7) if the third party is not a Venture Capital Firm, Seed
            Funding Competition or UK or Devolved Government Department (or
            intermediary public body authorised to award funds from that
            Department), the number of the third party or their authorised
            representative's identity document (such as a passport or
            national identity card), the place of issue and dates of issue
            and expiry.


   8. The mandatory requirements are set out in sub paragraphs (1)  to  (7).
      It is not mandatory that the legal representative verify the signature
      of the Entrepreneur. There is reference at  the  commencement  of  41-
      SD(d)(ii) to 'confirming the validity  of  signatures  on  each  third
      party declaration provided, which confirms the declaration(s) from the
      third party or parties contains the signatures of the people  stated'.
      The respondent's submission before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that
      this  meant  that  the  legal  representative  must  confirm  all  the
      signatures on the third party declaration.


   9. Judge Levin considered this submission in the context of  the  reality
      of such documentation and  the  requirement  for  such  documentation.
      There are specific mandatory requirements in sub paragraphs (1) to (7)
      and this requirement is not amongst them. The  requirement  is  for  a
      legal representative in either the country where the third party is or
      where the money is. Since an applicant in Mr Ighodaro's  position  was
      not in the country where the money is or where the third party is, the
      judge was correct to say that in the context of  the  purpose  of  the
      rule which is to verify that the money does actually exist, then  such
      a requirement does not make sense. To reach an alternative  conclusion
      would permit indeed possibly require, a legal representative to  reach
      such a conclusion on at least one copy document because the  applicant
      was not present, such a course of verification not being permissible.

  10. In so far as the judge the contra preferentem rule,  this  is  not  of
      relevance. Such a rule is almost always applied to contracts where  an
      ambiguous clause has been inserted; the ambiguity is held against  the
      offerror of the clause. Although it can be said that the paragraph  of
      Appendix A in question may be ambiguous, it is very unlikely that  the
      contra  preferentem  rule  should  be  applied  when  considering  the
      construction of an Immigration Rule.

  11. In so far as the case of Durrani is relied upon  this  refers  to  the
      Rules  being  construed   reasonably   and   sensibly.   Durrani   was
      substantively concerned with the production of bank  letters  and  the
      potential position that  banks  were  being  placed  in  in  terms  of
      guarantees etc; that is not the case here; rather the Rule  should  be
      read sensibly and reasonably in terms of  the  purpose  of  the  Rule.
      There is no question of the judge having interpreted the Rules  as  he
      wished it to be or speculating as to its construction. In  so  far  as
      there was any ambiguity because of the use of the words  "confirm  the
      validity of signatures" this has to be read  with  the  whole  of  the
      Rule. When read in this manner there is no error of law in the  First-
      tier Tribunal judge's interpretation.

  12. There is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

  13. The appeal of the SSHD is dismissed.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set  aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal stands.



[pic]

                                    Date 31st March 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
