
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45011/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 August 2014                             |On 1st Sept 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN

                                   Between

                            Mrs Elizabeth Kisaiku
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Paxi-Cato, Counsel instructed by Augustine
                    Clement Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   The appellant has been granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid who,  by  a  determination
      promulgated on 20 May 2014, dismissed the appellant's appeal.


 2.  The judge was wrong to say at paragraph 1 of  the  determination  that
    the appeal was against a decision to refuse  leave  to  remain  because
    this was in fact an appeal against a decision to curtail leave to enter
    or remain as a visitor.

3.    At  paragraph  2  of  his  determination  the  judge  identified   the
    immigration decision as being contained in a letter dated  20  February
    2014.  However, that is not an immigration decision at all but a review
    by the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    decision to curtail leave.

4.   At paragraphs 6 and 10 of the determination the judge talks  about  the
    appellant overstaying but it was not part of the respondent's case that
    the appellant had overstayed any grant of leave.  The complaint of  the
    respondent was that the  applicant  had  used  a  multi-visit  visa  to
    effectively reside in this country but as no visit was  more  than  six
    months she  could  not  be  said  to  have  overstayed  any  particular
    admission or  grant  of  leave  as  a  visitor.   The  judge  therefore
    misunderstood not just the nature of the appeal before him but also the
    factual basis  upon  which  the  respondent  took  the  decision  under
    challenge.

5.   At paragraph 19 of the determination the judge says that the  appellant
    did not adhere to conditions of her leave under paragraph 41 of HC  395
    but the judge does not say in what way he finds her  to  have  been  in
    breach of her conditions of leave.  Also at paragraph 19 the judge says
    that the appellant is needed more by her grandchildren  in  Nigeria  so
    that the appellant "cannot persuade me" he said "to allow her to remain
    in this country."  I confess that I cannot see what  the  reasoning  is
    that leads to that conclusion or how that represents an arguably  sound
    basis upon which to dismiss this appeal.

6.   This is a confused and  wholly  inadequate  determination  that  simply
    fails to address the matters that were in issue  between  the  parties.
    The parties are entitled to see  that  the  judge  who  determines  the
    appeal understands what is in issue between them and that the judge has
    engaged properly with those issues.  That is not the case here.   There
    has been no real attempt to resolve the matters in  issue  between  the
    parties.  That is sufficient to demonstrate that the judge has made  an
    error of law in attempting to  determine  this  appeal  such  that  his
    decision cannot stand.

7.   Mr Walker who appears for the respondent quite properly does  not  seek
    to suggest otherwise. There has effectively been  no  determination  of
    the appeal at all by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There  has  been  no
    attempt to make proper findings of fact.  In  those  circumstances  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to the extent that the decision
    of the judge will be set aside and the appeal will be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for determination afresh by a judge other  than  Dr
    Majid.

Signed                                  Date 27 August 2014
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
