
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45727/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 April 2016                         |On 28 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ODUNAYO AYODEJI IBITOYE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss E King, Counsel, instructed by Trinity
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department. The appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria,  born  on  22  July
    1974.  However, for the sake  of  convenience  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were referred to in the proceedings before  the  first-
    tier Tribunal. The appellant  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse him further leave to remain as a spouse of a  Tier
    1 Points-Based Migrant.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Owens  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human
    Rights.

2.   The respondent appealed against the decision  and  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nicholson granted the respondent  permission  to  appeal  stating
    that it is arguable that the judge erred in placing significant  weight
    on private life because the judge was bound by Section 117B of the 2002
    Act as amended to place little weight on a private life established  at
    a time when the appellant's immigration status was precarious.   It  is
    therefore arguable that the weight attached to the appellant's  private
    life had a material bearing on the overall outcome of the decision.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  the  following  findings  in  her
    determination dated 29  September  2015.   She  notes  the  immigration
    history of the appellant at paragraph 23 which is that he  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 4 November 2010 as the dependant spouse of a  Tier  1
    Points Based Migrant and he was granted leave until 17 May 2015.  On  8
    May 2014 he submitted an application for indefinite leave to remain  at
    the same time as his wife as the spouse of a Tier 1  Migrant  and  this
    application was refused on 22 October.

4.   The judge noted that it is not in dispute that the appellant  is  in  a
    genuine relationship with his wife on whom he is dependent.  She stated
    that the appellant married his wife on 18 August 2001  in  Nigeria  and
    the couple lived in Lagos  together  prior  to  coming  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  They have been married for fourteen years and  the  appellant
    was granted leave to enter the UK as the dependant of his wife who  was
    a work permit holder.  At all times the appellant has remained lawfully
    in the United Kingdom as her dependant and they  continue  to  cohabit.
    They have two children both born in Nigeria, the first born on 23  July
    2003 who is almost 12 years and in year 7 at school, the  second  child
    born on 17 May 2005 who is now 10 years old and in year 5.

5.   The appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    because his application stands for refusal under paragraph 319E of  the
    Immigration Rules because of a caution which was given to the appellant
    for assault.

6. The judge then considered the appellant's appeal under Article 8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights and considered Razgar [2004] UKHL  27
   and stated that the appellant has established private life in the  United
   Kingdom because he has been in this country for five years and has worked
   here.  She found that his wife  also  has  private  life  in  the  United
   Kingdom and accepts that the eldest two children  have  also  established
   their own private life in this country.   She  found  that  they  have  a
   secure home life in  the  United  Kingdom  and  have  established  social
   networks in the United Kingdom and their workplace, school and community.



6.   The judge concluded that the appellant's removal  will  interfere  with
    the appellant's family and  private  life.   The  judge  considered  at
    paragraph 51 the public aim to be achieved with  reference  to  Section
    117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended by Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 and took  those  into
    account. She took into account ZH (Tanzania)  and  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The judge concluded  at
    paragraph 54:

         "I find that it would not be reasonable for  family  life  to  take
         place abroad. I find that the appellant's wife and his two children
         have all been granted indefinite leave  to  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom in recognition of their ties to the UK. I find that the two
         children are now rooted in the UK as they have  remained  here  for
         the last four and a half years  since  they  were  young  children.
         They are settled into  school  and  the  eldest  child  is  now  at
         secondary school.  The appellant's wife is  employed  and  able  to
         support the two children and she is receiving ongoing treatment  in
         respect of her mental health issues.  It would be difficult for the
         family to find a home and employment initially and  the  disruption
         would cause them considerable hardship and interfere  significantly
         with the two children's education and the appellant's wife's mental
         wellbeing. On this basis I find that in these circumstances that it
         would not be reasonable for the family to relocate as  a  whole  to
         Nigeria."

7.   The judge went on to consider  the  interests  of  the  children  as  a
    distinct and separate enquiry under Section 55 and said that they  have
    lived in this country for almost five years and  their  best  interests
    are to be brought up by both parents. It is  important  for  these  two
    children to have their father present because he is  their  main  carer
    when their mother becomes ill and their  mother  suffers  from  bipolar
    relapses and can become extremely unwell.

8.   The judge then considered the issue of proportionality and the  caution
    given to the appellant for assault and  said  that  the  appellant  had
    satisfied all the substantive requirements of the immigration rules but
    pursuant to paragraph 319E  he  stands  for  refusal  because  of  this
    caution which was given to him by  the  police  because  the  appellant
    assaulted his wife. In that respect he also considered the  explanation
    provided by the appellant that this caution was given at  a  time  when
    his  wife  was  having  a  bipolar  relapse.  The  judge  allowed   the
    appellant's appeal.

9.   The grounds of appeal state that at paragraph 54 of  the  determination
    the judge finds that it would not  be  reasonable  for  the  family  to
    relocate to Nigeria as a whole. The judge finds  that  the  appellant's
    wife is bipolar but there is no evidence that treatment is  unavailable
    in Nigeria.  There is no evidence that the  appellant  and  his  family
    would face harsh conditions in Nigeria and there is  no  evidence  that
    the appellant and his wife would be unable to find employment in  order
    to support  their  family  financially  upon  return.   They  are  both
    currently employed in the United Kingdom and there is no evidence  that
    the appellant and his wife have any family in Nigeria and if  they  do,
    whether that would be unable to support them upon return.

10.  The appellant and his wife would be returning to  conditions  that  are
    no different to that experienced by every other Nigerian family.    The
    judge has failed to identify any circumstances which would lead  to  an
    unjustifiably harsh outcome for the  appellant  and  his  family.   The
    judge made a material error of law when she did not take  into  account
    that little weight should be given to a private life established when a
    person's immigration status is precarious  or  unlawful  and  therefore
    little weight should be given to their private life as in the  case  of
    AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  where  Parliament  has
    drawn a sharp distinction between any period of  time  during  which  a
    person has been in the United Kingdom unlawfully and any period of time
    when the person's immigration status in the UK were merely precarious.

11.  At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is an error of law in the decision.   Mr  Melvin  relied  on  his
    grounds of appeal and said that the judge has not  considered  why  the
    appellant's circumstances are exceptional that she  should  be  granted
    leave under Article 8.

12.  Miss King stated that the judge saw that this is  a  family  life  case
    and took the best interests of the children into account.  She has also
    considered Section 117B and concluded that it  is  an  old  deportation
    case and the judge was entitled to reach the  findings  that  she  did.
    The judge found there would be unjustifiably harsh outcomes.  The  test
    is unjustifiably harsh outcome.  It is not necessarily compelling.

13.  The judge focused on the  appellant's  wife's  mental  health  and  has
    clearly dealt with the caution issued to the appellant for his assault.
     The wife should not be punished further by being required to leave the
    United Kingdom and return to Nigeria with her husband and children.

14.  Mr Melvin replied that  there  has  been  no  consideration  that  this
    family are Nigeria  citizens  and  ZH  (Tanzania)  applies  to  British
    citizens.

My Findings as to whether there is an Error of Law in the Determination

15.  There is no dispute that the judge correctly found that  the  appellant
    does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  in  that  he
    stands for refusal under paragraph 319E(a) due to the caution  that  he
    received after he assaulted his wife.

16.  The judge when considering Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights stated that it would be unreasonable for the  family  life
    to take place outside of the United Kingdom.  The judge  did  not  give
    adequate reasons as to why it would be unreasonable for the appellant's
    family life to continue to  take  place  in  Nigeria.  Nowhere  in  the
    determination is there recognition that  the  appellants  are  Nigerian
    citizens and not citizens of the United Kingdom.

17.  The judge was bound to  consider  whether  there  are  any  exceptional
    circumstances in this case which are not  covered  by  the  Immigration
    Rules which have been found to be Article 8 complaint.  She  failed  to
    identify the gap that possibly exists  between  where  the  Immigration
    Rules end and Article 8 begins.  There was no discussion or evidence in
    the determination in respect of what  family  the  appellants  have  in
    Nigeria and whether this family  might  be  able  to  support  them  in
    Nigeria,  initially  when  they  return.  The  judge  found  that  both
    appellants are working and the appellant's wife's bipolar condition can
    be treated in Nigeria.

18.  I therefore find that the judge has not considered this  appeal  within
    the law and the jurisprudence in that  there  must  be  something  more
    preventing the appellants to return to their home  country  other  than
    the choice of the appellants as to where they want  to  live.   If  the
    judge was to find that it would  be  unreasonably  harsh  for  them  to
    return to Nigeria, the judge must identify  evidence  to  support  that
    finding.  The mere fact that the appellant's wife has bipolar condition
    is not sufficient in itself for her to be granted  protection  in  this
    country. There was no evidence before the  judge  that  this  condition
    cannot be treated in Nigeria.

19.  In respect of the children they are  not  British  citizens,  they  are
    citizens of Nigeria and came to this country sometime after  they  were
    born.  They have not lived here for seven years and therefore the judge
    did not explain why these children's private lives cannot be replicated
    in Nigeria and the community and schools in that country.

20.  I find that there is a material error of law in  the  determination  by
    the judge's failure to detail the evidence  upon  which  she  made  the
    finding that it would not be reasonable for family life to  take  place
    in Nigeria.

21.  I therefore set aside the determination and  remake  it.   I  therefore
    find that I have been informed by Miss King that the appellant was  not
    represented at the First-tier Tribunal and therefore he should have  an
    opportunity for the evidence to be adduced about  his  and  his  wife's
    circumstances in Nigeria and any other evidence for this matter  to  be
    considered again.

Notice of Decision

22.  I therefore direct that the appeal be heard by the First-tier  Tribunal
    by a judge other than Judge Owens at the first convenient date.

23.  No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   Mrs S Chana                              Date  26th  day  of  April
    2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There can be no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 26th day of April  2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

