
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45312/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                          MR SUNDAY UCHENNA AJAEGBU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bajwa, counsel instructed by A Bajwa & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ J McIntosh,  promulgated
       on 15 December 2014.

Background


    2. The appellant was granted limited leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
       as a Tier 4 migrant until 23 September 2013. On 20 September 2013  he
       sought leave to remain on the basis  of  his  relationship  with  his
       partner, a Ghanaian national who is settled in  the  United  Kingdom.
       That  application  was  refused  on  15  October  2013  because   the
       respondent considered  there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       family life being continued outside the United Kingdom. It  was  also
       considered there were no exceptional circumstances involved.

    3. In his grounds of appeal, the appellant argued that the he could  not
       live with his partner in Nigeria because she was  granted  indefinite
       leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of long  residence
       in the United Kingdom. Furthermore, his partner had an adult daughter
       who was living in the United Kingdom.

The hearing before the FTTJ

    4. The appellant and his partner gave  evidence  before  the  FTTJ,  who
       heard the  appeal  on  31  October  2014.  It  was  conceded  by  the
       respondent  that  the  parties  lived  together  in  a  genuine   and
       subsisting relationship. The FTTJ found that it was possible for  the
       appellant to return to Nigeria and for his partner to join him there,
       notwithstanding that they were shortly expecting a child. In terms of
       Article  8  outside  the  Rules,  the  FTTJ   considered   that   any
       interference with the appellant's private life was proportionate.

Error of law


    5. The grounds of appeal argue that the FTTJ misdirected himself because
       the appellant's partner was from Ghana and not Nigeria and they  were
       expecting a baby. The renewed grounds added that the  child  had  now
       been born and was a British citizen.

    6. FTTJ Chamberlain granted permission, finding there to be an  arguable
       error of law for the FTTJ not to consider the appellant's family life
       with his wife outside the Rules and also not to consider section 117B
       of the 2002 Act (as amended). FTTJ  Chamberlain  was  disinclined  to
       reject the other grounds but noted that the birth of the child  post-
       dated the hearing.

    7. The Secretary of State's response of 23 June  2015  stated  that  the
       respondent opposed the appellant's application. The reply argued that
       the FTTJ considered the appellant's circumstances in some  detail  in
       the decision and rejected the appellant's assertions  that  it  would
       not be possible for the couple to live in Lagos. The FTTJ also  noted
       that the adult child of the sponsor was pursuing a degree and  living
       independently of her mother. It was also said that the FTTJ noted the
       absence of any exceptional grounds; that the conclusion was one  open
       to the FTTJ that the grounds were no more than  a  mere  disagreement
       with the FTTJ's findings.

The hearing


    8. Mr Bajwa relied upon the grounds of the appellant's  application  and
       the grant of permission.  He argued that  the  five-step  process  in
       Razgar was still required and that section 117B of the 2002  Act  did
       not materially alter the position. He submitted that the  appellant's
       partner should not have to abandon her life in the United Kingdom and
       take her adult daughter and infant son to Ghana in order  to  sponsor
       the appellant from Nigeria. Nor should the appellant have  to  return
       to Nigeria and sponsor his wife and her daughter to join him there.

    9. Mr Duffy agreed that the proportionality assessment did  not  include
       consideration of family life. However, he argued that all the  issues
       had been considered at paragraph 21 of the decision, where  the  FTTJ
       had found there to be no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
       taking place elsewhere. Mr  Duffy  made  the  point  that  there  was
       freedom of movement between ECOWAS  countries  such  as  Nigeria  and
       Ghana and there were therefore  no  immigration  concerns  with  each
       party living in each other's country of origin.

   10. In reply, Mr Bajwa stressed that the respondent had conceded that the
       appellant and sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting  marriage.  He
       argued that the family life would suffer "complete devastation"  were
       the appellant required to leave the  United  Kingdom.  I  invited  Mr
       Bajwa to identify any compelling circumstances why the FTTJ ought  to
       have proceeded to consider the appellant's family  life  outside  the
       Rules. He replied that those circumstances were that the  appellant's
       child was an infant; that the appellant  being  permitted  to  remain
       would mean that in the  near  future  the  partner  would  "come  off
       benefits" and that the partner would be likely to remain on  benefits
       were the appellant removed.

   11. The only issue of substance before the FTTJ was  whether  there  were
       insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  between  the
       appellant and his  partner  outside  the  United  Kingdom.  The  FTTJ
       considered that issue in detail at [20-23] of the decision. The  FTTJ
       took into consideration the differing nationalities  and  ethnicities
       of the appellant  and  his  partner;  the  fact  that  the  partner's
       daughter was an  adult  in  full-time  further  education  who  lived
       independently from her mother;  that  the  partner  was  expecting  a
       child; that she would not be able to travel abroad immediately  owing
       to her advanced pregnancy but that she could do so after the birth of
       their child and be reunited  with  the  appellant  abroad;  that  the
       partner could support a settlement application in the future and that
       both parties had qualifications and  experience  which  would  enable
       them to find employment in Nigeria. After considering these  matters,
       the FTTJ  concluded  that  they  did  not  amount  to  insurmountable
       obstacles as defined in EX.2 of Appendix FM to the Rules.

   12. Mr Bajwa's complaint is that the FTTJ stopped  consideration  of  the
       appellant's  family  life  without   proceeding   to   consider   the
       proportionality of his removal.  I find that there  was  no  material
       error in the FTTJ declining to carry out such an  assessment  in  the
       circumstances of this case.

   13. I am guided by what was said in R (oao Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC  720
       (Admin) at [43]

           "...the gap between the test for leave to remain under EX.b(1)
           and the result one would arrive at by direction consideration of
           Article 8 in the precarious family life class of case is likely
           to be small. In the majority of such cases, if the applicant for
           leave to remain cannot show that there are insurmountable
           obstacles to relocation of a spouse or partner to his or her
           country of origin so as to meet that part of the test laid down
           in EX.b(1), they will not be able to show that their removal is
           disproportionate."

   14. All the relevant evidence was  considered  by  the  FTTJ  during  her
       consideration of the  Rules  and  in  view  of  those  findings,  any
       consideration of the Razgar steps could  not  have  gone  beyond  the
       second step, in that the FTTJ's findings indicate that there would be
       no interference with  the  appellant's  family  life  caused  by  the
       respondent's decision to remove him  because  family  life  could  be
       continued elsewhere.

   15. The grant of permission refers to the absence of any consideration of
       section 117B of the 2002 Act. While  Mr  Bajwa  relied  on  the  said
       grant, he did not develop this point before me.  Indeed,  Mr  Bajwa's
       submission was that  section  117B  did  not  materially  affect  the
       appellant's position.

   16. In relation to section  117B  of  the  2002  Act,  I  note  that  the
       appellant's family life was established when his  immigration  status
       was precarious and when it was known that his partner would be unable
       to meet the financial requirements because she worked  part-time  and
       was in receipt of public funds.  The aforementioned factors would not
       have added weight to the appellant's case had the  FTTJ  referred  to
       the factors set out  in  section  117B,  given  the  public  interest
       considerations in section 117B (1), (3) and (4).

   17. I have also had regard to what is said in SSHD v  SS  (Congo)  &  Ors
       [2015] EWCA Civ 387 as to "good reason" needing to be shown as to why
       a particular applicant, who  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  the
       Rules, was entitled to preferential treatment over other  applicants.
       Mr Bajwa's submission amounted to speculation that the appellant  and
       his partner could not  live  in  each  other's  countries;  that  the
       partner would remain on benefits if the  appellant  was  removed  and
       that she would  no  longer  claim  benefits  if  the  appellant  were
       permitted to remain. I do not find that those  particular  Article  8
       arguments amount to good reason for considering let alone allowing an
       appeal outside the Rules. While it might have been preferable for the
       FTTJ to consider the Article 8 claim outside the Rules, for the  sake
       of completeness, I  find  that  the  FTTJ  cannot  be  said  to  have
       materially erred in law in  declining  to  carry  out  an  Article  8
       assessment outside the Rules in the particular circumstances  of  the
       appellant's case.

Conclusion

  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
  making of an error on a point of law.

  I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.

  No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and I am aware of no  reasons
  for making such a direction now.


  Signed    Date: 30 August 2015


  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
-----------------------
Appeal Number: IA/45312/2013


4



