
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45136/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th April 2014                              |On 4th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                    s O O
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Charles of Leslie Charles Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant before the First-tier Tribunal is a citizen  of  Nigeria.
    I have considered  whether  any  of  the  parties  to  the  proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  The appeal  impacts
    directly upon the interests and rights of a child. In order to  protect
    those interests and taking  account  of  all  the  circumstances  I  do
    consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the respondent against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Crawford.  However  for  the  purposes  of  the  present
    determination I have kept  the  designation  of  the  parties  as  they
    appeared in the original determination.

Immigration history

 3. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom  on  6  March  2005  as  a
    student. His leave as a student had  been  extended  at  various  times
    until  31  January  2009.  In  October  2008  the  appellant  had  made
    application for an  EEA  residence  card.  That  application  had  been
    refused in May 2009. The appellant made two further applications for an
    EEA residence card which were likewise refused. On  17  June  2011  the
    appellant was issued with an IS150A notice indicating that  he  was  an
    overstayer and that he was to be removed from the United  Kingdom.  The
    appellant made further applications for an EEA residence card  in  July
    2011 and December 2011, which were refused.

 4. The appellant then made an application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of his relationship with  his  partner  and
    his daughter, who are British citizens.

 5. The application was refused on 24 April 2013 and a decision made, which
    did not give the appellant an  in-country  right  of  appeal.  Judicial
    Review proceedings were issued and as a result of those proceedings the
    respondent agreed to reconsider the appellant's application and make  a
    new decision with an in-country right of appeal.

 6. Thereafter the appellant's application was refused by letter of refusal
    and a decision was made to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom
    as an overstayer under section 10  of  the  1999  Act,  both  dated  14
    October 2013. The appeal against that decision  appeared  before  Judge
    Crawford on 10 January 2014.

 7. By decision promulgated on 10th February 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Crawford allowed the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 8. The respondent  sought  leave  to  appeal  against  that  decision.  By
    decision taken on the 28th  February  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Warren Grant granted permission to appeal.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Grant gave leave in respect of article 8.

 9. Thus the appeal now appears  before  me  is  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the first instance to determine whether or not there was  a
    material error of law in the original determination.





Legal submissions

10. The representative for the respondent sought to rely in the  main  upon
    the issues raised in the grounds of appeal. The grounds submit: -

         a) It is acknowledged that the appellant was seeking to  remain  in
            the United Kingdom on the basis of  his  relationship  with  his
            partner and child, who are both British citizens.

         b) It is submitted that the judge has failed to deal with the  fact
            that the appellant and his partner entered into  a  relationship
            at  a  time  when  the  appellant's   immigration   status   was
            precarious. It is submitted that that is a  factor  relevant  to
            the  proportionality  exercise  and  the  judge  has  failed  to
            consider the same

         c) The judge found that it was disproportionate for the appellant's
            partner and daughter to relocate to Nigeria with  the  appellant
            because they both suffered from  sickle  cell  anaemia.  It  was
            submitted that the judge had relied solely on the evidence given
            by the appellant's partner as to the effects of that illness and
            her personal experiences of what she had suffered and others had
            suffered because of the illness in Nigeria.

         d) It is submitted that the onus was on the  appellant  to  produce
            evidence that effective treatment for sickle  cell  anaemia  was
            not available in Nigeria. In that regard it  is  submitted  that
            the  judge's  findings  are  "imbalanced"  and  failed  to  give
            adequate consideration to the interest in maintaining  effective
            immigration control.

         e) The judge failed to assess the income threshold in  appendix  FM
            as part of the article 8 assessment. It is  submitted  that  the
            financial requirements are a factor within  immigration  control
            which is directly relevant to the decision to be  taken  and  as
            such is for the democratically accountable government to set  an
            appropriate level.

         f) Further as is clear from the cases of Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640
            and Nagre 2013 EWHC 720 where an appellant does not  and  cannot
            meet the requirements of the rules  article  8  should  only  be
            considered  where  there  are   compelling   circumstances   not
            recognised by the rules. In the  present  case  such  compelling
            circumstances were not identified. In  the  light  of  that  the
            findings are unsustainable.

11. On behalf of the appellant it was submitted that the judge had properly
    considered the requirements of the rules and had thereafter gone on  to
    consider family life under the rules and article 8 outside  the  rules.
    It was submitted that the judge  had  assessed  material  factors  with
    regard to the circumstances  of  the  appellant's  partner  and  child.
    Having considered all the evidence the judge had made findings of  fact
    which directly related to whether there were exceptional  circumstances
    justifying consideration of this matter outside the rules on Article  8
    grounds.

Consideration of the issues

12. It is suggested within the grounds of appeal that the judge has  failed
    to make material findings with regard to the requirements of the  rules
    and that, as the appellant did not meet the requirements of the  rules,
    the judge has failed to take that into account in assessing  article  8
    outside the rules. In line with the cases of Gulshan 2013  UKUT  640  ,
    Nagre 2013 EWHC 720 and Haleemudeen 2014 EWCA Civ 558 it  is  submitted
    that the judge should consider whether or  not  there  are  exceptional
    factors which justify consideration of this appeal  outside  the  rules
    on Article 8 grounds.

13. Within paragraph 4 of the determination  the  judge  has  set  out  the
    requirements of the rules specifically the details within  appendix  FM
    and EX.1. Thereafter the judge has in the determination considered  the
    letter of refusal of 14 October 2013 in detail [see paragraphs 5 and  6
    covering several pages]. The judge in paragraph 8  specifically  states
    that he has considered  the  bundles  of  evidence  submitted  by  both
    parties. A judge does not have to identify  each  and  every  piece  of
    evidence at each stage of a determination.

14. In considering the requirements of the rules the judge has  in  setting
    out the refusal letter identified all of  the  issues  that  have  been
    raised by the respondent to show that the appellant did  not  meet  the
    requirements  of  the  rules.  The  judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the
    requirements of the rules  and  those  parts  of  the  rules  that  the
    appellant did not meet.

15. The judge noted in paragraph 7 of the determination that  in  light  of
    the matters set out it was conceded on behalf of the appellant that  he
    did not meet the requirements of the immigration rules either  appendix
    FM or paragraph 276 ADE.

16.  In the letter of refusal it is quite evident that  the  appellant  was
    not in the United Kingdom with any  leave  when  he  entered  into  his
    relationship the basis of the present application. The judge went on to
    make findings with regard to be substance of the  relationship  between
    the appellant and his partner including that the relationship, although
    there have been periods of separation, had been ongoing since 2007. The
    judge noted that since the birth of the child the  appellant  had  been
    committed to the relationship and to his child.  The  judge  had  noted
    that both the partner and child  suffered  from  a  medical  condition,
    namely sickle cell anaemia, and that the child was monitored by medical
    staff on a regular basis because of the condition.

17. The letter of refusal had considered the issues of  article  8  outside
    the  rules  and  found  that  there   was   nothing   which   warranted
    consideration of article 8 outside the rules.

18. Having noted that the appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    rules, the judge was clearly looking at the whole of the  circumstances
    considering  whether  or  not  there  were  factors   which   justified
    consideration of the appeal on article 8 grounds under  the  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence and  Razgar 2004 UKHL27.

19. On the basis of that evidence the  judge  was  clearly  satisfied  that
    there were factors relevant to Article 8  justifying  consideration  of
    Article outside the rules. It was not challenged that the  partner  and
    child were British citizens. The judge  considered  the  following  the
    best interests of the child of the family; the medical condition of the
    appellant's partner and child; the fact that medical monitoring was  in
    place to cope with the illness both suffered; the impact of removal  on
    the family unit; and the possibility of removal of the family  unit  to
    Nigeria.

20. It is suggested that the judge should not merely have accepted what was
    claimed by the appellant and his partner  as  to  the  consequence  for
    those suffering sickle cell anaemia in Nigeria.

21. The partner has available medical supervision but more specifically the
    child as set out in paragraph 11 of the determination is under  medical
    supervision and has regular medical appointments for the blood tests to
    obviate the crises that can occur and are  a  symptom  of  sickle  cell
    anaemia. The child has a regime which is currently in place to  provide
    medical care and supervision for her.

22. The partner has personal experience of living in Nigeria. She is in the
    United Kingdom now as a nurse but had lived a major part of her life in
    Nigeria. It was part of her evidence that she had a family member  that
    had died as a result of suffering from  sickle  cell  anaemia  and  the
    susceptibility that that leads to other illnesses. The  judge  was  not
    merely accepting what was said about the availability of  treatment  in
    Nigeria but was concentrating on the treatment being  received  in  the
    UK.

23. The fact that the partner and child  would  not  relocate  and  it  was
    clearly not in the best interests of the child to relocate to  Nigeria,
    where immediately there would be no medical  monitoring  were  relevant
    factors the judge was  entitled  to  take  into  account.  The  medical
    condition of the partner and child are significant  factors  warranting
    consideration of the appeal on Article 8 grounds outside the rules.

24. Although not explicitly stated the judge  was  clearly  concerned  with
    regard to the best interests of the child under section 55 of the  2009
    Act and the medical interests of the child. The judge was  entitled  to
    find that such were factors that justified consideration of the  appeal
    on Article 8 grounds outside the rules

25. Having considered all the circumstances the judge has gone on  to  make
    specific findings with regard to the elements of Article 8 outside  the
    rules on the basis of the guidance given in the case of Razgar.

26. On the basis of the evidence presented the judge was entitled  to  find
    that there was a family life between the  appellant,  his  partner  and
    child.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the  decision  would
    significantly interfere with that family life. The  judge  was  clearly
    satisfied that the decision was in accordance with the law and for  the
    purposes of maintaining immigration control.

27. Thereafter the judge has made findings of fact and determined that  the
    decision is not in the circumstances  proportionately  justified.  That
    was the findings of fact that the judge was entitled  to  make  on  the
    basis of the evidence presented.

28. In the circumstances there is no  material  error  of  law  within  the
    determination of the judge.

29. Even if the judge has failed  to  assess  the  issues  with  regard  to
    article 8 properly for the reasons set out I find that consideration of
    Article 8 outside the rules is warranted  in  circumstances  where  the
    child of the appellant is subject  to  regular  medical  monitoring  to
    obviate any risks of harm to the health  of  the  child.   There  is  a
    substantial and significant relationship between the appellant and  his
    partner, which constitutes family life. The partner works in the United
    Kingdom as a nurse. The appellant assists the partner in caring for the
    child.

30. Clearly consideration could be given to the appellant himself returning
    to Nigeria and seeking to make  application  to  enter.  However  in  a
    situation in which child is clearly medically monitored because of  her
    condition such a serious disruption in the  child's  life  would  be  a
    major factor.

31. I have considered all of the evidence in the case. There is  clearly  a
    family life that exists between the appellant, his  partner  and  child
    and the decision would clearly interfere  with  the  same.  Whilst  the
    decision is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  for  the  purpose  of
    maintaining immigration control, I would not in the circumstances  have
    found the same proportionately justified.

Decision

32. The reasons set out I find that there  is  no  material  error  of  law
    within the determination and I uphold the decision to allow the  appeal
    on article 8 grounds.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


