








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45177/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 18 September 2014                         |On: 15 October 2014          |
|Prepared:  6 October 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                          MS Angela Pamhai Wakatama
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr A Billie, solicitor (IEI Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe, born on 2nd April  1971.  She
      appealed the decision  of  the  respondent  dated  7th  October  2013,
      refusing her application for leave to remain in the  UK  and  to  give
      directions for removal from the UK.


   2. She arrived as a visitor to the UK on 31st  December  2000.  Her  visa
      expired on 1st July 2001. On 4th July 2001, she  applied  for  limited
      leave to remain as a student which was refused with no right of appeal
      on 13th February 2002. She then applied on  21st  September  2012  for
      indefinite leave to remain outside the rules, relying on private life,
      and in particular upon the fact that she was diagnosed as HIV positive
      at the Luton and Dunstable Hospital in 2005 and is  receiving  medical
      treatment in the UK.


   3. She claimed that she has no family members and no home to return to in
      Zimbabwe.


   4. In a decision promulgated on 11th July 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge
      Beg dismissed "the human rights  appeal"  (articles  3  and  8).    In
      dismissing the appeal, it was noted that the respondent concluded that
      the appellant had not reached the high threshold of Article 3 required
      in decisions such as N v SSHD.


   5. Further, in relation to Article 8, she noted that the  respondent  had
      regard to Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the rules in respect  of
      her private life. She was 42 years old, having entered the UK on  31st
      December 2000. She had not lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
      20 years. The respondent also contended that even though she  had  not
      lived in Zimbabwe for over  12  years,  nonetheless  she  has  social,
      cultural  and  family  ties  in  Zimbabwe.  She  could  continue   her
      relationships in the UK from Zimbabwe.


   6. The grounds of appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contended
      that the decision was not compatible with her Article 3 and 8  rights.
      Further, she met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.


   7. The Judge found  [9]  that  the  appellant  made  an  application  for
      indefinite leave to remain outside the rules on 21st  September  2012.
      At that date, she had been an overstayer for a significant  number  of
      years. Her credibility was significantly damaged by the fact that  she
      made no application to  regularise  her  stay  after  2012  until  the
      present application was made.


   8. The Judge found that she relied on Articles  3  and  8  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention. The threshold in respect of Article 3 is high.  She
      had regard to N [2005] UKHL 31 as well as D v  UK.  In  N,  Lord  Hope
      acknowledged that medical  facilities  in  Uganda  were  not  as  well
      developed as those in the UK. A comparison between the health benefits
      and other forms of assistance which are  available  in  the  expelling
      state with those in the receiving country does not in itself give rise
      to an entitlement to remain in the territory of the expelling state.


   9. The Judge found [14] that although the appellant was diagnosed in  the
      UK as HIV positive, it is likely that she had also been tested for HIV
      in Zimbabwe, bearing in  mind  that  her  husband  died  of  the  same
      condition before  she  came  here.  Her  representative  had  in  fact
      submitted that her husband died of the same illness in Zimbabwe.


  10. The Judge found that even if she accepted that the appellant's parents
      were deceased, she is an adult who was working in Zimbabwe as a school
      secretary before she  came  to  the  UK.  Her  brother  now  lives  in
      Tanzania. The appellant claimed that there were no surviving aunts and
      uncles. However, in 2000, she came on a visit visa to visit her cousin
      who lives in London and is a priest. He was her sponsor. She sees  him
      once a month. Her cousin has a brother in Zimbabwe whom he visits from
      time to time.


  11. The Judge found [15] that even if the appellant is not  close  to  her
      cousin's brother in Zimbabwe, nonetheless there  will  be  someone  in
      Zimbabwe from whom the appellant could seek advice and  moral  support
      to help her re-establish herself there.


  12. The Judge also had regard to the number of her close  church  friends.
      The appellant had had a history of  working  in  Zimbabwe.  There  was
      however no credible evidence that  she  would  not  be  able  to  seek
      employment there with which she is familiar.  She  would  be  able  to
      attend another church and establish herself in another community.  She
      would be able to keep in contact with friends in the UK.


  13. The Judge noted that the "thrust" of her case is that she would not be
      able to access medical treatment in Zimbabwe and would  not  have  the
      support of the friends that she currently has. There  was  significant
      evidence that anti-retroviral treatment is available in Zimbabwe.  The
      Judge had regard to the  COI  reports  in  respect  of  Zimbabwe  that
      HIV/AIDS treatment is available there.


  14. She  took  into  account  the  objective  evidence  submitted  on  the
      appellant's behalf. The report from the newspaper  of  September  2013
      referred to the acute shortages of the anti-retroviral drugs at public
      health institutions which was seriously  compromising  the  health  of
      more than half a million people living with HIV and  AIDS.  Since  the
      introduction of a new regime, tenofovir, there has been a  decline  in
      the supply of drugs at all public health  institutions,  resulting  in
      patients being given one week supplies or  the  old  drugs  with  more
      serious side effects.


  15. The Judge found that many of the articles, some of which are  old  and
      go back to 2008 and 2010, indicate that there have been  shortages  in
      Zimbabwe of anti-retroviral drugs. However the test is not the quality
      of healthcare in the UK as compared to Zimbabwe. She found that  drugs
      are available, even if not immediately free at the  point  of  access.
      The appellant would be able to rely on the support of friends  in  the
      UK to help her access such drugs immediately on return.


  16. The appellant's circumstances are not exceptional.  Her  condition  is
      stable. The circumstances do not compare to D v UK.


  17. The Judge noted that she did not have a partner or family life in  the
      UK. In considering the evidence in its totality, she did not find that
      the appellant had reached the high threshold of Article 3.  Nor  would
      she be destitute on return to Zimbabwe.


  18. She found that the appellant has a private life in the  UK.  She  took
      into account the appellant's immigration history  and  the  length  of
      time she has lived here. She has been able  to  access  a  significant
      amount of expensive medical treatment here. The Judge found that  "she
      could reasonably be expected to return to  Zimbabwe  and  re-establish
      her life there." [20]. She referred to RS (Zimbabwe -  AIDS)  Zimbabwe
      CG [2010] UKUT 363 where the Court held that a significant  number  of
      people are receiving treatment for HIV/AIDS in Zimbabwe  and  hence  a
      Zimbabwean returnee would not succeed in  a  claim  for  international
      protection on the basis of HIV/AIDS  unless  their  case  crosses  the
      threshold identified in N v UK.


  19. Nor would her return to  Zimbabwe  place  the  UK  in  breach  of  its
      obligations under the Disability Discrimination Act.


  20. The Judge took into account DM (Zambia) V SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  474
      where Lord Justice Sedley held that to remove an  AIDS  sufferer  from
      free care and treatment in one of the  best  health  services  in  the
      world, which had rescued her from what would  otherwise  have  been  a
      terminal condition, would seem to have been a clear interference  with
      her physical and psychological integrity and thus an invasion  of  her
      private life.


  21. Judge Beg found that there is no doubt  that  removing  the  appellant
      from the UK would interfere  with  her  private  life,  that  is,  her
      psychological and her physical condition. Nevertheless, the issue  for
      the  Judge  that  she  was   required   to   consider   is   "one   of
      proportionality." She concluded that the  interference  would  not  be
      disproportionate in all the circumstances.


  22. Accordingly, she found that even a minimal  disruption  of  her  anti-
      retroviral treatment while she is returned to Zimbabwe would not  lead
      to the conclusion that interference in her Article 8 rights  would  be
      in a manner sufficiently serious so as to amount to a  breach  of  the
      fundamental right protected by Article 8.


  23. On 29th July  2014,  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy
      granted the appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  He
      noted that the grounds averred that although the Judge  made  findings
      relating to Articles 3 and 8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention,  she
      failed to determine the appeal on the  grounds  that  the  immigration
      decision was not in accordance with the immigration rules. Further, it
      was also argued that  the  Judge's  approach  to  Article  8  was  not
      adequate.


  24. Judge McCarthy states that in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the determination,
      Judge Beg recognised that paragraph 276ADE was  in  issue  but  at  no
      point thereafter engaged with those  provisions.  Although  the  Judge
      made some findings [15] and [16] that relate to her continued ties  to
      Zimbabwe,  it  was   not   clear   whether   those   were   sufficient
      considerations  of  the  issues  arising   under   paragraph   276ADE.
      Therefore, the appellant had identified an arguable  legal  error  and
      permission to appeal was granted.


  25. He went on to state that  if  the  appellant  were  to  succeed  under
      paragraph 276ADE, then the proportionality exercise  may  have  to  be
      revisited. Accordingly, although not granting permission to appeal  on
      that basis, he "left it open."


  26. Mr Billie submitted that there was no proper indication that the Judge
      reached a finding of fact as to whether  the  appellant  had  ties  to
      Zimbabwe or not. That omission is particularly apparent  in  paragraph
      21, where the Judge made no reference to  the  claim  under  paragraph
      276ADE. The Judge had accordingly failed to give reasons, or  adequate
      reasons, on a material matter which amounts to  a  material  error  of
      law.


  27. He also submitted that even if the Judge is found to  have  considered
      the claim under paragraph  276ADE,  the  accepted  evidence  does  not
      support any conclusion  that  she  has  any  ties,  including  social,
      cultural or family, to Zimbabwe.


  28. This is because the test under paragraph 276ADE is more than assessing
      the extent of the family and  friends  that  the  person  has  in  the
      country to which she is being deported or removed, but also includes a
      consideration of "the quality of the  relationships  that  person  has
      with those friends and family members" - Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  New
      Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC).


  29. He submitted that the word  "ties"  involved  more  than  a  continued
      connection to life in Zimbabwe i.e., something that ties a claimant to
      Zimbabwe. If that were not the case, it would appear that  a  person's
      nationality of the country of proposed deportation could  have  itself
      led to a failure to meet the requirements  of  the  rule.  That  would
      render the application of the rule, given the context within which  it
      operates, entirely meaningless.


  30. He submitted that from Ogundimu, consideration of whether a person has
      "no ties" to such a country must involve a rounded assessment  of  all
      the relevant circumstances and is not limited to "social, cultural and
      family circumstances." In that case, the Court was satisfied that  the
      appellant had no ties with Nigeria, being a stranger to  the  country.
      His father may have ties but there are none for the appellant.  It  is
      noteworthy that the appellant had been resident in the UK as  a  child
      and all his ties are with  the  UK.  He  consequently  had  so  little
      connection with Nigeria as to  mean  that  the  consequences  for  his
      establishing private life there at the age  of  28,  after  22  years'
      residence here, would be "unjustifiably harsh."


  31. Mr Billie nevertheless submitted that in  this  case,  any  suggestion
      that the appellant has ties to Zimbabwe because she has a  cousin  who
      is in the UK who in turn has a brother in Zimbabwe, who has never been
      close to the appellant, and who resides far from the appellant's  city
      of return, is not in accordance with the law,  having  regard  to  the
      authority cited, because it does not take into account the extent  and
      quality of the relationship between the parties.


  32. Further, Mr Billie also submitted that  the  Judge  failed  to  assess
      Article 8 in  accordance  with  the  law.  Having  accepted  that  the
      appellant has private life and that removing her  from  the  UK  would
      interfere with her private life, that is  her  psychological  and  her
      physical condition, the Judge  concluded  that  her  return  would  be
      proportionate.


  33. There was however no indication that the Judge properly addressed  the
      relevant stages of the five steps  in  the  manner  mandated  by  Lord
      Bingham in the case of  Razgar.  That  is  important  because  once  a
      claimant has established that she enjoys a protected  right  which  is
      threatened with violation, the burden shifts to  the  state  to  prove
      that the violation is justified.


  34. Here, there is no indication whether Article 8 is engaged or  not,  or
      whether any removal is in accordance with the law or necessary in  the
      public  interest.  Without  identifying  such  legitimate  aims   when
      considering interference with the appellant's private life, the  Judge
      could not properly  strike  a  fair  balance  between  the  respective
      interests.


  35. The Judge  finally  failed  to  assess  fairly  the  evidence  adduced
      relating to the availability  of  treatment  in  Zimbabwe.  The  Judge
      rejected the background evidence on the grounds that some  of  it  was
      old and dated as far as 2008 and 2010. Nevertheless the Judge accepted
      various reports cited in the COI dated as far back as 2010,  2011  and
      2012.


  36. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Bramble submitted  that  although  her
      determination contained  no  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE  in  the
      findings, Judge Beg's findings  themselves  at  paragraph  15  and  16
      indicated that she 'would have concluded'  that  the  requirements  of
      that paragraph could not be satisfied on the basis that the  appellant
      had retained social, cultural and family ties with Zimbabwe.


  37. Although Mr Bramble accepted that the Judge did not  properly  address
      paragraph 276ADE, he nevertheless submitted that it was immaterial. He
      referred to  Ogundimu, supra, and emphasised that in  that  case,  the
      appellant was aged 6 when he arrived  in  the  UK.  This  was  also  a
      deportation case.  Since his arrival in the UK, the appellant had only
      visited Nigeria on one occasion. It was to attend a wedding.


  38. At paragraph 123, in that case, the Judge referred to the natural  and
      ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  "ties"  which  imports  the  concept
      involving something more than merely remote and abstract links to  the
      country of proposed deportation or removal. It involves there being  a
      continued connection to life in that country; something that ties  the
      claimant to his or her country of origin.


  39. He then referred to paragraph 124, where a rounded assessment  of  all
      the relevant circumstances must be taken, which is not to  be  limited
      to social, cultural and family  circumstances.  Mr  Bramble  submitted
      that on the facts  of  Ogundimu,  it  was  clearly  evident  that  the
      appellant had been in the UK for 22 years and was only 28 at the  date
      of the hearing. In those circumstances, the consequences for returning
      him to Nigeria would be "unjustifiably harsh, given  that  he  had  so
      little connection with Nigeria." Regard must be had to the  individual
      facts in that decision.


  40. In contrast, the appellant here does still have ties to  Zimbabwe.  He
      referred to paragraph 15 and 16 relating to  the  cousin  as  well  as
      potential friends in a church.


  41. He submitted that there was sufficient consideration  given  to  these
      matters,  irrespective  of  whether  paragraph  276ADE  was  expressly
      considered.


  42. In any event, he submitted that the relevant components  in  paragraph
      276ADE have ultimately been  considered.  She  has  had  contact  with
      Zimbabwe and has various support networks. The Judge had regard to the
      evidence given by the appellant as set  out  at  paragraph  7  of  the
      determination. She  would  be  able  to  attend  church  in  Zimbabwe,
      depending on how she is feeling.


  43. She had worked as a school secretary in her home town before she  came
      here. She lives close to Harare. She has only one sibling and that  is
      her brother, who lives in Tanzania. He  left  Zimbabwe  in  2005.  Her
      father died in 2011. Her uncle is also deceased.  Her  father  had  no
      sisters. Her mother died in 2004. Both her brothers are deceased.  She
      has no sisters. Her brother works  for  a  motoring  company  and  she
      speaks to him about three times a month.


  44. At paragraph 8, it was also established that she had no  relatives  in
      Zimbabwe. She is not close to her cousin in the UK or his brother.


  45. At paragraph 21, Mr Bramble submitted that the Judge "brought  it  all
      together" in considering the return to Zimbabwe of a person  diagnosed
      with HIV/AIDS. Proper regard was had to DM (Zambia), supra.


  46. Although the Judge did not 'properly' consider the steps  from  Razgar
      to be undertaken in such a case, he nevertheless had proper regard  to
      the circumstances as a whole.


  47. In reply, Mr Billie stressed the evidence relating to the  appellant's
      position. She has no parents. Her brother  and  his  children  are  in
      Tanzania. She is a widow. As to her ties, she only has a cousin in the
      UK to whom she is not close. There is in fact nobody close at  all  in
      Zimbabwe. It is clear that Ogundimu was not properly applied.


  48. If paragraph 276 had properly been applied, it  is  reasonably  likely
      that a court would conclude that she does not have the  relevant  ties
      and consequently would be entitled to succeed under the rules.


     Assessment


  49. It is evident that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  a  significant
      number of findings and considered evidence relating in  particular  to
      Article 3. She also considered Article 8, albeit very briefly.


  50. I agree with Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  McCarthy's  reasons
      for granting permission. Although Judge Beg recognised that  paragraph
      276ADE was  in  issue,  she  did  not  thereafter  engage  with  those
      provisions. Although, as relied on by  Mr  Bramble,  there  were  some
      findings made by the Judge at  paragraphs  15  and  16  regarding  her
      continued ties to Zimbabwe, there was no consideration  given  to  the
      proper approach regarding the meaning of the words "no  ties  (social,
      cultural or family)" similarly contained  in  paragraph  399A  of  the
      Immigration Rules.


  51. Paragraph 276ADE sets out the requirements to be met by  an  applicant
      for leave to remain on the grounds of private  life  in  the  UK.  The
      applicant must  show  that  she  is  18  years  or  above,  has  lived
      continuously in the UK for  less  than  20  years,  but  has  no  ties
      (including social, cultural or family) with the country to  which  she
      would have to go if required to leave the UK.


  52. The Tribunal in Ogundimu took note of the fact that  the  use  of  the
      phrase in paragraph 399A of the Rules is not exclusive  to  that  rule
      but  is  also  used  in  paragraph  276ADE,  in  the  context  of  the
      requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to  remain  based  on
      private life, where she has lived here for less than 20 years.


  53. Although the Judge has considered the relationships, such as they are,
      that the appellant has in the UK and Zimbabwe,  she  has  nevertheless
      not considered them with regard to the proper approach  identified  in
      Ogundimu.


  54. I accordingly find that the  decision  of  the  Tribunal  was  not  in
      accordance with the law.  Both parties agreed that if I came  to  that
      conclusion, that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal would have to
      be set aside and a fresh decision made.


  55. Mr Billie submitted that this was an appropriate case for  the  appeal
      to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. Mr Bramble did  not  oppose
      that submission, stating that he would remain neutral.


  56. I have considered the Senior President's guidance in that respect.   I
      find  that  the  appellant  has  not  had  the  benefit  of  a  proper
      consideration of her appeal under paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
      Rules. She has thus been deprived of the  opportunity  of  having  her
      case properly considered. There will also  be  fairly  extensive  fact
      finding required.


  57. I find in the circumstances that this is a proper case for the  appeal
      to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


     Decisions


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of      law.  The decision is accordingly set aside.


      It is  directed  that  the  appellant's  appeal  be  remitted  for  a
rehearing to Taylor House   (not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg).


     The necessary administrative arrangements will have  to  be  completed
having regard     to the availability of the parties.


          No anonymity direction made.




                               Signed                     Date 6/10/2014


                               C R Mailer
                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge





