
IA 45683 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 June 2014                                |On 5th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                          OCHUKO ADONIJAH IGHAVODHA
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SECRETARY OF STATE

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Jibowu , of counsel, instructed by MJ Solomon &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 22  February,  1988.  He
      arrived in this country on 24 January, 2010  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
      student. He had leave to remain until 28 May, 2011. On application his
      leave was extended until 28 June, 2013. On 10 May 2013 he applied  for
      a residence card following his marriage to an EEA national  exercising
      Treaty  rights  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006. The application was refused on 18 October, 2013.

   2. The appellant appealed and his appeal  came  before  First-tier  Judge
      Obhi on 28 February, 2014. The judge records that she did not hear any
      oral evidence or submissions  as  the  appellant  who  had  originally
      requested an oral hearing had changed his mind  and  had  requested  a
      paper determination of the appeal.

   3. The judge summarised the case for the respondent in  paragraph  12  of
      her decision. The respondent was not satisfied  that  the  appellant's
      spouse was a qualified person having carefully checked the evidence of
      employment. The letter from the employer was of poor  quality  and  in
      poor English and there appeared to  be  a  change  of  gender  of  the
      employee towards the end of the letter. It provided no start  date  or
      salary but did provide a character reference. It was not  accepted  as
      evidence  of  employment.  Three  payslips  had  been  provided.  They
      appeared to quote the correct tax code for the  appellant's  wife  but
      the  actual  calculation  of  tax  and  NICs   was   inaccurate.   The
      discrepancies caused the respondent to undertake further research into
      the existence of the company that the appellant's wife was  supposedly
      working for. No  response  to  telephone  calls  made  to  the  number
      provided by the appellant had been received. The net book value of the
      company appeared to be insufficient for  it  to  be  trading  and  the
      registered office was not shown as trading from the  address  provided
      under the Royal Mail postcode finder.

   4. The judge  noted  in  paragraph  14  of  her  determination  that  the
      appellant's wife was  now  employed  in  a  different  capacity  at  a
      different business. She had commenced her  employment  on  1  October,
      2013 and payslips were provided covering the previous four months. The
      judge observed:

           "However  this  is  an  entirely  new  situation  from  the  one
           presented to the Secretary of State, and the grounds  of  appeal
           assert that the Secretary of  State  was  wrong  to  refuse  the
           application as the appellant's wife  was  genuinely  working  as
           claimed. There is no explanation as to why if there was  nothing
           wrong with the previous employment, the  appellant  has  changed
           jobs. There are no letters from the Inland  Revenue  to  confirm
           the employment and the  payment  of  tax.  There  is,  in  short
           nothing to refute the reasons why the application  was  refused.
           Although the date for the determination of facts is the date  of
           hearing, the facts which I have to  determine  are  whether  the
           information provided to the Secretary of State at  the  time  of
           the  application  was  true.  Issues  are   raised   about   the
           reliability of the information provided  which  are  potentially
           serious and which have not been addressed. Therefore it  is  for
           the respondent to consider the new application, as that is  what
           it essentially is, made on behalf of the appellant."

   5. In paragraph 15 of the determination the judge noted that the marriage
      appeared to have been a proxy marriage  in  Ghana  and  there  was  no
      evidence that the customary marriage was an acceptable and  recognised
      form of marriage in the appellant's  wife's  home  country,  Slovakia.
      Although the point had not been raised by the respondent the  Tribunal
      had made it clear that there needed to be evidence of  the  acceptance
      of such marriages by the laws of the EEA country from  which  the  EEA
      national comes. The judge referred to Kareem  (Proxy  Marriages  -  EU
      Law) [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC). She concluded paragraph 15 as follows:

           "I make no finding in relation to the marriage, and it will be a
           matter for the Secretary of State to consider afresh as and when
           the  appellant  submits  his  application  based  on   the   new
           employment that his wife has."

   6. The information provided to the judge was  insufficient  to  determine
      the appeal under Article 8 given her concerns about the  marriage  and
      the applicant's case ought to be put to the  respondent,  the  primary
      decision maker. She accordingly dismissed the appeal.

   7. There was an application for permission to  appeal,  it  being  argued
      that the judge should have focused on the state of play at the hearing
      and determine whether or not the sponsor was a qualified  person.  The
      judge had erred in drawing a negative inference as to why the  sponsor
      had changed her job as  this  conflicted  with  the  concept  of  free
      movement. Irrelevant matters had been taken into consideration.

   8. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Judge  Landes  on  24
      April, 2014. The judge noted that it had not been made clear that  the
      new evidence provided by the  appellant's  solicitors  had  ever  been
      supplied to the respondent and referred to rule 51 (7) of  the  Asylum
      and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  This  rule  prevents
      the tribunal taking into account any evidence that has not  been  made
      available to all the parties.

   9. Mr Jibowu referred to his skeleton argument. The appellant's wife  had
      started her  employment  in  October  prior  to  the  refusal  of  the
      application on 18th  October.  Accordingly  there  was  proof  of  the
      sponsor's employment at the time of the respondent's decision  at  the
      date of the hearing.

  10. The judge was entitled and obliged to consider the state of affairs as
      of the date of the hearing and reference was made to section 85 (4) of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act, 2002:

           "On an appeal under section 82 (1), 83 (2) or 83A(2)  against  a
           decision the tribunal may consider  evidence  about  any  matter
           which it thinks relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  decision,
           including evidence which concerns a  matter  arising  after  the
           date of the decision."

  11. It was accordingly implicit that the  judge  could  consider  evidence
      about any matter  including  evidence  arising  before  or  after  the
      decision which had not been considered by the  respondent.  The  judge
      had accordingly erred by failing  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the
      sponsor's employment in circumstances appertaining before the decision
      (albeit not before the respondent) and at the time of the hearing.

  12. Counsel submitted that the judge had erred as she had the payslips  in
      front of her and there was no requirement to  explain  the  change  of
      jobs given the free movement  provisions.  The  appellant's  wife  was
      exercising Treaty rights.

  13. In  relation  to  the  point  flagged  up  by  Judge  Landes,  counsel
      acknowledged there was no evidence that  the  appellant's  bundle  had
      ever been sent to the respondent. Mr Bramble confirmed that there  was
      no bundle from the appellant in the file.

  14. Mr Bramble referred to the response filed on  20  May,  2014.  It  was
      quite clear that the judge had considered the evidence as of the  date
      of the hearing. She had made many other findings which  were  relevant
      for the just  disposal  of  the  appeal.  This  was  an  entirely  new
      situation to the situation presented to the Secretary  of  State.  The
      issues  raised  with  the  original  employment  were  relevant.   The
      appellant had chosen not to fully engage with the appellate system and
      had opted for a paper hearing. The new evidence could not be tested by
      the judge. There was no evidence of tax  being  paid  or  confirmation
      from the Inland Revenue of employment. It was not clear moreover  that
      rule 51 (7) had been complied with and the respondent had not  had  an
      opportunity to verify the new evidence. The observation  made  by  the
      judge at paragraph 15 in relation to the proxy marriage was also valid
      and this affected the application.

  15. Having carefully considered the matter I am  not  satisfied  that  the
      judge erred in law in determining the appeal as she did.  Reliance  is
      placed on fresh material that  was  not  before  the  respondent.  The
      appellants bundle was sent to the Tribunal under  cover  of  a  letter
      dated 12 February, 2014. Despite  the  point  being  flagged  up  when
      permission to appeal was granted there is no evidence that that bundle
      was sent to the respondent. It is a fundamental principle reflected in
      the Procedure Rules that the material considered by the  judge  should
      be available to both parties.

  16. The judge was entirely correct in the circumstances  to  observe  that
      the situation was an entirely new one. Mr Bramble also points out that
      the judge did consider the new evidence but  found  it  unsatisfactory
      given the history. I accept this point. The judge was also correct  in
      stating it was  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the  new
      application "as that is what it essentially is".

  17. The judge was moreover entitled to dismiss the appeal  on  that  basis
      alone quite apart from the issue relating to the marriage itself. That
      was a matter which no doubt will have  to  be  looked  into  when  the
      appellant makes a fresh application based on the  material  which  had
      not been made available to the respondent and had not been  lodged  in
      accordance with the procedure rules before the Tribunal.

  18. For these reasons I find this challenge fails and the determination is
      confirmed.

Appeal dismissed

Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               4 June 2014



