

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal No: IA/45430/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at Field House
                Decision promulgated
On 11 December 2014
               On 6 January 2015


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DIGNEY

                                   Between

                          SHERON NYASHA MUGABE (MS)
                                                                   Appellant


   and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the respondent: Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                               DECISION AND REASONS


   1. On 24 January 2013 the appellant who was born in 1987,  a  citizen  of
      Zimbabwe, applied for leave to remain as the child of a person present
      and settled in this country who was over 18 but had been granted leave
      under paragraph 302 of the Immigration  Rules.  That  application  was
      refused under paragraph 276 ADE of the rules on 16 October  2013.   It
      is to be noted that it appears that at the time of the application the
      appellant had been in this country lawfully for nine years  and  seven
      months but at the time of the decision had been here lawfully for over
      ten years.[1]

   2. An appeal against the decision was dismissed  after  a  hearing  on  2
      September 2014. The judge concluded, as had the respondent,  that  the
      appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE.

   3. Permission to appeal was sought and granted.  In  granting  permission
      the judge said, after stating why the appeal had been dismissed:


             My concern is that it appears from the appellant's immigration
             history that she may qualify for leave under paragraph 276B of
             the Immigration Rules.[2] She has been in the UK for over  ten
             years and it appears on the face of it that she may  have  had
             lawful leave throughout that time. Judge Khan appears to  have
             given no consideration to the length of time she has  been  in
             the UK. The appellant was not legally represented.


   4. The facts on which permission was granted appear to  be  correct.  The
      respondent says that I should conclude that there has been no material
      error of law for two reasons. The first is to be found in paragraph  3
      of the rule 24 response. That states:


             As regards the grounds related to the failure of the Judge  to
             consider  paragraph  276B  of  the  Immigration   Rules,   the
             appellant is free to make an appropriate application  in  this
             regard for the respondent to  consider  with  the  appropriate
             supporting evidence and it is submitted that  the  failure  of
             the Judge to consider this is not a material error of law.


   5. The fact that a fresh application could be made is  irrelevant  as  to
      whether a decision contains a material error of law. If a point should
      have been considered and was  not  that  is  likely  to  amount  to  a
      material error of law.


   6. The second point was raised by the presenting officer at this hearing.
      She argued that the judge did not need to consider paragraph  276B  as
      it was not raised before him. As the judge points out at paragraph  18
      of his determination, the "[n]otice of appeal is expressed in  general
      terms". It was drafted by the appellant and reference is not  made  to
      any particular  paragraphs  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  However  the
      grounds make  it  clear  that,  if  the  facts  alleged  are  correct,
      paragraph 276B would be engaged and  the  judge  actually  states,  in
      paragraph 27 of his determination that the appellant has been in  this
      country for 11 years.  In those circumstances it was incumbent on  the
      judge to consider paragraph 276B and his failure to do so amounts to a
      material error of law.


   7. It follows that I conclude that the decision is vitiated by a material
      error of law and the parties are agreed that in  those  circumstances,
      as the matter has never been considered,  the  appropriate  course  is
      that the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross
      for the matter to be considered afresh by any judge other  than  Judge
      Khan.   As  the  rule  24  response  states,  "appropriate  supporting
      evidence" will have to be provided.


   8.  It follows that the original determination did contain  an  error  of
      law and   the appeal is accordingly allowed  to  the  extent  set  out
      above.

The appeal is accordingly allowed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Digney
                        5 January 2015



-----------------------
[1] This fact seems to be acknowledged in  the paragraph on page 3 of the
RFRL that starts "Furthermore, whilst"
[2] Ten years' lawful residence.

