
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber    Appeal Number: IA/45447/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 18 March 2016                     |On 4 April 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   BETWEEN

                         MRS OMODAMWEN JUDITH ABUWA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw, counsel instructed by Nandy & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision, promulgated  on  1  September
       2015, of First-tier Tribunal Judge D Ross (hereinafter referred to as
       the FTTJ). Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  FTTJ  Brunnen  1
       February 2016.

  Background

    2. On 19 December 2004, the appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  an
       EEA Family Permit,  which  was  valid  until  19  April  2006.  On  3
       September 2009, the appellant was issued with a Residence Card as the
       family member of her husband, a German national.  On 15  August  2014
       the appellant, with the assistance of her current solicitors,  sought
       a Permanent Residence Card on the basis she was  separated  from  her
       EEA family member who continued to work in the United Kingdom and  to
       financially support her. She also claimed to be a victim of  domestic
       violence.

    3. The respondent interpreted the application as including  a  claim  to
       qualify for retained rights of residence. That claim was  refused  on
       the basis that the marriage had not been  terminated.  The  claim  of
       domestic  violence  was  rejected  owing  to  a  lack  of  supporting
       evidence. The application for permanent residence as a family  member
       was refused owing to insufficient evidence that the EEA  sponsor  was
       exercising Treaty rights either prior to 15 October 2012 or after  15
       January 2013. Consequently, it was not accepted that the EEA  sponsor
       had been exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
       continuous 5-year period.

    4. The appellant appealed. The grounds of appeal relied on the  case  of
       Diatta  v  Land  Berlin  C.267/83.  Thereafter  the  arguments   were
       convoluted and did not identify which Regulation(s) it is  considered
       the appellant met. Reference was also made to Article 8 ECHR.

    5. At the hearing before the FTTJ, evidence was presented  showing  that
       the EEA sponsor was working and paying tax in the United Kingdom from
       2006 until 2014. However, the appeal was dismissed on the basis  that
       the appellant had not cohabited with her husband for a period of five
       years.

    6. The grounds of application argue  that  the  FTTJ  erred  in  law  in
       concluding that there was a requirement for the appellant to live  in
       the same household as her EEA national sponsor. Reference was made to
       PM (EEA - spouse- "residing with") Turkey [2011] UKUT 89 (IAC).

    7. FTTJ Brunnen granted permission on the basis that the above-mentioned
       grounds were arguable.

  The hearing

    8. At the hearing before me, Mr Bramble indicated that the Secretary  of
       State no longer opposed the appeal. He invited me to  set  aside  the
       decision and remake, taking into account the FTTJ's findings of fact,
       by allowing the appeal under  the  Regulations.   Unsurprisingly,  Ms
       Shaw was in agreement with this submission.

  Error of law

    9. At the end of the hearing, I confirmed that the FTTJ materially erred
       in finding that the Regulations were not met and that I would  remake
       the appeal by allowing it. My reasons are as follows.

   10. The FTTJ accepted that the appellant remained married to  her  German
       husband and that he was exercising  Treaty  rights  from  2007  until
       2014. He found that "in order to succeed (the appellant)  would  have
       to show that she had lived with her husband in the UK until at  least
       29 January 2012." The appellant left her husband in December 2011 and
       the FTTJ concluded that she  had  not  been  residing  with  her  EEA
       national husband for five continuous years and thus was not  entitled
       to a permanent residence card. In this, the FTTJ was  plainly  wrong.
       As PM clearly states in the headnote;

           'The "residing with" requirement relates to presence in the  UK;
           it does not require living in the common family home.'

   11. I accordingly, set aside  the  FTTJ's  conclusion  on  the  issue  in
       question and while retaining all findings of fact, remake the  appeal
       by allowing it under of Regulation 15(1)(b).

  Conclusions

       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
       making of an error on a point of law.

       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.

       I remake the decision by allowing the appeal under the Regulations.

       No application for anonymity was made and I saw  no  reason  to  make
       such a direction.




  Signed:   Date: 19 March 2016


  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
