
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45108/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 15th July 2015                    |On 17th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                         MR SANDEEP REDDY MAL REDDY
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr John Waite, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             REMITTAL & REASONS

   1. The appellant is a male citizen of India, born 10  October  1984.   He
      made application in August 2014 for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
      (General) Student.  The application was  refused.   He  appealed  that
      decision.  He did not request an oral hearing.

   2. The appeal was considered by Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Ghani
      who dealt with the appeal without an oral hearing upon  the  basis  of
      the papers before him.  The appeal was dismissed and the  reasons  are
      contained in a determination dated 17 February  2015,  which  runs  to
      little more than one side of A4.

   3. Paragraph 6 of the determination noted that the  appellant  "maintains
      that further grounds (of  appeal)  will  be  submitted"  and  that  no
      further grounds had been submitted.  Having the appeal  dismissed  the
      appellant sought leave to appeal upon the basis that  further  grounds
      had indeed been submitted  and  it  is  alleged  that  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge erred in law in deciding the appeal  without  reference
      to those further grounds.

   4. The application then came  before  another  judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal who granted leave to appeal.  That judge noted  that  further
      grounds were now on file and there was a Royal  Mail  "tracking"  slip
      submitted as proof of delivery.  The  judge  considered  that  it  was
      arguable that the appellant had been deprived of a  fair  hearing  and
      accordingly permission was granted.

   5. Thus the matter came before be in the Upper Tribunal.   Mr  Waite  was
      unable to add any further information.  Mr Richards confirmed that the
      Home Office had not received a copy of the further grounds of  appeal.
      Mr Richards noted that such further grounds were available and  should
      have been placed before Judge Ghani.  In the  circumstances  he  could
      not resist the application  and  agreed  that  the  matter  should  be
      remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal as  the  appellant  had  been
      deprived of a fair hearing.

   6. I announced my decision that through no fault of  his  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge had made a material error of law.  The further  grounds
      which purport to give an explanation as to the central  issue  of  the
      appeal had been received by the Tribunal Office, but not placed before
      the judge.  I consider that the appellant has been deprived of a  fair
      hearing.   The error was material to the outcome and it  must  be  the
      case that Judge Ghani's decision should be set aside  and  the  appeal
      remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
