

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45555/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                    |Promulgated                    |
|On 29 February 2016                 |On 9 March 2016                |
|                                    |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                               SHEERAZ HUSSAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Waheed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. The Respondent refused  the  Appellant's  application  for
       leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant  on  24
       October 2014. He is a citizen of Pakistan who was born  on
       13 February 1985 (now aged 31). He was required  to  leave
       the United Kingdom.


    2. His appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Khawar ("the Judge") following a hearing on 10 July 2015.

The grant of permission


    3. Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission to  appeal
       (20 January 2016) on the ground  that  it  is  or  may  be
       arguable that the Judge erred when stating "that there was
       no evidence that the accounts had  been  sent"  given  the
       contents of the  letter  of  1  September  2014  from  the
       Appellant's solicitor.


    4. Both representatives told me there was no need for  me  to
       determine whether the Judge misunderstood the evidence  as
       to whether the Appellant is a signatory to the account, or
       what the precise meaning of the wording of paragraphs  46-
       SD (c) (ii)(2) of Appendix A of the Statement  of  Changes
       in Immigration Rules HC 395  ("the  rules")  meant  as  Mr
       Jarvis conceded that the Appellant was indeed a  signatory
       to the account.


Respondent's position

    5. The Judge  directed  himself  appropriately.  The  grounds
       appear to be just a disagreement with the Judges decision.
       The  documents  produced  are  not  audited  or  unaudited
       accounts.

Appellant's position

    6.  The  report  from  Pinders  and  Operations  Report  when
       combined amount  to  unaudited  accounts.  The  Respondent
       should produce  the  abbreviated  accounts  and  financial
       statements produced with the application.


Judge's Determination


    7. It is found in the determination that [12] the  Operations
       Report,


          "cannot possibly be viewed as an equivalent  to  either
          Audited or  Unaudited  Accounts  because  there  is  no
          evidence contained within those reports to suggest that
          all  of  the  expenses  of  running  this  business  is
          recorded  therein  -  an  obvious  example  being  that
          salaries of employees appear  not  to  be  included  in
          these OPS Reports. Further  and  in  any  event  it  is
          inappropriate for  an  Appellant  to  seek  to  provide
          alternatives to either audited  or  unaudited  accounts
          and thereby require the Respondent to  effectively  act
          as an accountant or indeed, in this  appeal  to  expect
          the Tribunal to act as an accountant."


    8. He further said at [13],


          "I also note from the aforementioned Business Appraisal
          and Valuation Report prepared by Pinders that they make
          reference to accounts for the year end  2012  and  year
          end 2013. Consequently such  accounts  in  relation  to
          this business must have been in existence and available
          for  examination.  No  adequate  explanation  has  been
          provided by the Appellant as to why such accounts could
          not have been forwarded to the Respondent..."
    9. He accordingly found at [14],


          "...the Appellant did not satisfy the  requirements  of
          paragraph 46-SD because he  failed  to  supply  audited
          accounts  or  unaudited  accounts  with   an   Accounts
          Compilation Report  showing  the  amount  invested  and
          there were no accounts showing his  investment  in  the
          form of a Directors loan."

Discussion


   10. It states in the part of Appendix A of the rules  that  is
       relevant for this appeal that (my underlining);


          "46-SD. The specified documents in paragraphs 41(b) and
          46 are as follows:
          (a) The applicant  must  provide  all  the  appropriate
          specified documents needed to establish the  amount  of
          money he has invested from the following list:
             (i) If  the  applicant's  business  is  a  registered
             company that is required to produce audited accounts,
             the audited accounts must be provided;
             (ii) If the applicant's business is not  required  to
             produce audited accounts, unaudited accounts  and  an
             accounts compilation report must be provided from  an
             accountant  who  is  a  member  of  a  UK  Recognised
             Supervisory Body (as defined  in  the  Companies  Act
             2006);
             (iii, iv) n/a
          (b)  Audited  or  unaudited  accounts  must  show   the
          investment in money made directly by the applicant,  in
          his own name or on his behalf (and showing  his  name).
          ...


   11. The letter  of  1  September  2014  from  the  Appellant's
       Solicitor states that the  documents  in  support  of  the
       application include;

          1) Business Bank Statements issued by Barclays Bank,
          2) Abbreviated accounts and financial statements,
          3) Copy of VAT returns, and
          4) Letter from Basilico in favour of the Appellant.


   12. I  note  from  the  record  of  proceedings  that  it  was
       submitted before the Judge that the Operations Report  was
       equivalent to accounts or unaudited accounts when combined
       with  the  accounts  analysis   business   appraisal   and
       valuation  report  prepared  by  Pinders.  All  of   these
       documents were in the Judge's  bundle.  I  note  that  the
       Operations  Report  is  a  single   sheet   of   financial
       information that does not state it has been prepared by an
       accountant who is a member of a UK Recognised  Supervisory
       Body. I note that on the report prepared  by  Pinders  its
       states that they are members  of  the  RICS  -  the  Royal
       Institute of Chartered Surveyors.


   13. Nowhere in the letter from the  Appellant's  Solicitor  to
       the Respondent or in the  Appellant's  bundle  before  the
       Judge were there audited accounts, or  unaudited  accounts
       and  an  accounts  compilation  report  provided  from  an
       accountant who is a member of a UK Recognised  Supervisory
       Body. I am not satisfied that  "Abbreviated  accounts  and
       financial statements" amount either to audited accounts or
       unaudited accounts and an accounts compilation  report  as
       there was no evidence before the Judge that they  are  the
       same  thing.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  terms  "audited
       accounts",    "unaudited    accounts",    and    "accounts
       complication report" have particular  accounting  meanings
       as otherwise anything could be produced with no indication
       as to the qualification of the person preparing them. I am
       not  satisfied  that  they  are  covered  by  the   phrase
       "abbreviated accounts and financial statements" as  it  is
       unclear who prepared those documents or  what  they  mean.
       Nor  am  I  satisfied  that  the  Operations   Report   is
       equivalent to accounts or unaudited accounts when combined
       with  the  accounts  analysis   business   appraisal   and
       valuation report  prepared  by  Pinders  as  there  is  no
       evidence that  either  report  has  been  prepared  by  an
       accountant who is a member of a UK Recognised  Supervisory
       Body. Indeed it is unlikely that if there were accounts or
       unaudited accounts in existence on 1 September  2014  that
       copies of those could not  have  been  obtained  from  the
       accountant who prepared them or that the  Appellant  would
       not have retained a copy and  been  able  to  subsequently
       produce it.


   14. The Judge  was  therefore  entitled  to  find  as  he  did
       regarding the documents produced.

   15. There was therefore no material error of law by the  Judge
       as mandatory documents  required  to  be  filed  with  the
       application had not been, and had still not been  produced
       to the Judge and have still not been produced.


Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.





Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
2 March 2016
