










UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45475/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated on      |
|On: 22 February 2016              |13 April 2016                            |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mrs Olivia agrava Aldeza
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Haji, counsel

                            DECISION  AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge promulgated on 31 July  2015,  allowing  the
      claimant's appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  dated  29
      October 2014 refusing  her  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the
      Immigration Rules.


   3. In the course of his decision the Judge stated that the "rule of  law"
      demands that a person should be able to benefit from the ECHR so  long
      as the UK remains a party to that Convention [13]. He referred to  the
      appellant's witness statement, noting that her son has been in the  UK
      now for over seven years. He has progressed well at  school  and  made
      friends. For as long as he can remember, he has lived in  the  UK  and
      does not know the life in the Philippines. The second son was born  in
      the UK and English is his first language.


   4. The claimant also contended in her witness statement that  her  family
      in the Philippines would not be able to support them financially. Both
      her husband's parents have illnesses  and  are  unable  to  work.  Her
      mother is also financially vulnerable. She is not  in  a  position  to
      support herself, let alone support the appellant's family. They do not
      have an adequate home to go to in the Philippines. She  asserted  that
      her family in the UK has an established life here. She and her husband
      have been able to support and accommodate the family  without  relying
      on public funds. They are well integrated.


   5. The Judge referred to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration
      Act 2009 relating to the best interests of a child. He  also  referred
      to various authorities including ZH (Tanzania), Beoku-Betts, Chikwamba
      and EB (Kosovo).  He had regard to the Tribunal's decisions in  Azimi-
      Moayed and Others)  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward  appeals)
      [2013] UKUT 00197 [16-21] and Sultana and Others  [2014]  UKUT  00540,
      where the  Tribunal  noted  that  the  duties  imposed  by  s.55  will
      invariably be an intensely fact sensitive and contextual one.  In  the
      real world of litigation, the tools available to the Court or Tribunal
      in considering this  question  will  frequently  be  confined  to  the
      application or submission made to  the  secretary  of  state  and  the
      ultimate letter of decision [22].


   6. At [24] the Judge stated that he was fully  conscious  of  the  "legal
      requirements" stipulated by immigration law. It is incumbent upon  him
      to "advert" to the new Rules '.....giving respect to the animus  legis
      dictated by the supremacy of  Parliament'.  Being  bound  by  superior
      precedents, the best interests of children is  to  be  borne  in  mind
      [24].


   7. He was thus persuaded that the appeal should  be  allowed.  He  stated
      that he had named in his decision three  dependants,  namely  the  two
      children of the claimant and her partner. Since  it  is  in  the  best
      interests of the children to have both  parents  with  them,  "I  must
      indicate that the father and other dependants  should  be  allowed  to
      remain here" [24].


   8. On 5 January  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher  granted  the
      secretary of  state  permission  to  appeal.  He  noted  that  in  his
      decision,  the  Judge  has  made  no  'meaningful  reference'  to  the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules. He appears to have allowed  the
      appeal under Article 8 of the EHCR, without addressing the question of
      whether  there   were   any   compelling   grounds   which   warranted
      consideration  outside  the  rules,  and  he  has  made  no  reference
      whatsoever to the public interest considerations set  out  in  s.117B.
      There is no attempt to balance the  best  interests  of  the  children
      against the wider public interests.


   9. He thus found that all grounds raised were arguable.


  10. Mr Tarlow on behalf of the secretary of state submitted in  line  with
      the grounds seeking permission that the Judge's approach to Article  8
      had  been  erroneous.  First,  he  has  failed  to  engage  with   the
      immigration rules and has failed to  conduct  any  kind  of  balancing
      exercise outside the  rules.  The  Immigration  Rules  are  Article  8
      compliant  and  can  provide  a  complete  code  in  the  absence   of
      circumstances not covered by the rules.


  11. Although it is mentioned in the appellant's witness statement that [C]
      (her son) has been in the UK for over seven years, the Judge failed to
      give any reasons for his findings at [24]  that  the  father  and  the
      other dependants should be allowed  to  remain.  No  consideration  is
      given as to whether it is "reasonable" to expect the children to leave
      the UK pursuant to EX.1. The Judge  simply  quotes  from  the  witness
      statements without making findings and case law without applying it to
      the facts.


  12. Secondly, the Judge's approach to s.55  is  erroneous.  In  accordance
      with EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874  the  question  should  have
      been asked as to whether it was reasonable for the child to follow the
      parents to the Philippines as the parents have no right to  remain  in
      the UK. The Judge failed to consider s.55 on the  basis  of  facts  as
      they are in the real world, undermining the s.55 assessment.


  13. Finally, the Judge "entirely failed" to take into  account  s.117B  of
      the 2014 Act. The Tribunal is under a  duty  to  consider  the  public
      interest identified in that section in its proportionality  assessment
      outside the rules. Sections 117A-D are not  an  a  la  carte  menu  of
      considerations that it is at the discretion of the Judge to  apply  or
      not.  Judges  are  duty  bound  to  have  regard  to   the   specified
      consideration - Dube (ss. 117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC).


  14. Mr Tarlow's ultimate submission was that at [24]  the  Judge  gave  no
      reasons at all as to why the appeal should be allowed.


  15. On behalf of the claimant, Ms Haji submitted in her Rule  24  response
      that there has been no material error of law. The  Judge  adopted  the
      correct  approach,  noting  the  Immigration   Rules,   and   properly
      considered the best interests of the  children.   She  submitted  that
      even if the Judge had considered s.117B of  the  2002  Act,  he  would
      still have  allowed  the  appeal  for  the  reasons  he  gave  in  the
      determination.


  16. In expanding her submissions during oral argument, she contended  that
      on a proper analysis of the decision, the Judge at [24] must have been
      referring to s.117B as he stated that it  is  incumbent  upon  him  to
      advert to the new rules giving  respect  to  the  spirit  of  the  law
      dictated  by  the  supremacy  of  Parliament.  That   therefore   must
      constitute a reference to the  public  interest  considerations  under
      s.117.


  17. It is also evident that the  Judge  did  have  in  mind  the  relevant
      immigration rules, including paragraph EX.1, where  the  Judge  stated
      that the claimant confirmed that her removal from  the  country  would
      deprive her children of her care. They are doing very well in  school.
      They are able to provide for them in the UK without being a burden  on
      public funds and they will be lost in the Philippines.


  18. At [10 (a)] the Judge noted from the documents in the bundle "... that
      this family has made its life in the UK substantially. To uproot  them
      would indeed be contrary to the best interests of the children". Their
      best interests cannot be ignored [10(b)].


  19. At [12] the Judge had regard to the submission that the appeal  should
      be allowed and "the appellant should be given the benefit  of  Article
      8." The ECHR should also be considered  in  assessing  the  claimant's
      case. Moreover, at [14 vii] the Judge noted that her son has  been  in
      the UK for over seven years and that he would not be in a position  to
      be supported financially should they return.


  20. The Judge also took into account  at  [14]  the  claimant's  statement
      where she asserted that she and her family have established a life  in
      the UK. They have been able to support and  accommodate  their  family
      without relying on public funds. They have friends here and  are  well
      integrated into the community. That, she submitted, was the basis  for
      the consideration of the matters referred to in s.117B.


  21. The Judge had regard to the best interests  of  the  children,  albeit
      that he initially  stated  at  [16]  that  the  Supreme  Court  in  ZH
      (Tanzania) held that the  best  interests  of  the  child  had  to  be
      considered and given "paramount weight" as part of the  assessment  of
      proportionality under Article 8.'  He did however state  in  the  next
      paragraph [17], that in reaching decisions that will affect a child, a
      primacy of importance must be accorded to his or her  best  interests.
      In the event the Judge ultimately adopted the correct approach.


  22. She submitted  that  even  though  the  Judge  had  not  set  out  the
      applicable Rules and the statutes,  he  has  taken  into  account  the
      relevant  factors.  The  Tribunal  cannot  go   behind   findings   of
      credibility.


  23. In reply, Mr Tarlow submitted that it is an essential feature  in  the
      making of any decision for a party to know why they lose  or  succeed.
      It should be clear on the  basis  of  the  determination  itself  with
      sufficient and appropriate reasoning that the major issues  have  been
      properly assessed and considered.


  24. The lack of any proper reasoning together with the failure to deal  at
      all with s.117 interests renders the decision unsafe. It is  wrong  to
      have to attempt to identify the various rules and statutes 'by looking
      between the lines'.


     Assessment


  25. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  diffuse
      and unfocused.  There has been a  failure  to  identify  the  relevant
      immigration rules which apply in this case. Moreover, as contended  on
      behalf of the secretary of state, there was no reference to s.117B  of
      the 2002 Act.


  26. Ms Haji contended that there nevertheless had not  been  any  material
      errors of law as the Judge appears to have given consideration to  the
      relevant rules and the statutes.


  27. However, I accept Mr Tarlow's submission that there has  not  been  an
      appropriate identification of the rules which  apply.  There  has  not
      been any focus on the  essential  requirements  under  the  rules.  In
      particular, there has not been any accompanying reasoning as to why it
      would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.  There
      had merely been assertions made by the appellant in that  respect.  No
      actual evidence relating to the family's position in  the  Philippines
      was adduced.


  28. The Judge did not direct himself in accordance with EV  (Philippines),
      supra. He did not therefore consider, as  directed  by  the  Court  of
      Appeal, the best interests of the children on the basis  of  facts  as
      they are in the real world.


  29. Finally, in accordance with the decision in Dube, supra, the Judge did
      not take into account all the enumerated considerations  in  s.117A-D.
      It is not at the discretion of the Judge to apply  or  not  apply  the
      specified considerations.


  30. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of material errors on a point of  law.  I  set  it
      aside. The parties agreed that in that event it would have to  be  re-
      made.


  31. As submitted by Mr Tarlow the whole decision has to be re-made;  there
      will have to be substantial fact finding following  detailed  evidence
      and submissions.  This  is  accordingly  an  appropriate  case  to  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and the decision is set aside.


      The claimant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor
      House) for a fresh decision to be made before another Judge.


      No anonymity direction is made.










      Signed                             Dated:  4  April 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

