

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45292/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 23 May 2014                                |on 29 May 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                  O J ODOKO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Fox, dismissing his appeal  against  refusal  of  a  residence
       card.


    2. Permission to appeal to the UT was granted on paragraphs 1 -5 and  7
       of the grounds.  Mr Ndubuisi  accepted  that  paragraph  6  is  only
       narrative.

    3. As Mr Ndubuisi was winding up his submission, Mr Mullen (fairly  and
       correctly) conceded that the judge went wrong as  to  the  date  for
       admissibility of evidence (ground 1)  and  by  failing  to  consider
       evidence of transfer of funds to the appellant  in  Nigeria  (ground
       3).  While ground 7 might be based on an observation which makes  no
       difference, the other grounds might also show lack  of  underpinning
       for the findings about dependency and household membership.

    4. Representatives agreed that the case should be remitted to the First-
       tier Tribunal for fresh hearing.

    5. The determination is set aside. No findings of the FtT are to stand.
        Under s.12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2  the
       nature and  extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  necessary  for  the
       decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate  to  remit  the
       case to the FtT.  The member(s) of the FtT chosen to reconsider  the
       case are not to include Judge Fox.


                               [pic]
                                23 May 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


