
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45697/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 29 May 2014                                |On 2nd June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

          BESHAR AHMED BHARAM (previously recorded as Begar Ahmed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr S Winter, Advocate instructed by Maguire,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born  on  4  May  2012.   He  appeals
   against a determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wallace,  dated  3
   February 2014.




2) The appellant's grounds are as follows:

    The appellant's case focused on Article 8, ECHR.  He is living  with  a
    British  national.   She  has  an  8  year  old  son  from  a  previous
    relationship. She is pregnant with the appellant's  child.   The  Judge
    accepted that there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  at
    paragraphs 48 and 51 of  the  determination.   The  Judge  refused  the
    appeal on the basis that as  the  appellant's  immigration  status  was
    precarious this emphasised a distinctly weak basis  for  any  claim  to
    family life sufficient to overcome the public interest  in  maintaining
    proper immigration control (see paragraph 49) and the Judge found  that
    there cannot be  a  foundation  for  family  life  as  the  appellant's
    immigration status has,  from  the  outset  of  the  relationship  been
    precarious  (see  paragraph  52).   It  appears  the  Judge  found   it
    proportionate for the appellant to return to apply for entry clearance.
     There was no suggestion by the Judge that it would be  reasonable  for
    the appellant's  wife  and  child  to  relocate.   It  is  respectfully
    submitted that the Judge has erred in law:


              i)  by  failing  to  identify  or  apply  the  correct   legal
                 principles in the correct manner as enunciated in Secretary
                 of State for the Home Department  v  Hayat  and  Treebhowan
                 [2013] Imm AR 15, [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 at paragraph 30.  In
                 particular  the  Judge  failed  to  identify  the   correct
                 question by asking whether there was a sensible reason  for
                 requiring the  appellant  to  return  to  apply  for  entry
                 clearance.  The Judge failed to identify  relevant  factors
                 in assessing whether it was sensible for the  appellant  to
                 return to apply for entry clearance.  Such factors  include
                 the prospective length and degree of disruption and whether
                 other  family  members  are  in  the  UK.   Had  the  Judge
                 identified  these,  it  would  have  been  found  that  the
                 appellant's partner is in the UK and is  British  and  that
                 under the Immigration  Rules  the  separation  between  the
                 appellant and his partner is likely to  be  longer  than  6
                 months in light of the fact that 6 months  wage  slips  are
                 required under the Immigration Rules.  There would then  be
                 further time needed to make the entry clearance application
                 and for that to be decided.  Such a  time  limit  has  been
                 found to be a factor in making return to  apply  for  entry
                 clearance disproportionate  (see  Kotecha  v  Secretary  of
                 State for the Home Department [2011]  EWHC  2070  Admin  at
                 paragraph 59 per Mr Justice Burnett.)  The appellant  would
                 not be able to support his partner who is pregnant with his
                 child whilst outside of the  UK.   Further  other  relevant
                 factors include whether the appellant's ties  with  the  UK
                 are strong such as the appellant's partner's nationality as
                 a British national, as is her 8 year old son, and it is not
                 being suggested that marriage between the appellant and his
                 partner would not give the appellant the right to remain in
                 the UK (see Kotecha at paragraph 60.)  As per Kotecha,  the
                 foregoing  factors   are   demonstrative   of   exceptional
                 circumstances  and  there  would  be  unjustifiably   harsh
                 consequences  in  terms  of  the  length  and   degree   of
                 separation between the appellant and his partner.  If it is
                 said that the Judge did take account of these factors,  the
                 Judge has erred by failing to  explain  how  these  factors
                 have been assessed in reaching the decision.  If it is said
                 the Judge has given adequate explanation, the  Judge  erred
                 by reaching an irrational decision;


             ii) on the hypothesis that the Judge's decision is to  be  read
                 as also  finding  that  it  would  be  reasonable  for  the
                 appellant's partner and child to relocate to  Iraq,  it  is
                 respectfully submitted that the Judge erred  in  law.   The
                 Judge has failed to assess the best interests of the  child
                 as a primary consideration in examining whether  relocation
                 would be reasonable in light  of  various  case  law.   The
                 Judge has also failed to assess the weight to be  given  to
                 the  appellant's  partner's  nationality  and   length   of
                 residence in the UK.  Such factors are weighty factors  and
                 the Judge  ought  to  have  taken  those  into  account  in
                 assessing whether relocation would be reasonable.   Failure
                 to take these relevant factors into account is an error  of
                 law.  Had the Judge taken these factors  into  account  she
                 would not have reached the decision she did.

3) On 24 February 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer  granted  permission
   to appeal, observing as follows:

    The grounds are arguable  as  it  is  unclear  what  finding  was  made
    regarding whether from the appellant's point of view  the  relationship
    was genuine, as there appears to be have been no consideration given to
    the best interest of Laura's child, and as the judge  appears  to  have
    found the "precarious" nature of his immigration status  when  entering
    the relationship to be determinative as opposed to a factor.


4) The SSHD responded to  the  grounds  of  appeal  under  Rule  24  in  the
   following terms:


        3. ... these grounds disclose no material arguable  errors  of  law
           capable of having a material impact  upon  the  outcome  of  the
           appeal.


        4. The grounds advanced are in mere disagreement with the  negative
           outcome of the appeal.  Although it is  arguable  that  the  FTT
           Judge  did  [not?]  give  express  consideration  to  the   best
           interests of the sponsor's 8 year old child, he also  considered
           the best interests of the sponsor's unborn child.  (Paragraph 44
           determination).  At paragraph 43 of the  determination  the  FTT
           Judge considered how the sponsor's son would be affected if  the
           appellant were removed as the appellant was one  of  two  father
           figures in the child's life (along with  the  sponsor's  father)
           but made the reasonable sustainable finding that the appellant's
           mother, aunts, cousins and grandparents will still remain in his
           life.

        5. Moreover, it is submitted that given the facts:

           a) the  appellant  had  only  met  the  sponsor  10  months  ago
              (paragraph 35 determination);
           b) there was limited evidence of a  relationship  and  no  joint
              utility bills (paragraph 40);
           c) that the appellant knows little English (paragraph 42)


           ... that any omission by the FTT Judge in this regard is  not  a
           material error capable of having  a  material  impact  upon  the
           outcome of the appeal.

5) Mr Mullen submitted that the judge made findings which were  adequate  to
   support the conclusion reached.  He argued that the grounds  were  framed
   on the assumption that the judge decided the case on the basis  that  the
   appellant could seek entry clearance from Iraq, but that was not  a  fair
   reflection of the determination.  The judge said at paragraph 39 that  it
   was common ground that the appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
   the Immigration Rules.  The only other reference  was  at  paragraph  50,
   where the judge said  that  the  appellant's  partner  would  support  an
   application for him to return as her spouse.  If he could  not  meet  the
   Rules in any event, that was neither here nor there.  The findings  might
   be brief, but the judge had reached the only conclusion properly open  to
   her.

6) I advised parties of my finding that the determination errs in  law,  and
   would have to be set aside.  There is a no clear finding on whether  this
   is a genuine relationship on the part of the appellant.  The  judge  says
   at paragraph 52 that there can be no foundation for family  life  because
   the appellant's immigration status has been precarious from  the  outset.
   A precarious immigration status will always be a  significant  factor  in
   the proportionality balance, but that (i) does not mean that family  life
   cannot exist for Article  8  purposes  and  (ii)  is  not  determinative.
   (There is also an absence of explicit consideration of the best interests
   of the 8 year old child, the son of  the  appellant's  partner,  although
   that by itself might not require the  determination  to  be  set  aside.)
   Thus there is deficiency in findings on the primary facts, and  error  of
   legal approach, such that the determination cannot stand.

7) The hearing proceeded  with  the  view  to  reaching  a  fresh  decision.
   Circumstances have changed significantly since  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   hearing.

8) The appellant and his partner, Laura Urquhart, have  a  daughter,  Marley
   Beshar Bharam, born on 1 May 2014.  His partner also has an  8  year  old
   son from a previous relationship.  Those 3 parties are all  UK  citizens.
   The appellant and Ms Urquhart intend to marry, but no date has  yet  been
   fixed.  The appellant could not succeed on an application based on family
   life within the Immigration Rules, due to inability to meet the financial
   requirements.  This is not a Chikwamba case - there is no prospect of  an
   entry clearance application from abroad succeeding within the Rules,  and
   any Article 8 consideration outside the Rules may be carried out at least
   as readily in the UK as by an Entry Clearance  officer.    Those  matters
   are all common ground.

9) Mr Mullen suggested that the appellant could reasonably  be  expected  to
   make further representations to the respondent, which  would  lead  to  a
   fresh  decision  based  on  his  up-to-date  circumstances.   Mr   Winter
   submitted that the Upper Tribunal should resolve the Article 8  issue  on
   its merits, there being no need for further factual investigation by  the
   respondent or by a Tribunal.  I prefer Mr Winter's submission.   There is
   no good reason for the Upper Tribunal not to resolve the Article 8 ground
   of appeal before it, based on a factual  position  which  is  essentially
   agreed.

10) The appellant's partner and  child,  and  the  older  child,  cannot  be
   expected to leave the UK.  The alternative of family life  in  Iraq  does
   not arise for consideration.   The consequences of removal  would  be  to
   sever present family relationships.  Those are arguably good grounds  for
   granting leave to remain outside  the  Rules  and  the  question  becomes
   whether  they  constitute  compelling  circumstances   not   sufficiently
   recognised under the Rules - in other words,  the  case  arrives  at  the
   proportionality assessment in terms of question 5 in Razgar.

11)  The factors against the appellant are his adverse immigration  history,
   which is poor but far from the worst; inability  to  meet  the  financial
   requirements of the Immigration Rules; the fact that  relationships  were
   formed while status was precarious; and the general  public  interest  in
   enforcing the Rules.

12) Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 regarding Article 8 of  the  ECHR
   and public interest considerations has not yet been brought  into  force.
   If and when it is, the 2002 Act will be amended by insertion  of  section
   117B(6):

    In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,  the  public
    interest does not require the person's removal where -


           a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
              with a qualifying child, and
           b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave  the
              United Kingdom.

13) Although not yet in force, I think that is a valid reference  for  where
   the public interest lies, and it reinforces my conclusion  on  where  the
   proportionality balance should be struck.

14) The  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.   The
   following decision is substituted: the appellant's appeal, as  originally
   brought to the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed under  Article  8  of  the
   ECHR.







                               [pic]
                                30 May 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
