
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45217/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 November 2014                           |On 16 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          THE HONORABLE LORD BURNS
                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                              SAHATTHAYA SOPON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hussain, Counsel for A1 Law Chambers, London


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Thailand, born on  18  April  1987.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated  9  October  2013
    refusing to grant her leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4
    (General) Student under Article 8 of ECHR.  Her  appeal  was  heard  by
    Judge of the First  Tier  Tribunal  D  Ross  and  was  dismissed  in  a
    determination promulgated on 13 June 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by First Tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 30 July  2014  but
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on 21 October 2014.
     She found that it is arguable that the First  Tier  Tribunal  did  not
    apply the correct test for calculating the amount of time spent by  the
    Appellant studying at level 5, by failing to take into account that the
    calculation is not merely that of the amount of leave  granted  by  the
    respondent.  Permission was granted on this sole ground and  permission
    was specifically not granted in relation to the Article 8 claim.

 3. At the  Hearing  the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  guidance  on  the
    computation of the time permitted for studying, not at degree level.

 4. At the outset of the hearing we referred to the issue of whether  there
    was a right of appeal before the First Tier Tribunal.  After discussion
    it was found that there might have been no right  of  appeal  when  the
    appeal was heard by the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  as  the  claim  has
    reached the point which it has now reached,  we  went  ahead  with  the
    error of law hearing.

 5. The Appellant's representative submitted that the Judge made  an  error
    when  he  made  his  calculation  of  time.   At  paragraph  8  of  the
    determination the Judge refers to paragraph 245ZX and the  requirements
    for leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.   One  of  these
    requirements is that if the course is below degree level, the grant  of
    leave to remain the Applicant is seeking must not lead to the Applicant
    having spent more than three years in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4
    Migrant since the age of 18, studying courses that do  not  consist  of
    degree level study.

 6. Counsel referred us to the last  four  lines  of  paragraph  9  of  the
    determination and submitted that this is where the error  lies.   These
    lines state that the Judge believes that as the  Appellant  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 27 October 2010, by  March  2014  she  will  have
    spent more than three years in the UK  studying  courses  that  do  not
    consist of degree level study.  The judge stated that the  requirements
    do not relate to the length of the actual courses  but  relate  to  the
    period which the Appellant has spent in the UK.  Counsel submitted that
    as the judge found that the period in the UK is the significant  period
    and not the length of the courses, he dismissed the appeal.

 7. We were referred to paragraph 245ZY (b).  This gives  the  calculations
    of time spent studying under degree level  and  paragraph  245ZY  (iii)
    refers to the table at paragraph 245ZY(b).   After  discussion  it  was
    found that the Appellant has studied for  two  years  and  two  months.
    This is accepted in the refusal  letter.   The  Judge  took  the  whole
    period of leave into his calculation instead of the actual study period
    of two years and two months.  The appellant is entitled, based on  this
    table, to study for another ten months at under degree level.   Counsel
    submitted that the course the Appellant is now going to study is from 9
    September 2013 until 4 September 2015  but  only  ten  months  of  that
    period of study will be at level 5 (below degree level) and the rest of
    the course will be at level 6 (degree level).  He  submitted  that  the
    Judge has made an error of law in  his  calculation  and  his  decision
    should be overturned.

 8. The Presenting Officer accepted that there is an error of  law  in  the
    determination because of the calculation by the judge. He accepted that
    the Appellant has so far studied for two years  and  two  months  under
    degree level.  He submitted that the Appellant then  applied  to  study
    for a Diploma in Tourism and Hospitality Management  from  9  September
    2013 until 4 September 2015.  He submitted that this is a points  based
    system case and under paragraph 85A(iii) of the  Rules,  evidence  that
    the new diploma course is partly at level 5 and partly at level  6  was
    not lodged with the application.  He submitted that because of this the
    new evidence cannot be accepted.  Originally the whole  course  was  at
    level 5.  He submitted that it is only now that there is evidence  that
    the course is going to be studied at level 5 and then at level  6.   He
    submitted that this evidence has only now become available and as  this
    is new evidence it cannot be considered.

 9. The Presenting Officer also accepted that there is an error of  law  in
    the  time  calculation  in  the  determination  at  paragraph  9.   The
    information submitted with the Appellant's application  in  respect  of
    the new diploma course indicated that the length of the course at level
    5 would be two years. The Appellant's overall studying at below  degree
    level would therefore  last  for  over  three  years.   The  Presenting
    Officer submitted however, that the misdirection is not material as the
    appeal cannot succeed because the evidence that the course is going  to
    be split between level 5 and level 6 is new evidence  which  cannot  be
    applied.

10. We asked Counsel if it is correct that the Appellant  applied  for  the
    course to be upgraded.  He said that is the case and this was not  done
    before the application was made.  He submitted that the course  is  now
    at level 6 after 2014 and the CAS submitted  with  the  application  is
    wrong.

11. Counsel  submitted  that  the  Judge  made  the  wrong  calculation  at
    paragraph 9 and as the course has now been upgraded, the appeal  should
    succeed.  He submitted that fairness is an issue and points  should  be
    awarded to the Appellant and she should be granted leave to remain,  as
    all the other terms of the Rules have  been  satisfied.   He  submitted
    that the Appellant had no control over the CAS letter and it  was  only
    because there was an error in the CAS letter that this application  was
    dismissed.  He submitted that  this  is  only  a  technical  point  and
    because of the  sponsor's  mistake  the  Appellant  has  suffered.   He
    submitted that when fairness is  taken  into  account  the  application
    should succeed.

Determination

12. There is an error of  law  in  the  determination  in  that  the  Judge
    miscalculated the length of time that the Appellant would  be  studying
    under degree level.  Both parties agree that the Appellant has  so  far
    studied for two years and two months.  In spite of this, the CAS handed
    in with the application stated that the diploma  course  the  Appellant
    would be studying would be for two years and would be at level  5.   In
    that case the Appellant would be studying in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    more than three years below degree level.

13. When the Appellant realised that  her  application  was  not  going  to
    succeed she asked for the course to be  upgraded  and  the  course  was
    upgraded so that she would be studying first of all at level 5 and then
    the course would change to level 6.

14. This is a points based system case and the only evidence  that  can  be
    considered is the evidence submitted with  the  application.   In  this
    case the CAS submitted with the application  stated  that  the  diploma
    course the Appellant will be studying will be for two years at level 5.
     The upgrading of the course only took place after the application  had
    been refused at the request of the appellant.  This  is  therefore  new
    evidence and cannot be considered.

15. There is an error of law in the Judge's determination but it is  not  a
    material error of law as the appeal cannot succeed.  For it to  succeed
    the new evidence about her new diploma course  would  have  had  to  be
    submitted with the application.

Decision

16. There is no material error of law in the Judge's determination although
    there is an error of law.

17. The First Tier Tribunal decision  promulgated  on  13  June  2014  must
    stand.



Signed        Date 16 December 2014

Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
