
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45865/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Justice-Belfast                      |                                     |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 30 November 2015                  |
|Judgment given orally at hearing     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr Francis Nketia Dumont
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M. O'Brian, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F. Connolly, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Secretary of  State  but
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on  28  February  1982.
    On 13 February 2013 he made an application  for  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a  permanent  right  of  residence  in  the  UK.   That
    application was refused in a  decision  dated  21  October  2013.   The
    respondent's decision considered  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the  EEA  Regulations")  and  refused   the
    application because the respondent concluded that the appellant had not
    established that he  and  his  partner  had  been  living  together  as
    partners in a durable relationship for at least two years.

 3. The appellant's partner is a  SK  who  is  both  a  British  and  Irish
    national.  So far as she is concerned, there was also an issue in terms
    of whether  in  terms  of  her  exercise  of  Treaty  rights,  she  was
    'permanently incapacitated' so as to come within regulation 5(3) of the
    2006 Regulations.

 4. The appeal against the respondent's  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Judge  Farrelly  on  13  June  2014.   At  [8]  he  records  that   the
    representative on behalf of the appellant stated that  the  appeal  was
    not being pursued on the basis of the EEA Regulations.  The  appeal  on
    that basis was untenable in the light of the  amendments  to  the  2006
    Regulations, the sponsor also being entitled to British nationality.

 5. The judge  went  on  however,  to  consider  the  contention  that  the
    appellant was able to succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR.  At [12] the
    issue of whether the appellant should have made a  separate  Article  8
    application was  canvassed.  Ms  Connolly,  who  also  appeared  below,
    indicated that there was a substantial fee that  would  otherwise  have
    been required, although it may be that in this case the appellant might
    not have been expected to pay it.

 6. From [13] onwards the judge referred to authorities  on  the  issue  of
    whether he had jurisdiction to consider Article  8,  in  particular  JM
    Liberia v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1402.  He concluded that he  did  have  jurisdiction  and  went  on  to
    consider Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  allowed  the
    appeal.  He took into account the best interests of couple's  daughter,
    A, she having been born on 8 May 2010.

 7. At [27] the judge said that

         "On balance, purely for the  sake  of  [A]  the  appeal  should  be
         allowed on article 8 grounds.  Were it not for [A] the respondent's
         decision, which ultimately would require the  appellant  to  leave,
         would not breach article 8.  By allowing the  appeal  in  this  way
         there is the hope that he will remain as a  father  figure  in  her
         life and she is an innocent to her parents' behaviour."

 8. The initial challenge to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    based on the judge's assessment of Article 8 outside the Rules.  At [2]
    of the grounds it was argued that the  Tribunal  erred  by  not  having
    regard to the Rules and that the subsequent proportionality  assessment
    is unsustainable because of this omission.  Latterly, and indeed on the
    occasion when this matter was last before the court and was  adjourned,
    it was apparent that a decision of the Upper Tribunal  was  awaited  in
    terms of whether a judge has jurisdiction to consider Article 8 on  the
    refusal of a residence card.  That  is  because,  as  asserted  by  the
    respondent, the refusal of  a  residence  card  does  not  involve  any
    removal directions and, so the argument goes, Article 8 is not engaged.



 9. The notice of immigration decision in this case has passages or phrases
    in it that could be supportive of the argument on either side  of  that
    line. However, the matter is now conclusively  decided,  for  the  time
    being at least, by the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  in  Amirteymour
    and Others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT  00466  (IAC),  that
    being a decision of the  President,  the  Vice  President,  Mr  C  M  G
    Ockelton, and Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul.  It is only  necessary  for
    present purposes to refer  to  the  headnote  of  that  decision  which
    reflects what is in the body of the determination.  The headnote  reads
    as follows:

         "Where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been  served
         and where no EEA decision to remove has  been  made,  an  appellant
         cannot bring a human rights challenge to removal in an appeal under
         the EEA Regulations.  Neither the factual matrix nor the  reasoning
         in JM Liberia [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 has any application  to  appeals
         of this nature."

10. It is not suggested that in this case there was a s120 notice and  none
    has been drawn to my attention.

11. In submissions on behalf of the appellant I was invited  to  take  into
    account that that decision is presently subject to appeal to the  Court
    of Appeal.   I  was  also  informed  that  the  President  himself  had
    adjourned some cases on the same point. However, I am not aware of  the
    facts of those other cases and it was not apparent to me as to when the
    Court of Appeal would hear the appeal against that decision; it may  be
    some many months in the future.  I did not consider therefore, that  it
    was appropriate to adjourn this appeal pending the outcome of the Court
    of Appeal's decision.

12.  It seems to me that the point about whether the judge had jurisdiction
    to consider Article 8 at all is conclusively dealt with in Amirteymour.
     I was not addressed in detail on the essence of that decision in terms
    of whether or not it was correctly decided. However, I have for my part
    considered the decision and the reasoning in it. I adopt that reasoning
    and apply it to the circumstances of this case which it seems to me are
    not materially different.

13. The First-tier judge of course did not have the benefit, as  I  do,  of
    the decision in Amirteymour. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that  he  did
    err  in  law  in  considering  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   He  had  no
    jurisdiction to do so and  in  those  circumstances  I  set  aside  his
    decision and re-make it, concluding that there is  no  jurisdiction  in
    this case to consider Article 8.

14. If I had to decide the Article 8 argument as advanced on behalf of  the
    respondent I would have decided the point in the  respondent's  favour,
    in that it does seem to me that in the judge's assessment  he  did  not
    have as his reference point the Immigration Rules on Article  8,  which
    would otherwise have governed  an  Article  8  case.   The  judge  went
    straight on to consider Article 8 proper without using  the  Article  8
    Immigration Rules as his reference point.

15. Whilst I doubt what is said  in  the  respondent's  grounds  about  the
    Immigration Rules  being  a  complete  code  in  cases  which  are  not
    concerned with deportation, it is nevertheless the case that the  judge
    ought  to  have  measured  the  Article  8  consideration   using   the
    Immigration Rules as the  primary  yardstick,  and  then  going  on  to
    consider whether there were grounds to  consider  Article  8  otherwise
    than under the Immigration Rules.  In failing to do so his decision  in
    my judgement was in error.  It is not necessary for me to go further to
    consider the Article 8 argument because, as I have said,  there  is  no
    jurisdiction to consider Article 8 at all.

    Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set  aside.  I
    re-make the decision and dismiss the appeal.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  26/11/15

