
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45327/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2015                    |On 9 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                             SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         NICHOLAS ROMULAR PUVIRANJAN
                          (No anonymity Order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Heller, of counsel, instructed by Waran & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but for convenience  I
         will refer to the original appellant herein, a citizen of Sri Lanka
         born on 3 June, 1951, as the appellant.

      2. The appellant states he entered the United Kingdom in May 2007.  He
         applied for asylum but this application was refused.  He  made  two
         applications for a residence card under the  Immigration  (European
         Economic Area) Regulations 2006 in 2012 which were both refused. On
         13 June, 2013 he made a further application as  a  dependent  under
         the regulations  which  has  resulted  in  the  appeal  proceedings
         herein. The application was refused  on  16  September,  2013.  The
         appellant claimed to be dependent on his sister before he had  come
         to the United Kingdom and that he was  dependent  on  her  in  this
         country.

      3. The appellant appealed and his appeal came before First-tier  Judge
         Beach on 15 July, 2014. The  judge  found  there  was  insufficient
         evidence to establish the  claimed  dependency  and  dismissed  the
         appeal under the regulations. There has been no challenge  to  that
         aspect of the decision.

      4. The judge went on to consider  the  appeal  under  article  8.  She
         concluded that the appellant could not make out his case under  the
         immigration rules and considered whether there were  arguably  good
         grounds for considering his claim outside the rules. She found that
         the appellant lived with his sister and her family  in  the  United
         Kingdom and had two other sisters in this country. He had  a  close
         relationship with her and was financially dependent  upon  her.  He
         had formed a private life in the UK and Article 8 was engaged.

      5. In paragraph 45 of decision of the  judge  considered  whether  the
         respondent's decision was proportionate. She accepted that  it  was
         likely that the appellant's sister would be  able  to  provide  the
         appellant with some financial support in Sri Lanka. She  noted  the
         appellant had not lived in Sri Lanka for a considerable  period  of
         time. It was unclear when the appellant had left Sri Lanka (1977 or
         1997) but even taking the later date he had been out  of  his  home
         country for 17 years and was now aged  63.  While  there  might  be
         other extended family members in Sri Lanka this did not  mean  that
         they were in a position to assist the appellant.  He  would  be  at
         some disadvantage on return and would have no  housing,  employment
         or  family  support.  The  decision  of  the  respondent  was   not
         proportionate. The judge allowed the appeal on article 8 grounds.

      6. The respondent appealed the decision. In the initial grounds it was
         argued that the judge had erred in concluding as she  did.  It  was
         argued that the appellant had social and  cultural  ties  with  Sri
         Lanka and could re-establish himself with the financial  assistance
         provided by his sister. The judge had failed to take  into  account
         the  effect  of  section  19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  the
         determination being promulgated on 11 August, 2014.

      7.  These  initial  grounds  have   been   overtaken   by   subsequent
         developments. On 20 November, 2014 the Secretary of  State  applied
         to vary the grounds of appeal arguing that the First-tier  Tribunal
         had no jurisdiction to determine the appeal on article  8  grounds,
         relying on Lamichane v Secretary of State [2012] EWCA  Civ  260  at
         paragraph 39 where Lord Justice Stanley Burnton stated as follows:

             "I can  now  turn  to  section  85(2).  The  reference  to  "a
             statement under section 120" is a statement made  in  response
             to a notice served under that section. There can  be  no  such
             statement if no section 120 notice  has  been  served.  It  is
             implicit in section 85(2)  that  in  the  absence  of  such  a
             statement the Tribunal shall not consider "any  matter  raised
             in the statement which constitutes a ground  of  appeal  of  a
             kind listed in section 84(1)  against  the  decision  appealed
             against". Given the  conclusion  I  have  reached  on  section
             96(1), this does disadvantage the appellant, in  that  if  his
             leave has expired in order to rely on his new ground  he  must
             either  stay  in  this  country  unlawfully,   or   make   his
             application from outside this country.  Against  that,  if  he
             stays in this  country  and  the  Secretary  of  State  serves
             removal directions, he will  have  a  right  of  appeal  under
             section 82(2)(g) against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
             State on his new ground."

      8. The hearing of the appeal was adjourned by  agreement  between  the
         parties pending  consideration  being  given  to  the  issue  by  a
         Presidential panel of the Upper Tribunal.

      9. As it turned out, the determination was published on the day of the
         hearing before me. Both parties had had sight of the  decision  and
         were  content  to  proceed  with  the  hearing.  This  decision  is
         Amirteymour and others (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT
         00466 (IAC), the headnote of which reads as follows:

             'Where no notice under section 120 of the 2002  Act  has  been
             served and where no EEA decision to remove has been  made,  an
             appellant cannot bring a Human Rights challenge to removal  in
             an appeal under  the  EEA  Regulations.  Neither  the  factual
             matrix nor the reasoning in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ  1402
             has any application to appeals of this nature.'

     10. Ms Isherwood relied on this decision and submitted that the  First-
         tier Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to determine the Article  8
         appeal as there had been no notice under s 120. There had  been  no
         challenge to the judge's decision  on  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
         Regulations.

     11. Ms Heller acknowledged that the points she had raised in  reply  to
         the respondent's amended grounds were all dealt with by  the  panel
         and she accepted that the judge had not dealt with  the  amendments
         made by the 2014 Act. There  was  a  material  error  of  law.  She
         accepted I was effectively bound by the Tribunal's decision.

     12. I find as accepted the determination was materially flawed in  law.
         I have no alternative but to allow the respondent's appeal  on  the
         basis that the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to deal with
         Article 8. As was pointed out by Ms Heller, however,  by  reference
         to what was said in paragraph 74 of Amirteymour, it is open to  the
         appellant to make a human rights application if so advised.

     13. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

         Fee Award

         The First-tier Judge made no fee award. In the circumstances I make
         no award.

         I make no anonymity order




    Signed


                                   Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                                   25 August 2015
