

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                Appeal Number: IA/45564/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 October 2014                            |On 27 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                           Ms GINA MANAIA KILKELLY

                                                                   Appellant

                                   and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                       ANONYMITY DIRECTION IS NOT MADE



Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms B Asanovic of Counsel instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Alice Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This appeal, against the decision of Judge  Doyle  of  the  First  Tier
  Tribunal, had come before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge, Judge Lever, on 23
  June 2014 who after hearing arguments from representatives had found that
  there was a material error of law in the decision made by Judge Doyle  to
  dismiss  the  appeal  that  the  appellant  had   brought   against   the
  respondent's decision rejecting his  application  for  permission  to  be
  allowed to remain in the UK under EU Law. Determination of  Deputy  Upper
  Tribunal Judge Lever is on the case file.
2.    After setting the decision  of  Judge  Doyle  aside  Judge  Lever  had
  reserved the re making of the decision to himself. As the appeal appeared
  in my list, the Principal Judge, Judge Latter made an order  of  transfer
  which representatives of both parties were content with.


3.    Before me, Mrs Holmes representing the respondent having  perused  the
  written skeleton arguments, conceded the merits of the appellant's claim.
  She invited me to allow the appeal. Based upon the decision granting  the
  appellant permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  her  grounds  of
  appeal as well as arguments advanced in the  written  skeleton  arguments
  filed by Counsel for the appellant, I  am  satisfied  that  Mrs  Holmes's
  submission to allow the appeal is correct and has saved substantial court
  time. Credit for expeditious disposal of this appeal must also go  to  Ms
  Asonovic, counsel for the appellant who  produced  an  excellent  written
  skeleton argument  which,  relying  on  case  law  as  well  as  relevant
  legislation, shows that the decision of the respondent was wrong in  law.
  I am most grateful to both representatives for the manner in  which  they
  had prepared the appeal and for their conduct in the Court.

4.  Accordingly I allow this  appeal.  I  find  that  the  decision  of  the
  respondent to refuse the appellant was in violation  of  the  appellant's
  right under paragraph 3 (a) (b) and (4) of Regulation 10  of  Immigration
  (EEA) Regulation 2006 as well as Regulation 15 of the  Immigration  (EEA)
  Regulation 2006.



      K Drabu CBE
      Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
      24 October 2014























