
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45830/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2015                  |On 2 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SHAHANA PARVEZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss N Malik, Counsel, instructed by No 5 Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for and do not make an order restricting publicity  about
    this case.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  a
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowing  the  appeal   of   the   present
    respondent, hereinafter "the  claimant",  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing her leave to  remain  under  the  ten  year
    residency route.

 3. By the time the First-tier Tribunal heard the  case  the  claimant  had
    completed ten years' lawful residence but when the  decision  was  made
    she was about two  months  short.  The  Tribunal  was  referred  to  MU
    ("statement of additional  grounds"  -  long  residence  -  discretion)
    Bangladesh [2010] UKUT 442 (IAC) which makes it clear that  the  appeal
    should be allowed because the lawful residence  was  completed  by  the
    time the Tribunal heard the case.  That being the position,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  He  further  indicated
    that, if he had not allowed the appeal under the rules, he  would  have
    allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

 4. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal.   I  think  it
    important to say here, because the Secretary of State's  conduct  might
    not make sense if I do not, that in my experience the grounds of appeal
    relied upon by the Secretary of State are frequently settled by  people
    who do not have the complete file and have no contact with  the  people
    who appeared in the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The grounds complain that the judge had  materially  misunderstood  the
    evidence. The claimant had not achieved ten  years'  lawful  residence.
    The lawful residence was interrupted by a long period in which she  was
    in the United Kingdom without permission.  According to  the  Secretary
    of State she did not have leave between 31 October 2007 and 14 December
    2011.  If that is right, then the case became  potentially  complicated
    because the appeal should not have been allowed under  the  Immigration
    Rules but the grounds do not challenge  the  finding  that  the  appeal
    should have been allowed on human rights grounds.

 6. Ms Malik had the advantage of actually knowing  what  happened  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  She appeared in the First-tier Tribunal and  told
    me very carefully that the Secretary of State's representative  in  the
    First-tier conceded that there had been ten  years'  lawful  residence.
    The judge's notes are easy to  read.  Although  some  things  might  be
    thought equivocal they show a very clear note by  the  judge  that  the
    Secretary of State accepted  at  the  hearing  that  the  claimant  had
    completed 10 years continuous lawful residence.

 7. It is very clear to me that there was  a  concession.   That  might  be
    enough to dispose of the case but it is also right to go a bit further.
    Ms Malik explained that  the  concession  was  the  result  of  careful
    consideration of the file by the Presenting Officer.

 8. At some point in her history the claimant had  carelessly  allowed  her
    leave to lapse. She made an application to extend her leave a day later
    than it should have been made.  There  is  no  shilly  shallying  about
    that.  She is quite straightforward about the  fact  that  she  made  a
    mistake. Ms Malik also said, although she was not able to back this  up
    with reference to particular documents, that at the material time,  and
    possibly now, a very short delay such as that was covered by policy and
    was deemed not to count as an  interruption  in  lawful  residence.   I
    think that may very well be right.

 9. I do not know exactly what happened next but Ms  Malik  says  that  the
    long gap between the application being presented and decided some  four
    years later was not the result of  any  failure  on  the  part  of  the
    claimant but was the result of the Secretary of State initially  making
    the  decision  badly  by  getting  facts  wrong  and  making  a  wholly
    unsustainable decision.  By the time that was  sorted  four  years  had
    lapsed.  Again I have to say  from  my  experience  that  is  eminently
    believable.

10. Mr Wilding was at a disadvantage because he did not have  the  complete
    file and he was not in a position to add anything to this.

11. I remind myself that Ms Malik is a member of the Bar who has given this
    factual outline in a considered way.  She is entitled to be believed.

12. I also look at the file and I see that there are  things  in  the  file
    that tend to suggest that she is right, although do not actually  prove
    everything that she recalled. Mr Wilding was not in a position to be as
    helpful as he should because he has not been given the papers he needs.
    That is not his fault but that is the position we were in and I have to
    decide what to do.

13. I am satisfied on what I have heard that when the whole  story  is  put
    together the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision was made on the basis
    of a considered concession on the facts which appears to have been made
    for perfectly sensible reasons and it follows  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's appeal before this Tribunal ought to be dismissed.

    Decision

14. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 30 October 2015                |

