
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45474/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 October 2015                   |On 3 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OHO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N. Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Malik, instructed by Alpha Rocks Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of OHO,  a  citizen  of
         Nigeria against the respondent's decision to refuse his application
         for leave to remain in the UK.

      2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to the  parties  as  they
         were in the First-tier Tribunal.

      3. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make no anonymity order.

    Background

      4. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 24  April  1974.   He
         entered the United  Kingdom  in  March  2001  and  was  granted  an
         extension as the family member of an EEA national until  16  August
         2008.  That marriage broke down with the divorce becoming  absolute
         on 21 October 2008.  The appellant made a  number  of  applications
         and appeals thereafter becoming appeals rights exhausted on 4  June
         2010.  He made an application in relation to Article 8 of the Human
         Rights Act on 5 July 2010.  Although this application was initially
         refused with no right of appeal, a further reconsideration resulted
         in the appellant being issued with a decision dated 22 October 2014
         to remove the appellant under section 10  of  the  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 1999.

      5. The appeal against that decision came  before  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge  O'Malley  on  11  May  2015.   The  judge,  in  a   decision
         promulgated on  28  May  2015,   dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
         Immigration Rules and under the EEA Regulations,  but  allowed  the
         appeal under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules,  in  relation
         to family life.

      6. Permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  sought  by  the
         respondent on the grounds that, firstly, there was a material error
         of law  and  contradictory  findings  in  the  judge's  finding  of
         dependency on the appellant by his brother.  The second ground  was
         that the judge's approach  to  Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) was flawed and  that
         the judge had failed to consider AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260
         (IAC).

      7. The appeal came before  me.   Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  relied  on  the
         grounds  of  appeal  and  submitted  that  the   judge   had   made
         contradictory findings when looking at the evidence.  She submitted
         that the findings indicated the  predominance  of  the  appellant's
         brother's care was provided by the state.  She indicated  that  the
         letters in support of the appellant numbering over forty  pages  in
         the bundle made no reference to  the  appellant's  support  of  his
         brother, notwithstanding the medical evidence before the  Tribunal.
         In relation to the second ground Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that
         the judge had failed to consider all the relevant factors including
         the fact that the appellant did not meet the immigration rules  and
         had incorrectly attached positive weight to other factors.  It  was
         incumbent on the judge to take into consideration all the  relevant
         factors in section 117B.

      8. Mr Malik submitted in relation to ground 1  that  the  question  of
         whether there is family life is a question of  fact,  not  law  and
         that  this  was  a  matter  for  the  First-tier  to  decide.   The
         respondent could only succeed if they demonstrated that the finding
         was perverse and it was impossible for them to do so.

      9. As regards the second ground Mr Malik argued that in paragraph [63]
         the judge had addressed proportionality and had in mind the  weight
         to be attached to the public interest.  In relation to the  judge's
         findings at paragraph [65] that the appellant could  speak  English
         and had been no burden to the tax payer  he  was  obliged  to  have
         regard to those factors but did  not  allow  the  appeal  on  those
         factors.  It was Mr Malik's case that the judge did not  put  these
         factors in the balance in favour of the appellant  but  was  rather
         noting that they did not add weight to  the  public  interest.   In
         relation to the  respondent's  argument  that  the  judge  had  not
         properly applied Nasim and Others (Article 8) [2014]  UKUT  25  and
         [2013] UKSC 72, Patel and Others v  SSHD  Mr  Malik  asserted  that
         these had no relevance as they related to family life and this case
         was allowed solely on family life.

    Ground 1 - Family Life

     10. Although Ms Willocks-Briscoe sought to persuade me that the judge's
         findings on the ties between the appellant  and  his  brother  were
         contradictory, I do not find this to be the  case.   She  submitted
         that the judge had initially found that there were no ties and then
         later on in the decision found  a  close  bond.   However  she  was
         unable to point to any finding that there were 'no ties'.  Although
         she relied on paragraph 48 of the  decision  the  judge's  findings
         here were as follows:

             'The appellant does support his  brother  and  I  accept  that
             evidence.  I find that the personal care is  intermittent,  as
             there is a care package in place and I find that the appellant
             has other tasks and commitments to occupy his time'

         This was not a finding of 'no ties' but rather that the appellant's
         personal care of his brother was intermittent as there  is  a  care
         package in place for his brother.  However the fact that the  judge
         found that the appellant did  not  provide  all  of  his  brother's
         personal care, is not inconsistent with his findings of  additional
         levels of dependency, including in  the  same  paragraph  that  the
         appellant 'does support his brother.'

     11. At paragraph [56] the judge properly directed himself that in order
         to engage Article 8, in relationships between adults, there had  to
         be 'evidence of further elements of dependency, involving more than
         the  normal  emotional  ties'.    A  fact  sensitive  approach   is
         required:  Singh & Another v The Secretary of State  for  the  Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 6.

     12. At paragraph [57] the judge went on to find  that  the  appellant's
         case had the additional elements of  dependency  present  and  that
         there was a family life in the UK:

             'I note and accept that the appellant provides  support,  both
             practical and medical, to his brother and that  his  brother's
             physical and mental health is supported by the presence of the
             appellant.  In addition I find that  the  appellant  is  given
             support by the presence and relationship with his brother'.

         I also note that  at  paragraph  [51]  the  judge  found  that  the
         appellant's departure would cause hardship.

     13. At paragraph [62] the judge found that:

             '... the appellant's brother accepts  care  from  a  range  of
             carers who attend 3 times a day and find that he would  accept
             additional care, if needed, from other carers if the appellant
             were not present'.

         Again  this  finding  is  not  inconsistent  with  a   finding   of
         dependency; to suggest that it is, is to equate  personal  care  in
         itself with dependency.  In addition I do not  share  Ms  Willocks-
         Briscoe's view  that  the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant's
         brother receives visits from state carers  three  times  a  day  is
         equivalent to the state providing a 'predominance' of care  (and  I
         note that the appellant's evidence as recorded by the judge  -  and
         as  indicated  above  the  judge  at  paragraph  48  accepted   the
         appellant's evidence that he supported his brother - was  that  the
         appellant 'is there overnight and can give him his drugs and  carry
         him to his bed.')

     14. The judge's findings must be considered  in  their  entirety.   The
         judge clearly looked (including in his findings at  paragraph  [57]
         as set out in paragraph 12 of this decision) at all elements of the
         relationship between the appellant and his brother, which  includes
         in part, but which the findings clearly set out was not exclusively
         limited to, a personal care element.

     15. I am satisfied therefore that the judge reached a  conclusion  open
         to the judge on the evidence before  and  gave  detailed,  adequate
         reasons for those findings.  I  do  not  find  any  merit  in  this
         ground.

    Ground 2 - Approach to Section 117B

     16. In relation to ground 2, the judge at paragraphs 8  to  17  of  the
         determination set out the applicable law, including setting out  in
         full at paragraphs 16 and 17 the provisions of section 117B of  the
         2002 Act.  The judge at paragraphs 63 and 64 recorded a finding  of
         significant weight to be attached to the maintenance of immigration
         control.

     17. Although the respondent has argued that the judge, contrary to  the
         guidance in AM (s117B) Malawi (above), attached positive weight  to
         the non-receipt of  public  funds  and  that  the  appellant  spoke
         English, the judge was 'having regard' to these factors and  making
         findings on them as the  judge  was  required  to  do.   I  am  not
         satisfied that the judge was according  positive  weight  to  these
         factors, which would have been incorrect.   When  looked  at  as  a
         whole, paragraphs 63  to  paragraph  67  considered  generally  the
         factors in favour of the public interest, including considering  at
         paragraph 65, section 117B.  Within those findings the judge, quite
         properly, considered and made findings on the elements  of  section
         117B.  The fact that the judge found that  those  factors  did  not
         count against the appellant and towards the public  interest,  does
         not constitute an improper finding of positive weight.

     18. In relation to the issue of the appellant having used the NHS,  the
         public interest consideration at section 117B(3) states that it  is
         in the public interest that persons seeking to enter or  remain  in
         the UK are 'financially independent'.  There is no requirement that
         such financial independence constitutes an absence of  recourse  to
         the NHS.  Therefore the judge did not err in not including this  in
         the section 117B consideration.

     19. Considered in its entirety the judge's  findings  on  section  117B
         were findings that were properly open to  the  judge  and  did  not
         include irrelevant factors nor fail to consider relevant factors.

     20. In relation to the judge's finding, outside  of  the  section  117B
         remit, that the appellant had no criminal  convictions,  the  judge
         included this finding in the context of the findings under  section
         117B in relation to the public interest, although this is  not  one
         of the factors listed in that section.   Even if  this  constituted
         an error, it is not material,  as  there  was  no  positive  weight
         attached to this finding.  The judge at paragraph  59  had  already
         found that the appellant's private life did not  engage  Article  8
         and was therefore making findings exclusively in relation to family
         life.

     21. When considered as a whole the judge made findings that  were  open
         to the judge on the evidence. The second ground of appeal therefore
         has no merit.

    Decision:

     22. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law and shall stand.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     Dated: 28 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
