
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45889/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17 February 2016                    |On 21 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY

                                   Between

                                    t H K
                        (anonymity has been directed)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Karim, Counsel, representing Wall Lane
Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Ms Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone  born  on  [  ]  1963.   She
    appealed against the Respondents decision of 30 October  2014  refusing
    her application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom based on  her
    human rights.  Her appeal was heard  by  a  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal Onoufriou on 19 May 2015.  He dismissed the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of ECHR in a decision promulgated
    on 4 June 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  lodged.   Permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal  Robertson  on  17  August
    2015.  Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  lodged  and
    permission was granted by Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Archer  on  17
    November 2015.  The permission states that  it  is  arguable  that  the
    Judge did not apply the correct version of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of  the
    Rules.  In paragraph 28 of the decision the Judge  makes  reference  to
    ties with Sierra Leone and then to the absence of significant obstacles
    or exceptional circumstances preventing her  return  to  Sierra  Leone.
    The permission states it is  arguable  that  the  Judge  did  not  give
    adequate weight to the 9  year  delay  in  making  a  decision  by  the
    Respondent and incorrectly applied an exceptionality test at  paragraph
    29 instead of the compelling circumstances test identified at paragraph
    33 of SS (Congo) & Others [2015] EWCA Civ387.  Permission  was  granted
    on all grounds.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states that  with  regard  to
    consideration of Rule 276ADE(vi) the newer version of  the  Rule  is  a
    more difficult test for the Appellant to meet so it could not have been
    a material error for the Judge to  fail  the  appeal  under  the  older
    version.  The response states  that  the  Judge`s  findings  of  family
    support in Sierra Leone are relevant to  either  test  (paragraph  28).
    The response states that the Judge properly considered the issue of the
    delay in the context that it allowed the Appellant  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom for a substantial  period.   This  formed  part  of  his
    overall Article 8 findings.

The Hearing

 4. There are 4 grounds of application.   Counsel  referred  to  the  first
    ground and paragraphs 23 and 24  of  the  decision.   The  Judge  makes
    credibility findings in these paragraphs and refers to  the  Devaseelan
    principle based on the Appellant's  previous  asylum  appeal.   Counsel
    submitted that the Judge did not make his own credibility findings  but
    instead based his decision on the credibility findings  in  the  asylum
    appeal.

 5. With regard to the  second  ground  and  to  Rule  276ADE(vi),  Counsel
    submitted that at paragraph 28 the Judge conflates the former test with
    the correct test.  He makes his decision based on the Appellant`s  lack
    of ties to Sierra Leone and whether there are any significant obstacles
    to her returning.  He submitted that that is not the correct test.  The
    correct test is whether there are very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's integration into Sierra Leone.

 6. Counsel submitted that there was a delay  of  9  years  from  when  the
    Appellant made her human rights claim until  the  Respondent  made  the
    decision to refuse her human rights  claim.   He  submitted  that  this
    detracted from her claim, as it meant that she lost touch with her  own
    country and any ties she had to Sierra Leone diminished.  He  submitted
    that the Judge did not engage with this.

 7. Counsel went on to deal with Article 8 outside the Rules and  paragraph
    29 of the decision, in  which  the  Judge  states  that  there  are  no
    exceptional circumstances in this case.  He referred to the  said  case
    of SS (Congo) & Others at paragraph 33 and submitted that the  test  of
    exceptionality no longer holds.  He submitted that the test now is  not
    as strict as exceptionality and this is an error on the Judge`s part.

 8. I put to counsel that with regard to the credibility findings the Judge
    makes, it perfectly clear at paragraph 23 of his decision why he  finds
    the appellant's evidence to lack credibility.  The Judge correctly uses
    the Devaseelan principle and then refers to the Appellant lying at  the
    Hearing before him and denying that she had a  previous  asylum  claim,
    which she clearly had based on what was before  him.   The  appellant's
    evidence that Mr [C] (she stays with him and his  wife)  has  supported
    her in the UK for 11 of her 14 years here but the Judge found not to be
    credible particularly as he did not attend the Hearing to  support  her
    appeal or even provide a letter.  At paragraph 24 the judge states that
    he finds that the Appellant totally lacks credibility.  He was entitled
    to  state  this  based  on  the  above.   Counsel  submitted  that  the
    appellant's evidence might not have been as clear as it could have been
    but the Judge's starting point, being  the  Appellant's  failed  asylum
    claim, was also his ending point and that is definitely not the case.

 9. With regard to rule 276ADE(vi) the judge deals with this  at  paragraph
    28.  He refers to very significant obstacles and the lack  of  ties  to
    Sierra Leona.  I put to Counsel that this is  a  lower  test  than  the
    current test which is "very significant  obstacles  to  integration  in
    Sierra Leone on return."  He submitted that this Appellant has been out
    of Sierra Leone for 14 years and would have very significant  obstacles
    to integration on return.

10. Counsel pointed out that at paragraph 29  of  the  decision  the  Judge
    refers to the 9 year delay.  The case of EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41  is
    referred to and the Judge states that the delay by  the  Respondent  in
    reaching her decision has been to the Appellant`s advantage rather than
    her detriment.  Counsel submitted that this delay has  meant  that  her
    integration into Sierra Leone is much more difficult now.

11. I asked Counsel why Article 8 should be considered  outside  the  Rules
    and why he thinks there are  compelling  circumstances.   He  submitted
    that the Rules only cover people who have been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for 20  years.  He  submitted  that  there  will  be  very  significant
    obstacles to this Appellant re-integrating into Sierra Leone  and  that
    delay is not covered by the Rules. He submitted that the Judge has  not
    properly applied the Rules in his decision  and  there  are  compelling
    reasons which will prevent this Appellant returning to Sierra Leone and
    integrating there.

12. Counsel submitted that there are material errors of law in the  Judge`s
    decision.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response and the Judge has given adequate  reasons  for  his  decision.
    She submitted that the Judge found that the Appellant had lied  at  the
    Hearing before him and in paragraphs 23 and 24 of the  decision  proper
    reasons are given by the judge for finding the appellant's evidence  to
    lack credibility.  She submitted that the judge applied the  Devaseelan
    principle properly and gave adequate reasons for finding credibility to
    be an issue.

14. The Presenting Officer submitted that at paragraph 28 of  the  decision
    the Judge has  considered  significant  obstacles  to  the  Appellant`s
    integration into Sierra Leone.  Due to a lack of  credibility  he  does
    not believe that she has no ties to Sierra Leone.   She  lives  with  a
    Sierra Leonean family in the United Kingdom and associates  with  other
    people from Sierra Leone.   Her sons are living in Sierra  Leone.   She
    states that she could not obtain employment there  but  no  reason  has
    been given for this statement. She submitted that  the  findings  under
    paragraph 276ADE can be said to apply to the  appellant  returning  and
    integrating into society there.

15. With  regard  to  the  delay  the  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    paragraphs  27  and  29  deal  with  this.   She  submitted  that   the
    Respondent`s delay in coming to a decision has not  adversely  impacted
    on the Appellant but has been to her advantage in that it has  extended
    her stay in the United Kingdom for much longer than she  was  entitled.
    She submitted that the judge  states  that  there  are  no  exceptional
    circumstances and she submitted that the delay has been properly  dealt
    with in the decision and the grounds are merely a disagreement with the
    Judge`s findings.

16. With regard to Article 8  outside  the  Rules  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that this is dealt with in paragraph 29.  She submitted  that
    all the facts before the Judge were considered within the Rules and  so
    Article 8 outside the Rules did not  require  to  be  considered.   The
    Judge has dealt with the matters  which  Counsel  has  stated  are  not
    covered by the Rules, being the delay, the length of time the Appellant
    has been in the United Kingdom, (which does not amount to 20 years) and
    there are  no  compelling  reasons  for  considering  this  application
    outside the Rules.

17. She submitted that all considerations have been assessed by  the  judge
    under the Rules.

18. She  submitted  that  with  regard  to  paragraph  29,  the  fact  that
    exceptional circumstances  are  referred  to  does  not  undermine  the
    Judge`s findings.

19. She submitted that there is no material error of  law  in  the  Judge`s
    decision.

20. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Rules  do  not  take  into
    account the quality of an Appellant`s private life.  He submitted  that
    private life in this appeal has not been properly considered under  the
    Rules and the Judge has failed to weigh to public interest against  the
    appellant's rights and that these are material errors.

Decision & Reasons

21. In paragraphs 23 and 24 the Judge has given his own reasons for finding
    that there is no credibility in this Appellant`s account.  He has  also
    dealt properly with the Devaseelan issue.

22. With regard to paragraph 276ADE (vi) the Judge made an  error  when  he
    referred to ties to Sierra  Leone  and  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's return but it is clear from his findings, that he is  aware
    that this is a lady who has lived for most of her life in Sierra Leone,
    has children there and has ties to Sierra Leonean people in the  United
    Kingdom.  He makes it clear why he finds the terms of paragraph 276 ADE
    cannot be satisfied.  Based on his findings  there  is  no  reason  for
    finding that the appellant would be unable  to  integrate  into  Sierra
    Leone on return.  This is not a material error of law.

23. The Judge deals properly with delay at paragraphs 26 and 29.  The  said
    case of EB (Kosovo) refers to delay in the Respondent making a decision
    being significant if it is to the  detriment  of  the  Appellant.   The
    judge finds that this is not the case here.  He has  pointed  out  that
    had the decision been made sooner the Appellant would have been  liable
    for removal sooner.

24. With regard to Article 8 outside the Rules, Counsel submitted that  the
    Rules do not cover everything in this case.  He referred  to  paragraph
    276ADE requiring an Appellant to be in the United Kingdom for 20 years.
     The Judge in his decision shows that he  is  aware  of  how  long  the
    Appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  and  has  taken  this  into
    account.  Counsel then submitted that delay is not covered by the Rules
    but the Judge has dealt with the  delay  adequately  in  his  decision.
    Counsel then  referred  to  the  appellant's  private  life  not  being
    properly considered within the Rules but  in  paragraph  29  the  Judge
    refers to her private  life,  stating  that  it  is  very  limited  and
    involves going to Church, doing voluntary  work  and  meeting  friends.
    The Judge  has  considered  everything  within  the  Rules.   There  is
    therefore no reason for considering this claim outside the Rules.  This
    is not an error of law.

25. In paragraph 29 the Judge deals with the  evidence  in  the  round  and
    finds that it would be proportionate for the Respondent to  remove  the
    Appellant from the  United  Kingdom  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining
    effective immigration control and in the public interest.

Decision

26. There is no material error of law in the Judge`s decision,  promulgated
    on 4 June  2015.   The  decision  of  Judge  Onoufriou  dismissing  the
    Appellant`s appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights
    issues must stand.

27. Anonymity has been directed.





Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
