
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Numbers:
                                                               IA/45343/2014
                                                           and IA/45349/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 7 April 2016                          |On 13 April 2016          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      (1) MISS NOVLETTE ELAINE FRANCIS
                           (2) MISS DENISE MESSIAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr V Onipede, Counsel
      (instructed by Stevjerne & Co)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 30 December  2015
           against the decision and reasons of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Seifert who had allowed the  Respondents'  appeals  against  the
           Appellant's decisions dated 22 October 2014 to refuse  to  grant
           the Respondents leave to remain on Article 8 ECHR  private  life
           grounds  with  reference  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of   the
           Immigration Rules and to remove them from  the  United  Kingdom.
           The decision and reasons  was  promulgated  on  25  August  2015
           following a hearing on 4 June 2015.


      2.    The Respondents, mother and adult  daughter,  are  nationals  of
           Jamaica, both born there.  The Respondents  entered  the  United
           Kingdom as visitors, respectively on 27 June 1998  and  29  July
           2001 and have since overstayed.  Their  immigration  history  is
           set out at [2] and [3] of Judge Seifert's decision and  reasons.




      3.    Judge Seifert found that the Respondents'  private  life  claims
           succeeded under Article 8 ECHR and under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)
           respectively.   The judge found at [65] that there would be very
           significant obstacles to the Second Respondent's integration  in
           Jamaica and that the separation of  mother  and  daughter  would
           amount to a disproportionate failure  to  respect  their  family
           life under Article 8  ECHR.   The  judge  stated  at  [67]  that
           although the Second Respondent had  achieved  qualifications  in
           the United Kingdom, this was about  ten  years  ago.   Her  life
           experiences since then, her disabilities and her depression  and
           anxiety were relevant to her current  problems  and  prospective
           integration on return.  The judge found at [68] that the  Second
           Respondent's return would not amount to a breach  of  Article  3
           ECHR.


      4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant (the Secretary of State) was granted by  Judge  Colyer
           because he considered that it was arguable that  the  judge  had
           failed (a) to identify any significant obstacles to  integration
           in Jamaica; (b)  to  address  the  evidence  of  the  assistance
           available to the Second Respondent in Jamaica; (c)  to  consider
           that the Second Respondent had lived in Jamaica to  the  age  of
           14, had been educated there and had spent  over  half  her  life
           there and would be returning with her mother  and  (d)  to  take
           into account the fact that the Respondents had been a burden  on
           taxpayers through, inter alia, their use of the NHS.


      5.    Standard directions were made by the Upper  Tribunal  indicating
           that the appeals would be  reheard  immediately  if  a  material
           error of law were found. No rule 24 notice was filed  on  behalf
           of the Respondents.




      Submissions - error of law


      6.    Mr Tufan for the Secretary of State relied on  the  grounds  and
           the grant of permission to appeal.  In summary he submitted that
           the  judge's  errors  were  manifest.   There  was   no   proper
           discussion of the evidence and no adequate identification of the
           "very significant obstacles" to integration.  The  decision  and
           reasons could not stand and should be set aside and remade.


      7.    Mr Onipede for the Respondents  submitted  that  the  judge  had
           stated that she had considered all of the evidence when reaching
           her findings.  There had  been  evidence  from  the  Respondents
           about the consequences of return to Jamaica.  The judge had been
           entitled to reach the conclusions  she  had  and  the  balancing
           exercise had been properly conducted.




      The error of law finding


      8.    At the conclusion of submissions, the  tribunal  indicated  that
           accepted Mr Tufan's submissions and found  that  the  judge  had
           fallen into all of the material  errors  of  law  of  which  the
           Secretary of State complained and in respect of which permission
           to appeal had been granted.  Those faults are summarised at [4],
           above and so need not be repeated here.  The judge's decision on
           the key issues was not based on substantial independent evidence
           but rather on matters of impression, expressions  of  preference
           and  personal  opinion.   The  judge  failed  to  consider   the
           objective evidence concerning conditions in Jamaica set  out  in
           detail in the reasons for refusal letter, which the  Respondents
           did not challenge.  The principles of important case law had not
           been applied, such as AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC)
           and SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.   There  had  not  been  a
           structured and balanced analysis, beginning with the  fact  that
           mother and daughter were to be removed together  to  their  safe
           home country familiar to them.  There had been no  challenge  to
           the judge's essential findings of fact, which would stand.   The
           decision and reasons would otherwise be set aside and the appeal
           reheard immediately.




      Submissions - fresh decision


      9.    For clarity the tribunal will now refer to the parties by  their
           original designations in the First-tier Tribunal.


      10.   Mr Onipede for the Appellants submitted that the appeals  should
           be allowed because  of  the  very  significant  obstacles  which
           existed to their integration on return to  Jamaica.   The  facts
           fell within paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules.
           The Appellants were not a burden on the state because they  were
           supported by the charity of their friends at their church.  They
           spoke English and  should  benefit  from  section  117B  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


      11.   Mr Tufan relied on the reasons for refusal  letter.   The  adult
           Appellants were long term overstayers who had no right to be  in
           the United Kingdom.  They  would  be  removed  together  to  the
           country from which they came, and of which they were  nationals.
           There was thus no interference with their family life.   It  had
           been their choice to remain, unlawfully, even  after  the  first
           appeal had been dismissed.  It was clear from section 117B  that
           little weight should be given to a private life developed  while
           a person's immigration  status  was  precarious.   That  section
           applied equally to children  and  adults.    Forman  (ss  117A-C
           considerations) [2015] UKUT 412  (IAC)  and  Deelah  and  others
           (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT 515  (IAC)  provided  further
           guidance.  On the facts of the present appeal it was plain  that
           the public interest heavily outweighed the  Appellants'  private
           interests.  Their appeals should be dismissed.


      12.   At the conclusion of submissions the tribunal indicated that its
           determination was reserved.  The  tribunal's  reserved  decision
           now follows.








      The fresh decision


      13.   The burden of proof in these appeals lies on the Appellants.  It
           is necessary for the tribunal  to  decide  the  issues  in  this
           appeal under the Immigration Rules and in relation  to  non-risk
           assessed human rights matters on the standard of  proof  of  the
           balance of probabilities.  Because these appeals are being heard
           "in country", the tribunal may consider all relevant matters  as
           at the date of the hearing as section 85(4) of the  Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 provides.  The tribunal may also
           review any exercise of discretion  made  under  the  Immigration
           Rules.  Sections 117A-117D of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
           Asylum Act 2002 must be taken into account by  the  tribunal  in
           assessing the Article 8 ECHR claim.


      14.   The findings of fact made by Judge Seifert were  not  challenged
           and stand.  The judge's  finding  that  the  Second  Appellant's
           removal would not result in a  breach  of  Article  3  ECHR  was
           plainly correct and so stands.  There is family life between the
           Appellants notwithstanding that both are  adults  as  the  judge
           found but as they will be removed  together  such  removal  will
           cause no interference.  No family  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
           identified.  There may be some family connections of  the  First
           Appellant in Jamaica.


      15.   In summary the facts are that the  First  Appellant  and  Second
           Appellant deliberately overstayed in the  United  Kingdom.   The
           tribunal infers and finds that the First  Appellant  and  Second
           Appellant had no intention of leaving the  United  Kingdom  when
           they secured entry as visitors.   They  have  since  engaged  in
           protracted litigation to avoid removal, which the  Secretary  of
           State compromised for reasons best known to her by granting  the
           Appellants an "in country" right of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
           Tribunal.


      16.   It is plain and obvious that the Appellants ought to  have  left
           the United Kingdom on the expiry of  their  visit  visas.   Even
           after their belated applications for leave were refused in  2013
           they failed to depart. The United Kingdom is not a police state.
            The Appellants ought not to have somehow felt  that  they  were
           entitled to remain without leave, to await enforcement action by
           the Respondent.   It has been the Appellants' choice to defy the
           law and to remain in the United Kingdom  illegally.   Any  delay
           has been manufactured by them to prolong their stay.


      17.   The  Appellants  are  both  nationals  of  Jamaica.   There  are
           substantial ties with Jamaica, where both  were  born  and  have
           spent the greater part of their  lives.   Their  United  Kingdom
           social life  centres  on  their  church,  which  plainly  has  a
           significant Jamaican cultural connection.  Both Appellants  have
           been generously supported by their fellow  church  members,  who
           have been compassionate towards them.  The tribunal  infers  and
           finds  that  such  generous  support  will  continue  after  the
           Appellants have left the United Kingdom, and  that  through  the
           wider network of  church  connections  through  church  members,
           other sources of support will be available if needed in Jamaica.
            Even if the Appellants' own church  has  no  direct  branch  in
           Jamaica, it is more probable than not that there will be similar
           Pentecostal churches  and  that  the  Appellants  will  have  no
           difficulty in practising their faith.  There  is  no  reason  to
           believe  that  people  in  Jamaica  will  treat  the  Appellants
           unkindly and no evidence to support any  such  contention.   The
           Second Appellant will continue to need her  mother's  assistance
           and guidance, but that will remain available.


      18.   There was no  evidence  to  show  that  there  are  no  adequate
           facilities and  assistance  available  to  deaf  persons,  brain
           damaged persons and depressed persons in Jamaica.   Jamaica is a
           democratic and safe country. There is no responsibility  on  the
           United Kingdom to provide for the Appellants  who  have  already
           had the benefit of NHS treatment (and in the case of the  Second
           Appellant, education) at the unwarranted expense of  the  United
           Kingdom public purse.  There was no evidence at all that removal
           to Jamaica would be more likely than not  to  cause  the  Second
           Appellant harm.   Any necessary communication between doctors in
           Jamaica and doctors in the United Kingdom can take  place.   The
           tribunal finds that removal to Jamaica will not cause the Second
           Appellant harm.


      19.   Applying  those  findings  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the
           Immigration Rules, the tribunal finds that it is  reasonable  to
           expect the Appellants to return to Jamaica, notwithstanding  the
           time they have spent in the United Kingdom.  The First Appellant
           was well aware that they were in the United  Kingdom  illegally.
           Any suggestion that because no steps  towards  enforcement  were
           taken by the Secretary of State that somehow an  expectation  or
           entitlement  was  created  is  absurd  and  untenable.   It  was
           reasonable to expect that the Appellants would comply  with  the
           law.  The tribunal finds that there is no evidence  that  either
           Appellant would face very significant obstacles integrating into
           Jamaica.
      20.   As to section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
           Act 2002, this is a factor which  the  tribunal  is  obliged  to
           consider.   The Appellants' private lives were formed at a  time
           when  their  immigration  status  was   precarious.   The   only
           "positive" factor was that the Appellants both speak English  or
           BSL.  Neither is financially independent.  In any  event  AM  (S
           117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) shows that even the positive
           factors create no right to remain of themselves.


      21.   There was nothing to suggest that the consequences of removal to
           the Appellants would be so  unduly  harsh  that  they  could  be
           regarded as so out of  the  ordinary  as  to  be  compelling  or
           exceptional.   Thus there was no reason  for  the  Secretary  of
           State to consider the exercise of  her  discretion  outside  the
           Immigration Rules.


      22.   The tribunal now turns to any residual Article 8 ECHR  claim  in
           the light of Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate aim) [2014]  UKUT  00085
           (IAC), and the related line of authority, including MM (Lebanon)
           [2014] EWCA  Civ  985  and  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.
           Applying the Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  tests  as  explained  by  EB
           (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41, and at risk of repetition, it is  plain
           that the Appellants' removal will  not  cause  any  interference
           with the respect due to their  family  life,  as  they  will  be
           removed together.


      23.   There was  little  evidence  if  any  to  show  that  the  First
           Appellant or Second Appellant had developed  any  free  standing
           and significant private life in the United Kingdom,  apart  from
           their social life conducted mainly with  local  friends  and  in
           their church circle.  That private  life  can  be  continued  in
           Jamaica: see, e.g., Nasim and Others  (Article  8)  [2014]  UKUT
           00025 (IAC).


      24.   If, however, the tribunal were mistaken in any such finding,  it
           is necessary to consider whether the interference in  the  First
           Appellant's  and  Second  Appellant's  private  lives  would  be
           proportionate.  Nothing is being taken from them  as  they  have
           never had any right to  settle  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Many
           persons wishing to settle in the United  Kingdom  lawfully  have
           been refused permission to extend their  stays,  but  they  have
           accepted the adverse decision and have left the  United  Kingdom
           as required without enforcement action at public expense.   That
           is all which is expected from  the  Appellants.   The  continued
           presence of the Appellants has imposed a burden  on  the  state,
           not least in terms of the provision of education and  access  to
           the NHS.   It was admitted that the  Appellants  have  used  NHS
           services.


      25.   Paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules has  been  held  by  the
           Upper Tribunal (as affirmed by the Court of Appeal)  to  provide
           no additional right of appeal to  the  tribunal:  see  Qongwane,
           Patel and Khanum v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 957.


      26.   The appeals must fail and are dismissed.


      27.   There was no need for an anonymity direction  in  either  appeal
           and no submissions to any such effect.  The anonymity  direction
           made by the First-tier Tribunal is revoked.




      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on
      a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeals,  sets  aside
      the original decision and remakes the original decision of the  First-
      tier Tribunal as follows:

      The appeals are DISMISSED

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      No appeal fees were paid so there can be no fee awards


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
