
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45277/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Upper Tribunal                |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5 June 2014                                  |On 20 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               ghazala kousar
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss C Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Iqbal, Equity Law Chambers, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant Ghazala Kousar, was born on 29 June 1987 and is a citizen
    of Pakistan.  The appellant had been granted leave until 17 March  2015
    to enter the United Kingdom as the spouse of  Mohammed  Azhir  Ayaz,  a
    person present and settled here.  On 15 October  2013,  the  respondent
    decided to curtail the appellant's leave with immediate effect so  that
    no leave remained and also to make a  direction  to  remove  her  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Upson) which, in a determination promulgated on  3  March  2014,
    allowed the appeal on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's  immigration
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  The  Secretary  of  State
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  I shall hereafter
    refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the respondent  as  the
    appellant (as they were respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had submitted in support of her application for  leave  a
    English Language Testing Service Certificate which had been  issued  by
    Cambridge English  Language  Assessment.   The  refusal  letter  of  15
    October 2013 records that Cambridge  English  Language  Assessment  had
    confirmed that they had,

         identified an  unusual  pattern  of  reading  and  listening  tests
         responses for BULATS online candidates in Centre PK915,  where  you
         took your assessment.  Cambridge English  Language  Assessment  has
         therefore concluded that you showed  insufficient  engagement  with
         their test to be able to confirm the validity of  the  scores  with
         confidence".

 3. At the hearing before Judge Upson, the  appellant  submitted  that  the
    respondent had not acted fairly towards her.  The appellant relied upon
    the decision of the Tribunal in Naved (student - fairness -  notice  of
    points) [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC).  The judge cited Naved at [15]:

    In our judgment the problem arises not with the terms of  the  section,
    which is in any event binding on us as primary  legislation,  but  with
    the conduct of the respondent in examining the application and refusing
    it in the way she did. Given that the respondent was  (or  should  have
    been) aware of the consequences of s. 85A when she made the decision in
    this case, the respondent is under a  common law duty to act fairly  in
    deciding immigration claims properly made to  her.  A  failure  to  act
    fairly is a failure to act in accordance  with the law  and  a  failure
    to  make a decision in accordance with the law is a ground of appeal to
    the tribunal under s.84(1)(e) of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002.

 4. The judge also refers to Thakur (PBS decision -  common  law  fairness)
    Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 151 (IAC) finding that this case "declared  that
    a decision taken in circumstances where the [student]  could  not  have
    known about was "contrary to law".  (sic)  The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant did not appear

         to have been given any notice ... but  this  decision  [to  curtail
         their leave following a  report  from  Cambridge  English  Language
         Assessment] had even been considered.  She had  not  been  provided
         with anything that could assist her in  addressing  the  allegation
         that the test was dubious and the ECO accepted it  as  genuine  and
         valid at the time entry clearance was granted.  ... I do not accept
         the  submission  of  the  HOPO  that  the  case  of  Naved  can  be
         distinguished as a PBS  case.   The  principle  of  fairness  is  a
         principle applies throughout our legal system and, as  pointed  out
         in the case of Naved, it was further stated as a general  principle
         in the case of Patel.

 5. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge found, incorrectly, at [16]
    that there was any duty at all  upon  the  respondent  to  provide  the
    appellant  with  notice  and  she  "assist  her   in   addressing   the
    allegation".  The respondent  also  relies  upon  a  schedule  of  test
    certificates annexed to the decision at enclosure (B).   That  schedule
    appears to have been prepared by Cambridge English Language  Assessment
    and is a list of "names and ID details of all  candidates  disqualified
    from  Grafton  College,  Pakistan   as   a   result   of   the   recent
    investigation".  The appellant's name appears  on  that  list  and  the
    outcome  of  the  investigation  in   respect   of   her   was   marked
    "DISQUALIFIED".

 6. I find that the judge erred in law by allowing  this  appeal.   I  have
    reached that conclusion for the following reasons.  First, the facts in
    Naved can be distinguished from those in the instant appeal.  At  [14],
    the Tribunal in Naved held:

    Nevertheless the appellant's treatment has been  conspicuously  unfair.
    His application for leave to remain is being  refused  because  of  his
    failure to produce a document that he was never asked to produce;  that
    document only became relevant because of inquiries the respondent  made
    on the  application,  but  did  not  communicate  the  results  to  the
    appellant before the decision was made, or else  she  would  have  been
    made aware that the response from the appellant's previous college  was
    inaccurate. None of this would have mattered if s.85(4) had remained in
    force unaltered. We cannot imagine that Parliament intended to  produce
    so clearly unfair a result.

 7. The treatment of the appellant  in  Naved's  was  conspicuously  unfair
    because, as the Tribunal recorded at the outset of its determination at
    [2]

         it is common ground that, if  he  had  produced  evidence  [of  the
         course he had attended in the United Kingdom] with his  application
         for further leave to remain then he would have been entitled to  be
         treated as having an 'established presence' here.

    In other words, the appellant had to meet a requirement of which he had
    not been notified but which, crucially, with which he would  have  been
    able to  have  complied  had  he  been  notified  of  it.   That  is  a
    circumstance wholly different from that of the appellant in the present
    appeal.  The respondent does not accept that the appellant was entitled
    to entry clearance at all.  Indeed, it seems that the  respondent  will
    herself become a victim of conspicuous  unfairness  if  she  is  to  be
    prevented from changing decisions when new and relevant evidence  comes
    to light which indicates that entry clearance has  been  granted  on  a
    false premise.

 8. Further, it is significant that the very opportunity to respond to  the
    language provider's report, the denial of which opportunity Judge Upson
    found constituted the respondent's unfairness  towards  the  appellant,
    has, even now, not been taken up by this appellant.  If  the  appellant
    had evidence to adduce or arguments to put  forward  which  might  show
    that, in her particular case, her English  language  test  results  not
    tainted by the failings of the test provider, one would  have  expected
    her to have adduced that evidence or advanced those arguments  by  now.
    Indeed, Judge Upson heard evidence from the appellant  given  with  the
    assistance of a Punjabi interpreter [5] and he recorded  the  appellant
    having told him that she believed that  "she could pass that test again
    [in English language] if she had to" a statement which does not exactly
    inspire confidence in the appellant's English  language  abilities.   I
    find that any suggestion  that  the  respondent  has  behaved  unfairly
    towards the appellant by not giving her a  chance  to  respond  to  her
    decision is, in the circumstances, wholly without merit.  The facts  in
    this appeal differ entirely from those in Naved where, if the appellant
    had been given the opportunity to submit the  required  evidence,  both
    parties agreed he would have been entitled to leave  to  remain.  Here,
    the appellant's inertia and reluctance,  even  at  this  stage  of  the
    proceedings, to prove that the  respondent's  opinion  of  her  English
    language test result is telling.

 9. I acknowledge that the refusal letter is not a model of  clarity.   The
    Secretary of State "expected [the appellant] to either leave the United
    Kingdom or submit a fresh application for leave to remain  before  your
    current leave to remain expires"; that was a somewhat empty offer given
    that, in the previous paragraph, the appellant's leave  to  remain  had
    been terminated "with immediate effect".  On the other hand,  I  accept
    Miss  Johnstone's  submission  that  the  proper  forum  in  which  the
    appellant could have adduced evidence and advanced argument challenging
    the basis of the curtailment was  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  She chose not to take that opportunity.

10.  In  the  circumstances,  I  find  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination should be set aside.  In the light  of  my  findings  and
    observations above, I find the appellant has not discharged the  burden
    of proving that the decision to curtail her leave to remain was not  in
    accordance with the law and, accordingly,  I  remake  the  decision  by
    dismissing her appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules.

DECISION

11. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  3  March
    2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The appeal in  respect
    of the Immigration Rules is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 5 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

