
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45241/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|26 January, 02 March & 12 July 2016  |On 6th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            SUONG TUYET THI TRAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Norman, instructed by Stevens Machi Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The issue in this case is whether the refusal by the UK  government  to
    provide a derivative residence card to the respondent,  a  national  of
    Vietnam would deprive her minor daughter [L] of the  genuine  enjoyment
    of her right to reside within the European Union as a German  national.
    It is not in dispute that the respondent would be entitled under German
    law to reside with her daughter in Germany.  She objects to  doing  so.
    This is because of the unhappy history of her relationships in  Germany
    including that with [L]'s father.   The  respondent  and  her  daughter
    currently reside in the United Kingdom.  She asserts that  if  she  and
    [L] are required to return to Germany, she  would,  instead,  take  her
    daughter to Vietnam and thus deprive her of the  genuine  enjoyment  of
    the substance of her rights attaching to her status as a European Union
    Citizen.  There appears to  be  no  direct  authority  on  the  correct
    approach or assessment to be applied where there is an objection  by  a
    third country national primary carer to living in the member state of a
    EU Citizen child's nationality: certainly none was cited to us.

 2. The history relevant to this appeal is as follows. The respondent moved
    to Germany from Vietnam in 2004.  She has two  children.   The  eldest,
    who was born in 1994, is a university student in Vietnam; the  younger,
    [L], was born in 2006 in Berlin.  [L]'s father is a German  citizen  of
    Vietnamese origin.  The respondent only lived for a brief  period  with
    [L]'s father from whom she separated after three  months  after  moving
    with her daughter out of an immigration centre  to  live  with  him  in
    Hamburg.  Her next relationship was with a Vietnamese national who  was
    resident in Germany.  She remained with him for  six  months  but  left
    because he became violent.  They had lived  together  in  Berlin.   The
    respondent's first husband died in Vietnam in 2000.  Agents helped  the
    respondent to enter the United Kingdom unlawfully in 2008.   [L]  moved
    to Vietnam that year where she remained until 2012.  The respondent has
    lived unlawfully in the United Kingdom since her arrival.

 3. The respondent applied for a residence card in August  2014  which  was
    refused on 21 October 2014.  She appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    First-tier tribunal Judge Ievins allowed  her  appeal  "on  immigration
    grounds" for reasons given in his  decision  dated  21  May  2015.   He
    concluded that [L] would be unable to remain in the United  Kingdom  if
    the respondent was required to leave, there being no one else  to  take
    care  of  her.   He  did  not  accept  that  the  respondent  met   the
    requirements of Regulation 15A(2)(b)(iii) or any other of the  criteria
    in Regulation 15A.  Nevertheless, he accepted  the  argument  based  on
    Article 20 of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European  Union  and
    the case of Ruiz Zambrano (European Citizenship) [2011]  EUECJ  C-34/09
    and concluded that if the respondent was not entitled to  a  derivative
    right of residence in the United Kingdom, in practical terms, [L] would
    have to leave the European Union.  The judge appeared to have proceeded
    on the basis that because the respondent would be  unable  to  live  in
    Germany lawfully, [L] would be unable to do so herself.

 4. The challenge by the Secretary of State to that  decision  acknowledges
    that the Zambrano right would be engaged if [L]  was  forced  to  leave
    Germany and move outside the  EU  if  her  primary  carer  was  refused
    residence there.  It did not follow that such a right of  residence  is
    engaged so as to allow an EU national child to  reside  anyway  in  the
    Union.  There was no evidence to show that [L] would not be allowed  to
    reside in Germany with the respondent  as  her  carer.   There  was  no
    evidence to support such a conclusion that  the  respondent  could  not
    live in Germany lawfully.  The respondent had stated she did  not  want
    to return to Germany but that was a personal  preference  and  not  the
    same as being unable to return.

 5. In granting permission to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker
    observed that having recognised that the burden of  proof  was  on  the
    respondent, the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to apply it.

 6. We are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal fell into  error.   There
    was no evidential support for the conclusion that the respondent  would
    be unable to live in Germany other than the  bare  assertion  that  she
    could not do so.  This error infected his conclusion under  Article  20
    and accordingly we are satisfied the decision must  be  set  aside  and
    remade.  We gave the parties our view on this at the first hearing.  We
    heard evidence  at  the  second  hearing  and  having  invited  written
    submissions heard argument at the third hearing when  we  reserved  our
    decision.

 7. There are two preliminary matters which we need to  dispose  of  before
    turning to the substance  of  this  case.  The  first  relates  to  the
    entitlement of the respondent to live with [L] in Germany.  Any  doubts
    over that were dispelled at the hearing on 2 March with the  production
    by Mr Tufan of material in response to our direction made at the  first
    hearing for the Home Office to research German law to produce  evidence
    that may be relevant to returning a German national child with a  third
    country national who is the sole carer of that  child.   James  Dennis,
    third country unit liaison officer for Germany and Austria, explains in
    his letter dated 10 February 2016 that he had contacted Peter Derst,  a
    representative of Unit 21, responsible for German residence law at  the
    German Federal Office for Migration & Refugees.  Herr  Derst  responded
    in German and a translation is provided in these terms:

         "Dear Mr Dennis

         I can provide the following reply to your query:-  The German child
         has a right of residence in the Federal Republic of Germany because
         of his [sic] German citizenship.  Insofar as the  child  not  being
         resident in the UK and future residence in Germany, the  Vietnamese
         mother has  a  legal  right  to  a  residence  permit  for  Germany
         (initially as a national  visa  for  entry),  when  she  will  take
         custody of her German child here (# 28 para.1 sentence 1  number  3
         of the Residence Act).  The assertion that the  German  child  must
         leave the EU following (the  mother's)  refusal  of  the  right  of
         residence in the UK is therefore not applicable.

         Best regards

         By Authority

         Peter Derst"

 8. A copy of the relevant German legislation is provided together  with  a
    web link to an  English  translation  on  the  Act  of  the  Residence,
    Economic  Activity  and  Integration  of  Foreigners  in  the   Federal
    Territory.  This evidence was not challenged by Ms Norman.

 9. The second matter relates to Regulation 15A of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  At the first hearing Ms  Norman  accepted  that  she
    could  not  rely  on  a  derivative  right  of  residence  under   that
    Regulation.  This is understandable as  [L]  is  not  residing  in  the
    United Kingdom as a self sufficient person. Although the respondent has
    been given  permission  to  work  and  has  been  able  to  demonstrate
    sufficient support for herself  and  [L]  without  recourse  to  public
    funds, the  absence  of  comprehensive  sickness  insurance  cover  (as
    opposed to entitlement to access to the NHS) is  fatal  to  the  claim.
    There are several authorities on the point which were reviewed by Arden
    LJ in Ahmad v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 988.  We need not  take  this  point
    any further.

10. We now turn to the live issues to be addressed. Ms Norman's most recent
    submissions dated 21 March 2016 identify these as follows:

          1) Does the respondent have a right to reside pursuant to Article
             20 TFEU (the Zambrano principle)?

          2) What effect so Section 55 BCA  2009,  Article  8  ECHR  and/or
             Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
             Union have on the decision?

11. As to (2), Ms Norman confirms the inability of the respondent  to  rely
    on Article 8 but nevertheless asserts that she can rely on Article 7 of
    the Charter with reference  to   Abdul  (Section  55  -  Article  24(3)
    Charter: Nigeria [2016] UKUT 106 (IAC).   We  begin  our  consideration
    however with the first issue.  Articles 20 and 21 of the Treaty on  the
    functioning of the European Union ("the Treaty") materially provide:

         "Article 20

          1) Citizenship of the union is hereby established.  Every  person
             holding a nationality of a Member States shall be a citizen of
             the EU union.  Citizen of the union shall be additional to and
             not replace national citizenship.

          2) Citizens of the union shall enjoy the rights and be subject to
             the duties provided for in the  Treaties.   They  shall  have,
             inter alia:

               a) the right to move and reside freely within  the  territory
                  of the Member States ...

         This right shall be exercised in accordance with the conditions and
         limits defined by the Treaties and by the  measures  adopted  there
         under.

         Article 21

         (1)  Every citizen of the union shall have the right  to  move  and
             reside freely within  the  territory  of  the  Member  States,
             subject to the limitations and conditions  laid  down  in  the
             Treaties and by the measures adopted to give them effect ..."

12.  These  provisions  were  considered   in   Ruiz   Zambrano   (European
    Citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 where it was held (in the summary  of
    its judgment) that:

         "Article 20 TFEU is to be interpreted as meaning that it  precludes
         a member state from refusing a third country national upon whom has
         minor children, who are European Union  citizens  are  dependant  a
         right of residence in the member state of residence  a  nationality
         of those children, and from refusing to grant a work permit to that
         third country national, insofar as  such  decisions  deprive  those
         children of the genuine enjoyment of the substance  of  the  rights
         attaching to the status of European Union citizen.

13. Ms Norman reminds us in her submissions that in respect of  this  right
    there is no requirement to establish that a child is exercising  treaty
    rights; EU citizenship suffices for her carer  to  derive  a  right  of
    residence.  She argues that if the consequence of a decision to  refuse
    a derivative right of residence as to deprive the EU  national  of  the
    right to live within the European Union, the appeal must be allowed.

14. The scope of the Zambrano principle  was  considered  by  Elias  LJ  in
    Harrison & Another v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736.  After a  comprehensive
    view of the relevant authorities he concluded at [63]:

         "63. I agree ... that there is really no basis for  asserting  that
         it is arguable in the light of the authorities  that  the  Zambrano
         principle extends to cover anything short of a situation where  the
         EU citizen is forced to leave the territory of the EU.  If  the  EU
         citizen, be it child or wife, would not in practice be compelled to
         leave the country if the non-EU family member were  to  be  refused
         the right of residence, there  is  in  my  view  nothing  in  these
         authorities  to  suggest  that  EU  law  is  engaged.   Article   8
         Convention rights may then come into the picture to protect  family
         life as the court recognised in Dereci, but  that  is  an  entirely
         distinct area of protection."

    Further at [67]

         "... I accept that it is a general principle of EU law that conduct
         which materially impedes the exercise of an EU right is in  general
         forbidden by EU law in precisely the same way as deprivation of the
         right.  But in my judgment it is necessary to focus on  the  nature
         of the right in issue and to decide what constitutes an impediment.
          The right of residence is a right to reside in  the  territory  of
         the EU.  It is not a right to any particular quality or life or  to
         any particular  standard  of  living.   Accordingly,  there  is  no
         impediment to exercising a right to  reside  if  residence  remains
         possible as a matter of substance, albeit that the quality of  life
         is diminished.  Of course,  to  the  extent  that  the  quality  or
         standard of life will be seriously impaired by excluding the non-EU
         national, that is likely in  practice  to  infringe  the  right  of
         residence itself because it will effectively compel the EU  citizen
         to give up residence and travel with the non-EU national.   But  in
         such a  case  the  Zambrano  doctrine  would  apply  and  the  EU's
         citizen's  rights  would  have  to  be  protected  (save  for   the
         possibility   of   a   proportionate   deprivation   of    rights).
         Accordingly,  to  that  extent  the  focus  is  on  protecting  the
         substance of the right, that formulation of the  principle  already
         provides protection from certain interferences with  the  enjoyment
         of the right."

    And at [68]

         "68. In my judgment, it is also highly pertinent that the CJEU  has
         confirmed in Dereci (Paras 67-68) that the fact that the  right  to
         family life is adversely affected, or that the presence  of  non-EU
         national is desirable for economic reasons, will not of  themselves
         constitute factors capable of triggering  the  Zambrano  principle.
         In practice these are the most likely  reasons  why  the  right  of
         residence would be rendered less beneficial or enjoyable.  If these
         considerations do not engage this wide principle, it  seems  to  me
         extremely difficult to identify precisely what will.  What level of
         interference with the right would fall short of de facto compulsion
         and yet would constitute a form of interference which was more than
         simply the breakdown of  family  life  or  the  fact  that  the  EU
         citizens are financially disadvantaged by the removal of the non EU
         national family member?  The scope for this right to bite would  be
         extremely narrow and in  my  judgment  there  would  be  very  real
         uncertainty as to the nature and scope of the doctrine.  That legal
         uncertainty  would  itself   be   inconsistent   with   fundamental
         principles of EU law.  I do not accept the language of the CJEU  in
         Dereci is deliberately seeking to leave open this grey  area  where
         Zambrano may bite."

15. For the sake of completeness and in the light of the second of the  two
    issues identified by Ms Norman, we also refer  to  the  observation  by
    Elias LJ at [69]:

         "I do not accept that the recognition in Dereci that Article  7  of
         the Charter on Fundamental Freedoms may  apply  assists  his  case,
         although I accept that it is not entirely clear why that passage is
         included  in  the  judgment.   It  could  be  that  the  Court  was
         recognising that the deprivation of the right might be  appropriate
         and proportional in some circumstances;  or  as  Professor  Davies'
         paper suggestion, the Court might have been envisaging that Article
         7 could be relevant to the question whether the EU citizen  was  in
         fact compelled to follow the non-EU citizen out of the territory of
         the EU.  I do not think the Court was at that point in its judgment
         envisaging that Article 7 could be relevant to a situation which it
         had simply not in terms addressed at all."

16. There is nothing in the more recent authorities that have been drawn to
    our attention to suggest that the test to be applied is different  from
    that  analysed  in  Harrison  (Jamaica).   We  agree  with  Mr  Tufan's
    submissions that the decision in SSHD v AQ (Nigeria) & ORS [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 250 involved cases  with  distinctly  different  facts  from  those
    before us involving the deportation of a parent for criminal behaviour.
     Nevertheless, the observations of Pitchford LJ at [76] are pertinent:

         "76. It was a matter for the domestic court  to  determine  whether
         the mother's deportation would constitute  a  breach  of  the  UK's
         obligations towards the child by denying him the substance  of  his
         right as  an  EU  citizen  (Dereci  at  paragraph  74  ...).   That
         determination required an examination of the  practical  effect  of
         deportation (Harrison (Jamaica) at  paragraph  63).   I  accept  Mr
         Payne's submission, which I did not understand  Mr  Drabble  QC  to
         contest,  that  this  question   requires   no   consideration   of
         reasonableness  or  proportionality:  AQ   bore   the   burden   of
         establishing on balance that in practice her son would be compelled
         to leave EU if she was deported.  While I accept that at  paragraph
         90 the FTT spoke of a reasonable inference that if AQ was  deported
         her son would be taken into care, that conclusion was reached  only
         after setting off on the wrong foot to examine the  proportionality
         of the alternatives...

         77.  I agree with Mr Drabble QC that the question to be examined by
         the tribunal was a practical and not a hypothetical one.   ...   In
         my view, the domestic tribunal  is  entitled  to  examine  all  the
         circumstances  proved  that  its  focus  is  upon   the   practical
         consequences of deportation.  ..."

17. We were also referred to Ahmed (Amos: Zambrano: Reg 15A(3)(c) 2006  EEA
    Regs) [2013] UKUT  00089.   This  case  involved  two  German  national
    children whose Pakistan citizen mother  had  sought  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom following her divorce from her German national  husband.
    The couple had lived in the  United  Kingdom  with  the  children.   At
    paragraph [68] the tribunal observed:

         "... In the appellant's case, however, there is  no  suggestion  of
         the children being able to live with the father and Mr Deller  [the
         Home Office Presenting Officer] said that he accepted that  it  was
         not realistic to expect that she could live  in  Germany  with  her
         children.  He also accepted that for her and her children there was
         no alternative Union territory location other than the UK.  IN  our
         view Mr Deller was right to make that  concession.   The  appellant
         did not have any immigration status in Germany nor could  she  rely
         in Germany on any EU right of residence (to our  understanding  she
         would only be entitled to reside in Germany as a matter of  EU  law
         if able to show (as clearly she could not) that  she  was  a  self-
         sufficient parent in accordance with the principles set out by  the
         Court of Justice in Chen [2004] ECR 1-9925).  Accordingly,  in  our
         judgment the appellant is able to rely on her children's Article 20
         right of Union citizenship under the Treaty."

18. The evidence we have now seen from Herr Derst clarifies matters and  it
    may well be that had that been before the parties, the concession might
    not have been made.  The reference however to the  acceptance  that  it
    was "not realistic" to expect that the respondent could live in Germany
    does however accord with the practical nature of the enquiry identified
    in Harrison (Jamaica).

19. We were also referred to NA [2016] EWECJ C-115/15  (30  June  2016)  on
    reference from the Court of Appeal in England and  Wales.  Included  in
    the four questions asked by  the  referring  court  for  a  preliminary
    ruling by the Court of Justice were the second question:

         "Does an EU citizen have an EU right to reside  in  a  host  Member
         State under Articles 20 and 21 TFEU in circumstances where the only
         State within the EU in which the citizen is entitled to  reside  is
         his state of nationality, but there is  a  finding  of  fact  by  a
         competent tribunal that removal of the citizen from the host Member
         State to his State of nationality would  breach  his  rights  under
         Article 8 of the [Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
         Fundamental Freedoms) or Article 7 of the  Charter  of  Fundamental
         rights of the EU?"

    And the third:

         "If the EU citizen in (2) (above)  is  a  child,  does  the  parent
         having sole care of that child have a derived right of residence in
         the host Member State if the child  would  have  to  accompany  the
         parent on removal of the parent from the host Member State?"

20. The enquiry before the Court was whether a third  country  national  ex
    spouse was required to demonstrate exercise of treaty rights  by  their
    former spouse at the time of  divorce.   The  applicant  had  been  the
    victim of domestic violence during the marriage and the  divorce  post-
    dated the departure of the Union citizen spouse from the Member  State.
    It was concluded that reliance could not be placed on the retention  of
    a right of residence where the commencement of divorce proceedings post-
    dated the  departure  of  the  Union  citizen  from  the  Member  State
    concerned.  The Court  was  also  concerned  with  a  fourth  question:
    whether a child has a right to reside pursuant to Article  12,  if  the
    Union citizen parent who had been employed had ceased to reside in  the
    host Member State before the  child  entered  into  education  in  that
    State.  The Court concluded that Article 12 of  Regulation  No  1612/78
    did not require that the former migrant worker should still reside in a
    host Member State on the date when school or university began  or  that
    the parent should continue to  be  present  throughout  the  period  of
    attendance at school or university.

21. Specifically in respect of the second and  third  questions  the  Court
    concluded at [81] in its ruling:

         "In the light of the foregoing, the answer to the second and  third
         questions is as follows:

           - Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that it does not
             confer a right of residence in the host Member State either  on
             a minor Union citizen, who has  resided  since  birth  in  that
             Member State but is not a national  of  that  State,  or  on  a
             parent who is a third country national and who has sole custody
             of that minor, where they qualify for a right of  residence  in
             that Member State under a provision of secondary EU law.

           - Article 21 TFEU must be interpreted as meaning that it  confers
             on a minor Union citizen a  right  of  residence  in  the  host
             Member  State,  provided  that  that  citizen   satisfies   the
             conditions set out in Article 7(1) of  the  Directive  2004/38,
             which it is for the referring court to determine.  If so,  that
             same provision allows the parent who is the  primary  carer  of
             that Union citizen to reside with  that  citizen  in  the  host
             Member State."

22. The absence of comprehensive sickness insurance which is a  requirement
    of Article 7(1) reduces the material impact of  this  decision  on  the
    case before us.

23. Accordingly, we now examine the facts of the  case  before  us  to  see
    whether [L]  will  be  effectively  compelled  or  forced  to  give  up
    residence in the European Union and travel outside the Union  with  her
    non-EU national mother.

24. The reasons given by the respondent for not wishing to travel to German
    with [L] relate to  her  previous  adverse  experience  there  and  her
    perception of the difficulties she and her daughter would encounter  if
    living in Germany today.  These are summarised at [2] above. The source
    is two witness statements and the evidence before us on 02 March.   The
    first statement dated 12  May  2015  and  thus  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal refers to the respondent's two children. The respondent  moved
    to Germany in 2004 where she lived in an immigration holding centre  in
    Berlin for two years although she was free to come and go.  She  became
    pregnant and gave birth to [L] whilst at  centre,  and  then  moved  to
    Hamburg to live with [L]'s father, from whom she separated after  three
    months.  After living as a single mother the respondent met her  second
    partner who was also of Vietnamese origin with whom she lived for about
    six  months.   He  became  very  violent.   Police   intervention   was
    ineffective.  It is  not  clear  when  the  couple  met,  however,  the
    respondent decided in 2008 to make her way to the  United  Kingdom  and
    dispatched [L] to Vietnam to stay with a friend.

25. The respondent also explains in her first statement that  [L]'s  father
    was a gambler and an alcoholic and had no fixed abode in  Germany.   He
    last saw [L] when she was three months old.  [L] had lived  in  Vietnam
    with her friend.  The respondent's first husband had died in Vietnam in
    2000 and so her  first  daughter  had  lived  with  his  parents.   The
    respondent explains that she did not wish to go back to Germany as  she
    had had a very hard life there.  She has never claimed benefits in  the
    United Kingdom and believes that she can work to  support  herself  and
    her children.

26. In her second statement dated 1 March  2013,  the  respondent  explains
    that her daughter is in full time education  at  a  primary  school  in
    London where she is doing well and where she had been  since  September
    2012.  [L]'s father is described as a very  violent  man  who  used  to
    physically abuse the respondent and in this respect  also,  the  police
    were  not  effective  in  protecting  her.   He  had   threatened   the
    respondent's life and thus her decision to flee.  The second  statement
    makes no reference to the second partner.  The respondent explains that
    since coming to the United Kingdom she had had no  contact  with  [L]'s
    father and did not know his whereabouts.  Specifically  in  respect  of
    potential return to Germany, the respondent states:

         "I will not return to Germany and I will not take my daughter  back
         to Germany if my appeal to live in the UK were to  be  refused.   I
         will not allow anyone to take my daughter back to Germany.   If  my
         current appeal were to be refused, I will return to Vietnam with my
         daughter.  I have no home or income in Vietnam but at least, I have
         a friend and a few family members in Vietnam to help and protect me
         and my daughter there.  We had no protection in Germany.

         I am a Vietnamese national and I speak only Vietnamese language.  I
         do not speak German and my daughter  does  not  speak  German.   My
         daughter speaks English and Vietnamese.  She, in  fact,  lived  and
         attended nursery in Vietnam from 2008 until 2012 when I brought her
         to the UK.  She is doing very well at school here, but we will have
         no other choice but to return to Vietnam if my  appeal  fails.   My
         life in Germany was horrible and I will not return to that kind  of
         life again.  I have therefore decided that I will take my  daughter
         with me and we will both return to live in Vietnam if my appeal  to
         live with her in the UK fails."

27. Nothing new of a material nature emerged in the course of  the  answers
    given by the respondent at the hearing.  When asked about why she could
    not live  in  Munich,  Berlin  or  Stuttgart,  she  responded  somewhat
    confusingly that [L]'s father had been in  Hamburg  but  had  moved  to
    Berlin so she had to go away.  When it was suggested  that  there  were
    big cities in Germany where she could live away from Hamburg or Berlin,
    her response was that she did not know anyone  there.   The  respondent
    confirmed that she does not currently know where [L]'s father lives.

28. It is evident to us that the respondent has set her face against living
    again  in  Germany.   Although  we  take  account  of  her  unfortunate
    experiences, the respondent's relationships occurred  over  some  eight
    years ago. There has been no contact since. We find that  her  concerns
    are not objectively justified. Even if by some coincidence they were to
    meet, which would be very unlikely if the respondent  lived  away  from
    Hamburg or Berlin, the passage of time alone is likely to have  reduced
    the intensity of negative feelings and hostility.  For  these  reasons,
    we do not consider her previous experience to constitute an  impediment
    to her return.  It is a matter purely of her choice.

29. We readily accept that the respondent will have  become  accustomed  to
    life in the United Kingdom as will her daughter who has had the benefit
    of over three year's education here.  We see no reason however why  the
    respondent would be unable to obtain employment in Germany as  she  was
    successfully able to do so in the United Kingdom.  Similarly, we do not
    see any reason why [L] will be unable to adapt again to a new  life  in
    Germany; she is of an age where it will be possible for her to  acquire
    German and we have no doubt that the authorities  will  enable  her  to
    settle into that country with a sense of security and place.

30. None of the factors relied on by the respondent persuades us that there
    would be such diminution in quality of life or a particular standard of
    living  in  Germany  that  in  practice  rules  out  [L]'s  country  of
    nationality as a place where the family can live.

31. Ms Norman argues that the practical  effect  of  the  respondent  being
    refused a residence card would mean that she would leave Europe and  go
    to Vietnam taking [L] with her.   The  factors  that  militate  against
    return to Germany are not factors which would  compel  such  a  course.
    The rights in play are not matters that are a function  of  choice  but
    are driven by the practical effect of  factors  that  may  or  may  not
    undermine those rights.  Accordingly,  we  are  not  persuaded  that  a
    refusal of a derivative right of  residence  to  the  respondent  would
    deprive [L] of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of her rights  as
    an EU citizen.  The only thing that may deprive [L] of those rights  is
    her mother's decision to take [L] out of the Union, a  decision  which,
    as we have said, would not be based on any practical necessity.

32. We turn to the second issue, in particular Article 7 of the Charter and
    Section 55.  The matters relied on Ms Norman in support of this  aspect
    of the claim mirror those we had regard  to  in  deciding  whether  [L]
    would be deprived of the genuine enjoyment  of  her  rights  as  an  EU
    citizen.  The Article 7  factors  are  almost  identical  in  terms  as
    acknowledged by Ms Norman to Article 8.  Application  of  the  Zambrano
    principles   does   not   include   matters   of   reasonableness    or
    proportionality.  These do not arise at this stage since  the  decision
    under challenge is solely that of refusal to issue a residence card  to
    the respondent.  In the event that the Secretary of  State  decides  to
    remove the respondent, that will be the opportunity for  those  factors
    to be addressed.

33. We have set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal for error  of
    law and we  remake  that  decision.   We  dismiss  the  appeal  by  the
    respondent against the decision to refuse her a residence card.


Signed   Date: 05 September 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

