
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number:   IA/45374/13


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 25th June 2014                     |On: 26th June 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                            Betania Pyramo Santos
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Ramduny, M Reale Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Brazil date of birth 7th  October
       1971.  She  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal (Judge Petherbridge) to dismiss her appeal against  the
       Respondent's decision to refuse to issue her  with  a  residence
       card confirming her right of residence as a family member of  an
       EEA national exercising treaty rights.

    2. The basis of the Appellant's application was  that  she  is  the
       unmarried partner of an Italian national,  Mr  Erico  Jose  Zen.
       The Respondent refused the claim by way of letter dated the 16th
       October 2013.  The Respondent did not accept that the  Appellant
       was  an  extended  family  member  under  Regulation  8  of  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 because it was  not  accepted
       that the couple were in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship.
       The letter goes on to make reference to Regulation  17(4)(b).  A
       number of factors are  set  out  including  the  fact  that  the
       Appellant had overstayed, but central to the reasoning  is  that
       it was not accepted that the couple were living together and the
       Respondent considered "that all the documents  of  co-habitation
       provided as evidence of cohabitation provided  as  evidence  for
       Erico are false and that you have tried to practice deception to
       gain leave to remain in the UK".

    3. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal accepted  that  the  Appellant
       and her sponsor were credible and honest  witnesses,  and  found
       there to be an "overwhelming weight of evidence" that they  were
       in a durable relationship, having lived together  in  excess  of
       two years.  The determination then states [at 56]:

"a curious feature of the Respondent's decision is  that  having  found
that the Appellant and her partner were not in a  durable  relationship
such as to satisfy Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations,  a  further
decision was made under Regulation 17(4) without any discussion  as  to
how that subsequent decision came to be made"

    4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  apparently  considered   itself   in
       difficulty because of the lack of clear reasoning in the refusal
       letter in respect of Regulation 17(4) but the determination then
       goes on to replace the "reasoning" in the  refusal  letter  with
       the Tribunal's own, and in doing so dismissing the appeal.

    5. The grounds of appeal are slightly confusing in that they appear
       to assert that this appeal should  have  been  allowed  outright
       given  the  finding  that  the  couple   are   in    a   durable
       relationship. I am therefore grateful to Judge  Ransley  who  in
       granting permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  clarified
       the central matter in issue: "under Reg 17(5) the Respondent  is
       required  to  undertake  an   extensive   examination   of   the
       appellant's circumstances and to  give  reasons  justifying  the
       refusal to issue a residence card to an extended family  member.
       It is arguable that the Judge erred in law in deciding  [at  68]
       that 'the Respondent's discretion under regulation 17(4)  should
       not have been exercised differently' given that  the  Respondent
       had not given reasons justifying the refusal as required by  Reg
       17(5)".

    6. Before me Mr Kandola agreed that if I found the  Respondent  had
       indeed failed to  conduct  that  extensive  examination  of  the
       Appellant's circumstances, then the appeal should be allowed  to
       the extent that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  be  set
       aside  and  I  re-make  the  decision  (with  findings  of  fact
       preserved) as 'not in accordance with the law'. It would then be
       for  the   Respondent   to   conduct   her   investigation   and
       consideration and exercise her discretion under the Regulations,
       in light of the First-tier Tribunal's findings.

    7. The refusal letter does not conduct an extensive examination  of
       the Appellant's circumstances. Insofar as it purports to  do  so
       it is on the basis of a flawed understanding of the facts, since
       the Respondent's case that this relationship is a sham has  been
       found to be wrong. I therefore find that  the  decision  of  the
       Respondent was not in accordance with the  law  and  the  appeal
       should have been allowed on that basis.


Decisions

    8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is  set  aside,  save  that  the  findings  of  fact  are
       preserved.

    9. I re-make the decision in the appeal as follows: "the appeal  is
       allowed as the decision is not in accordance with the law".




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             25th June  2014
