

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/45551/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5th July 2017                         |On 4th August 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     FI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The appellant in person

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent is a citizen of Pakistan.

 2. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.   I
    make an anonymity direction  as  this  case  concerns  minor  children.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or the children. This direction applies both to
    the Appellant and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The procedural history and background:

 3. The Secretary of State, with permission, appeals against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Walker)  who,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 5th May 2015            allowed  FI's  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds (Article 8).

 4. Whilst the Appellant in these proceedings is the  Secretary  of  State,
    for the sake of convenience I intend to refer to the  parties  as  they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The Appellant's immigration history and the basis of his claim  is  set
    out within the determination at paragraph 3 of  the  FTT  determination
    and in the decision letter issued by the Secretary of State.  It can be
    summarised briefly as follows.

 6. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He applied for entry clearance
    to the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (dependent) of his partner,  N,  from
    21 September 2010 until 30 November 2011.  The  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 21 September 2010. The appellant had a  daughter,  H,
    born on 26 January 2010 who entered the UK with her parents.

 7. On 30 November 2011 he applied for an extension of leave to remain as a
    dependent of his partner, as part of her Tier  4  application.  He  was
    granted leave to remain on 25 May 2012 until 1 June  2013.  Whilst  the
    appellant and his partner were in the United Kingdom, she gave birth to
    a further child, A, born March 2011.

 8. On the First of June 2013 he applied for leave to remain under Appendix
    FM on the basis of his family and private life. That application is set
    out in the respondent's bundle. In a corresponding letter dated 1  June
    2013 he stated that  he  would  be  sending  supporting  statements  in
    support of the application from his family "all  of  whom  are  British
    citizens".

 9. The respondent refused that application and  a  notice  of  immigration
    decision refusing to vary leave to enter or remain in the  decision  to
    remove was made on 6 November 2014. It was accompanied by a reasons for
    refusal letter.

10. The respondent gave consideration to the application under the  Partner
    Route, however, the appellant and his  partner  were  no  longer  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship and thus the application could  not
    be considered further under that route. As to consideration  under  the
    Parent Route, whilst it was accepted that  he  had  children  with  his
    partner, he had failed to provide evidence to show  that  he  qualified
    under the rules of R-LTRP 1.1.  The  decision  letter  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had written to him on  13  August  2014  to  request
    evidence of the children's nationalities, as well as evidence  that  he
    had access rights to the children. He was also asked to  provide  birth
    certificates for the children. It was recorded that the  appellant  did
    not respond to the letter. A further letter  was  sent  requesting  the
    same information and on 19  September  2014,  the  applicant  submitted
    further documents including both children's birth certificates and also
    letters to explain that he was currently attempting to exercise  access
    rights to the children as he was separated from his spouse. It was  not
    accepted that he was the parent of a child who was  either  British  or
    settled. Nor was it accepted that he was the parent of a child who  had
    lived in the United Kingdom for seven years preceding  the  application
    and that EX1 applied as the children were three years  and  four  years
    respectively. Thus he had failed to show that he met  the  requirements
    of E-LTRP2.2.

11. As to the evidence of parental access to the children, it was  accepted
    that whilst he had access to the children, confirmed  by  letters  from
    his estranged partner in a letter from the GP, the primary carer of the
    children was not British nor was she settled in the United Kingdom. She
    had limited leave to remain until January 2016 and thus  the  appellant
    could also not meet E-LTRP 2.3 of the Immigration Rules under  Appendix
    FM.

12. As to consideration under the private  life  route,  the  Secretary  of
    State set out the requirements under paragraph 276ADE of the rules. The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom on 21 September 2010 and  had  not
    lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years therefore  he  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iii). As he was  32
    years old at the time of the application and not between the ages of 18
    years and above and under 25 years at the time of the application,  and
    had spent 28 years in Pakistan prior to coming to United  Kingdom,  the
    secretary  of  state  was  not  satisfied  that  he  could   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (v). The Secretary of State  also
    considered whether he could meet the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE
    (1) (iv) which referred to there being  significant  obstacles  to  his
    integration into Pakistan. The Secretary of  State  concluded  that  he
    could not based on the following factors; he was 32 years  old  at  the
    time of application and had resided in the UK for four  years.  He  had
    lived in Pakistan the  28  years  prior  to  this  which  significantly
    outweighed the  time  he  had  spent  United  Kingdom.  He  had  family
    relatives (his mother) resided in Pakistan and it provided no  evidence
    to show that she would be unable  to  support  or  accommodate  him  on
    return; he had cultural ties to Pakistan  which  demonstrated  that  he
    would be able to re -establish a life there given that  he  spoke  Urdu
    and Punjabi. He was aware also the social and  cultural  norms  of  the
    country due to the lengthy period that he spent living in Pakistan.

13. Consideration was given to section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 relating to the best  interests  of  the  children
    concerned. The Secretary of State concluded that as the  children  were
    currently in the care of their mother it would be assumed that the care
    arrangements would be continued on his return to Pakistan. It would  be
    at the discretion of the children's other  parent  as  to  whether  she
    would wish to return to Pakistan with him at the  children  or  whether
    they would remain in the United Kingdom until the expiry of their leave
    to remain (January  2016)  or,  if  granted  further  leave  to  remain
    indefinitely. The children were cared for  a  regular  basis  by  their
    mother whilst he had sought access, it would be in the  best  interests
    of the children to be cared for by their mother. As he was not the sole
    care of the children it was not considered that his  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom would breach the children's  rights  under  section  55.
    Furthermore he would be able to continue contact with the children  via
    other methods such as telephone calls, video calls, emails and letters.
    It would also be open to him to return to Pakistan and seek the correct
    entry clearance should he wish to visit the children in the future.

14. The secretary state also considered whether there were any grounds  for
    a grant of leave outside of the rules but  concluded  on  the  evidence
    provided that there were no such  grounds.  Thus  the  application  was
    refused.

15. The appellant sought to appeal that decision on  24  November  2014  by
    issuing grounds of appeal. Those grounds  asserted  that  the  decision
    made was not accordance with the law and incompatible with  his  rights
    under the ECHR. He claimed that he was in contact  with  his  daughters
    and that the contact arrangement would  not  continue  if  returned  to
    Pakistan as "my wife does not allow me to and I will be unable to enjoy
    my family life with my daughter and my daughters have a right  to  have
    contact with their father and it is in their best interest."

16. The appeal came before the First- Tier Tribunal  (Judge  Walker)  at  a
    hearing on 27 March 2015. In a determination promulgated on 5 May  2015
    he allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  (having
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules).

17. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  and
    permission was granted by the First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert) on  15
    July 2015. In particular, the grant of permission made reference to the
    failure to take account of the children's own lack of settled status in
    the United Kingdom.

18. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal on 9  October
    2015 before a Deputy Judge of the Tribunal. I have no details as to the
    proceedings that took place on that date however it  is  plain  from  a
    letter in the bundle addressed to both parties that subsequent  to  the
    hearing of the appeal, the judge  was  unable  to  complete  a  written
    decision therefore the Resident Judge, exercising his delegated powers,
    made an  order  for  the  transfer  of  the  appeal  to  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal. That was attached  to  a  notice  served  on  the
    parties on 10 February 2017.

19. The appeal was then listed before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor on
    30 March 2017. In a determination promulgated  on  7  April  2017  DUTJ
    Taylor found errors of law. The judge recorded those errors as follows:-



               1) "I am satisfied that the judge added  law  by  failing  to
                  have regard to a material fact, namely that as at the date
                  of the decision and the  hearing,  the  children,  on  the
                  evidence before him, had no settled status here. There  is
                  no reference to the fact that they would  be  expected  to
                  return to  Pakistan  in  due  course.  Indeed,  the  judge
                  appears to have basis decision upon  the  assumption  that
                  contact would not exist in any form if the  claimant  were
                  to be returned there.

               2) Furthermore, there is no reference to section 117B of  the
                  2002 Act. Accordingly, the judge did not take into account
                  the factors which he was required to consider by virtue of
                  that Act when reaching his decision. The decision  is  set
                  aside."

20. Having set aside the decision, the duty of every Tribunal is to  remake
    it. It appears from paragraph 13 of the  determination  that  when  the
    appellant gave further evidence, it emerged that he could be a  British
    Citizen. It was recorded that the appellant had said  that  his  father
    was British and be granted citizenship in 1974. He  said  he  had  been
    born  in  1982  and  that  he  could  provide  all  of   the   relevant
    documentation. The judge also made reference to  an  assertion  in  the
    presenting officer's file that the appellant's children  were  British.
    Thus the appeal was adjourned to be relisted before the same DUTJ.  The
    judge made a direction for the appellant to file all documents  related
    his father, enclosing a copy of his birth certificate to the  Secretary
    of State to be recorded within seven days. Secretary of  state  was  to
    undertake to consider those documents  thereafter  and  to  inform  the
    Tribunal what the position of the Secretary  of  State  is  after  that
    consideration.

21. On 24 April 2017 a further transfer order  was  made  by  the  Resident
    Principal Judge so that the appeal could  be  heard  by  a  differently
    constituted Tribunal.

22. Thus the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on 25 May 2017. On  that
    day the appellant, as he has been throughout,  appeared  unrepresented.
    At the hearing he had not provided any further evidence in relation  to
    the children and his relationship/contact with them and he also  stated
    that there was evidence that he did not have with  him  to  demonstrate
    that he was entitled to British citizenship. There appeared to be  some
    ambiguity as to whether he had received the skeleton argument  produced
    by Mr Jarvis concerning the issue of citizenship relating to his family
    relatives and thus the appeal was adjourned with further directions for
    the appellant to file and serve on the Tribunal and  the  respondent  a
    written statement setting out his full family  details  and  the  basis
    upon which he stated he had British citizenship and  for  any  evidence
    relating to contact has with the children.



The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

23. At the hearing the appellant appeared in person. He was accompanied  by
    his brother. The Secretary of  State  was  represented  by  Mr  Jarvis,
    senior presenting officer.

24. At the outset of the proceedings, I ensured that the appellant was able
    to understand the court interpreter and  vice  versa.  I  confirm  that
    throughout the proceedings  there  was  no  difficulty  in  either  the
    appellant  understanding  the  court  interpreter  or  the  interpreter
    understanding the appellant. I also ensured  that  each  stage  of  the
    hearing I explained to him the procedure so that he understood and gave
    him the opportunity to ask questions if there was any issue that he did
    not understand.

The evidence:

25. Having checked the court file, it did not appear that the appellant had
    complied with the directions given on the  last  occasion  relating  to
    provision of documentary evidence. However the appellant stated that he
    had brought that evidence with him. The court therefore took copies  of
    that documentation which are on the court file. For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt those documents are summarised as follows: -

               1) Letter from the appellant's  brother,  NJ  dated  30  June
                  2017.

               2) Letter from the appellant's brother SI dated 30th of  June
                  2017 and extract of passport.

               3) Application for registration as a citizen  of  the  United
                  Kingdom and Colonies in the name of the applicant's father
                  MI (not complete or dated).

               4) Letter from the Home Office  dated  11/7/74  acknowledging
                  receipt of two passports from MI.

               5) Document entitled "statement of facts relating  to  family
                  history" dated 30th of June 2017.

               6) Extract of UK passport for MI (appellant's father.

               7) Death certificate of the appellant's father.

               8) Copy photographs of the appellant and the children.

               9) Birth certificate copy of appellant's brother SI.

              10) Birth certificate of the appellant

              11) Certificate of registration as a British citizen  for  the
                  appellant's father, MI, dated fifth of July 1988.

              12) Birth certificate of appellant's brothers.

26. The respondent had produced a copy bundle of  documentation  which  had
    been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (which  included  the  original
    decision in 2014 and the  documentation  provided  by  the  appellant).
    Furthermore, further to the directions made by DUTJ Taylor there was  a
    skeleton argument dealing with the issue of British citizenship and  an
    accompanying set of documents relevant to that issue.  Those  documents
    had been served upon the applicant at the time of the  earlier  hearing
    and he confirmed he had been given the opportunity  to  consider  them.
    They replicated some of the  documentation  at  the  appellant  himself
    relied upon.

27.  I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant.  In  relation  to  the
    arrangements to contact to the  children  since  the  FTT  decision  in
    October, the appellant stated that he met them during  "school  times".
    When asked how often he had seen the 2015 he said that he had "met them
    frequently".  As  to  the  arrangements  that  he  had  made  with  the
    children's mother, he said that he took the children to school about  3
    to 4 times per month. When asked where he picked them up from, he  said
    that he did so "outside school". Therefore  the  evidence  was  further
    clarified as to the arrangements and he said that the children's mother
    would leave the children in the park,  which  is  a  park  outside  the
    school, he would go to the park and pick them up. His wife would  leave
    the children in the park. He confirmed that this  was  the  arrangement
    made with his wife. When asked if he saw them at  any  other  times  he
    said that sometimes he took them outside in "special circumstances". He
    described taking the children to McDonald's and that he would  ask  his
    wife to bring them to McDonald's and that he would spend  approximately
    1-2 hours with them. When asked how many times he had had that type  of
    contact he thought that there had been "many times" and gave  a  figure
    of about 15-20 times in the year.

28. He was asked about the photographs that  he  produced.  Photograph  one
    showed a woman a child and the appellant.  He  said  that  this  was  a
    picture of his daughter H aged about  seven  with  a  teacher  and  the
    photograph was taken in July 2017. It was taken at a school assembly.

29. Photograph three was a picture of the appellant and his  two  daughters
    are McDonald's celebrating the festival of EID.

30. The other photographs appear to be taken on the same occasion.

31. When asked if there were any other forms of contact with  the  children
    the appellant stated "no".

32. As to the children's circumstances he confirmed that both children were
    in good health and that they were still living with their mother.  When
    asked if he knew anything about his ex-wife's current circumstances the
    appellant replied "I don't know - she does not tell me anything."

33. He stated that the two children had been at  their  schools  for  three
    years and two years respectively.

34. He stated that he did not have any qualifications in English  but  that
    he understood English but did miss important  words  which  is  why  he
    required an interpreter. When  asked  how  he  was  living  in  the  UK
    (financially) stated that he did not have a proper job because  he  did
    not have status and that he had been doing  repair jobs.

35. As to family in Pakistan, he confirmed that his  mother  resided  there
    and he had married sisters who lived in their own homes.

36. When asked if there was any further evidence  he  would  wish  to  give
    about the children or his relationship with them,  he  said  "I'm  sure
    that they don't hate me but love me".

37. Dealing with the issue of British citizenship, in his written statement
    he set out his family history. That his father MI arrived in the UK  in
    1962 and that his father was joined by his mother in  1966.  He  stated
    that his father had been granted indefinite leave to remain and in 1974
    his father applied for British nationality. He stated that his  parents
    had three children while settled in the UK, his  brothers  SI  born  in
    1967, MJ born in 1970 and SI born in 1971. He stated that although  his
    father was a British  citizen  naturalised  in  1988  he  actually  had
    indefinite leave to remain in 1973 which entitled him to claim  British
    citizenship. In his  oral  evidence  he  confirmed  that  that  written
    statement was true.

38. When asked if he had ever made an application for  British  citizenship
    himself, he stated that he had not. When asked why he had not made such
    an application, he stated "I did not know about this but  told  by  the
    judge if my father was British I should apply."

39. The appellant was asked questions in cross  examination  by  Mr  Jarvis
    (senior presenting officer). He confirmed  that  he  saw  the  children
    approximately 15 to 20 times over the last year. He  further  confirmed
    that when preparing to meet the children in the park he  did  speak  to
    his wife to arrange where and when to meet. The appellant  agreed  with
    the suggestion that he had a fairly friendly relationship with his wife
    and that he had "given financial help to the children to his wife".

40.  He was asked if he had requested his former wife to give  evidence  at
    court. The appellant said that he had not. It was suggested to him that
    this was an important hearing  concerning  his  relationship  with  the
    children and he wanted to stay in the UK. In those circumstances he was
    asked why he had  not  asked  his  wife  to  attend  court  to  provide
    information about his relationship with  the  children.  The  appellant
    replied "she does not tell me anything about her case and I do not tell
    anything about my case." He further stated  "she  does  not  inform  me
    about her case I do not want  to  tell  about  my  application  and  in
    particular my citizenship." When asked why he would not tell her  about
    his citizenship case, the appellant replied "my  relationship  with  my
    wife is just about the children." When asked if there  was  any  reason
    why she should not  know  about  any  British  citizenship  claims,  he
    replied "there is no agreement she does not  tell  me  anything  and  I
    don't tell her. He stated that it was not necessary for her to  support
    his claim because he had evidence which he could bring to court. It was
    suggested to him that the evidence provided consisted of photographs of
    him with the children and that there was no evidence of his wife, there
    was nothing from the children about how often they  saw  him  or  their
    relationship with him. He was asked  why  the  children  had  not  been
    providing letters or notes in  support  of  his  claim.  The  appellant
    stated "I did not think about this. I have brought  evidence  which  is
    appropriate according to my thinking.

41. It was put to him that in reality he had not been seeing  the  children
    regularly and had not been acting as a father to  them.  In  reply  the
    appellant stated "I cannot support the children because I do  not  have
    status and no financial means. If I had the  money  I  would  have  the
    opportunity to meet them." He confirmed that he lived approximately  20
    minutes' drive away from the children's address.

42. He was asked if  he  had  requested  the  children  school  to  provide
    evidence to demonstrate that he played  a  part  in  their  lives.  The
    appellant replied "last time I was asked if I had a letter. I  went  to
    school but they did not provide me with one. I provided a  letter  from
    the GP (this referred to a letter dated November 2014).

43. He was asked about his wife's friend who sometimes dropped the children
    off in the park and whether he had a friendly  relationship  with  her.
    The appellant stated that it was not more than hello but that she  knew
    that he was the father of the children.

44.  He was asked about his brother N and whether  he  had  been  with  the
    appellant and the children? The appellant stated that he had  not  seen
    the children with the  appellant  since  the  appellant  and  his  wife
    separated (the date of separation was approximately 2013).

45. He said he last saw the children the day before the hearing  when  they
    finished school.

46. He stated that his brother did not have any contact with his  estranged
    wife.

47. The appellant was then asked questions about his  family  history.  The
    Home Office evidence suggested that the appellant's father  was  living
    in the UK in 1975 and that at the end of  1975  he  travelled  back  to
    Pakistan. The appellant agreed that  that  was  the  position.  He  was
    referred to page 17 of the bundle and that there was evidence that  his
    father applied to re-enter the United Kingdom in 1977 and  was  refused
    permission on 30 September  1979  and  that  his  appeal  against  this
    decision was rejected in  1980.  The  appellant  agreed  that  was  the
    position.

48. He further agreed that he was born in  1982  in  Pakistan.  He  further
    agreed that his father had written to the Home Office  (or  someone  on
    his behalf had done so) in 1987 (see page 53 of the bundle) asking  the
    Home Office to look into MI's status and nationality in the UK and that
    his father completed an affirmation and allegiance to the Queen in 1987
    (page 57).

49. He confirmed that in 1988 his father was living in Pakistan and that he
    was recognised as possessing a right of abode and  registered  in  this
    regard on 14 July 1988. He was asked if he had ever re-entered the  UK?
    The appellant stated that his father lived with his brother. When asked
    again when  his  father  had  left  Pakistan  he  stated  that  it  was
    "approximately 1988 - 1990" but that he was "just guessing".

50. I asked the applicant if he had received any school reports and he said
    that he did not. He also said that he received no information from  the
    school but that when he went there he would  ask  about  the  children.
    When asked what they had told them about the children's welfare he said
    "they are doing well". When asked if he  was  aware  of  anything  else
    significant in their lives? He said "nothing more than  they  are  well
    and intelligent."

51. The Tribunal then heard evidence from the appellant's  brother  NJ.  He
    had  provided  a  letter  setting  out  his  circumstances  which  made
    reference to his British citizenship. In his oral evidence he was asked
    about his relationship with his brother. He said that his  brother  had
    lived with him since coming to the United Kingdom in 2010. He described
    the circumstances stating that "initially they were both  supported  by
    us and living with us as a family between the years  2010  -  2013.  He
    stated that they lived at his home and he accommodated  both  of  them.
    When asked why she had left  in  2013  he  said  "because  the  parties
    separated". He confirmed that he had not seen her since that time. When
    asked if he knew that the appellant was in  touch  with  his  wife  and
    whether he had a good relationship with her,  the  witness  replied  "I
    don't know if he has regular contact with his  wife.  When  asked  what
    this was based on he said it came from the appellant, he does not  talk
    about his wife.

52. He confirmed that he had seen the Home Office documents relating to his
    father and that it had given him an  "insight  into  the  information".
    When asked if he had spoken to his brother about  British  citizenship,
    he stated "no - only of late it has never been an issue."

53. He was asked a number of questions by Mr Jarvis in  cross  examination.
    In relation to the children; he confirmed that  he  had  not  seen  his
    brother with the children since the parties  separated  in  2013.  When
    asked if he knew the circumstances in which his brother  had  seen  the
    children, the witness replied that he was "not a hundred  percent  sure
    it could be where they live I've never been present." It was  suggested
    to him that if the children were important to  him,  it  is  not  clear
    where he has seen them and he was asked if the appellant  talked  about
    the children? The witness replied "I know that  he  sees  them  doesn't
    talk about them." He confirmed that his brother had always  lived  with
    him. It was suggested that the Home Office concern was that he only saw
    the children in order to stay in the UK and he was asked  to  give  his
    opinion. The witness replied "I think that he is close I know  he  sees
    them. I don't know the arrangements he's often lost in thought  it  has
    affected him". He did not know his brother had asked his wife  to  come
    to court.

54. As to his father's citizenship, he was asked about  the  chronology  in
    accordance with the documents. They demonstrated that  his  father  had
    left the UK at the end of 1975 to go to Pakistan later he tried to come
    back to the UK via an application for entry clearance which was refused
    and that he had appealed but had lost the  appeal.  Eventually  he  had
    made representations in the late 1980s and was recognised with a  right
    of abode. The witness was asked when did his father come  back  to  the
    UK? He replied "my father left the UK because grandfather was  ill  and
    he was close to father circumstances changed and he died and he  became
    bogged down. Money ran out and he did not have a good time. He had more
    children in Pakistan. He stated that his father came back in  1989.  In
    answer to a question from the Tribunal, he was asked if his father  had
    left Pakistan in 1989. He said that he came  in  January/February  1982
    and not at the same time and that he had come First United Kingdom  and
    that he had come afterwards.

55. I then heard a summary from each of the parties. Mr Jarvis relied  upon
    the skeleton argument that dealt with  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
    claim to be entitled to British citizenship through his father.  It  is
    not necessary to go through that document as it is a matter of  record.
    He then made submissions relating to the appeal against the decision to
    refuse to vary leave. In this regard he made the following submissions:-



               1)  The  appellant  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of   the
                  Immigration Rules under Appendix FM or under paragraph 276
                  ADE for the reasons set out in the  decision  letter.  The
                  appellant's former partner is not a  British  citizen  nor
                  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  nor  of  the   children
                  "qualified children" under the rules. They are not British
                  citizens (although the appellant asserted  that  they  may
                  be) nor are they settled in the United Kingdom.

               2) As to private life, his length of residence was from  2010
                  and  in  the  light  of  his   circumstances   could   not
                  demonstrate   very   significant    obstacles    to    his
                  reintegration to Pakistan.

               3) When looking at the matter outside of the rules on Article
                  8 grounds, the starting point was the findings made by the
                  judge in 2015 who found  that  there  was  a  genuine  and
                  subsisting relationship with the children.  However  under
                  section 117D (1) (b) he was required to  demonstrate  that
                  there was a "parental"  relationship.  He  had  failed  to
                  demonstrate this on the evidence. There  are  pictures  of
                  the appellant  and  the  children  but  there  was  little
                  evidence of contact in 2015 and little contact  two  years
                  later.  There  was  a  significant  absence  of   evidence
                  relating to his relationship with the children. There  was
                  nothing from the appellant's wife  despite  the  appellant
                  stating it was amicable relationship and enough to see the
                  children 15 to 20 times last year.  However  she  had  not
                  attended court and there was no further  information  from
                  his wife.

               4) In reality, the appellant occasionally  saw  the  children
                  but  did  not  have  a  "parental"  relationship  of   any
                  significance given the lack  of  evidence  to  corroborate
                  this. The evidence of his brother was  limited  and  could
                  not corroborate  the  relationship  or  intensity  of  the
                  relationship. Looking at the history, in 2013 the  parties
                  separated and in absence of evidence, the Home Office  say
                  that the appellant had not discharged the burden  to  show
                  that he had a subsisting parental relationship with either
                  of  the  children.  Looking  at  the  best  interests   of
                  children, it would not be in their interest to be used for
                  a fabricated claim. Therefore  could  not  demonstrate  he
                  satisfied S.117B (6) (a).

               5) As to S117B (6) (b), the word "expect" in the  Act  has  a
                  meaning that there is  no  expectation  for  a  qualifying
                  child to leave the UK at the date of the hearing. Thus  he
                  submitted the reasonableness test did not apply the facts.

               6) The appellant's  removal  is  proportionate  applying  the
                  section  117  considerations.  He   is   not   financially
                  independent  and  whilst  he  can  understand  English  is
                  unclear about  the  level  of  that  ability  and  has  no
                  qualifications. His private life was established in the UK
                  precariously. The children have no leave or status  United
                  Kingdom  thus  any  contact  can  be   re-established   if
                  necessary in Pakistan.

56. I also heard a summary from the appellant. He had  the  opportunity  to
    make any notes and his brother was also present next to him to  assist.
    He made reference to the following matters:-

               1) He had not had any details about his father but had learnt
                  more from the documents and that from 1962 to 1974 he  had
                  indefinite leave to  remain  in  the  UK  and  after  that
                  applied for citizenship. In 1975 he left Pakistan.  If  in
                  the UK 1974 he would have been  given  UK  citizenship  at
                  that time. It was given on the basis of his previous  stay
                  in the UK.

               2) In answer to suggestions made by  the  presenting  officer
                  that he was unable to work legally, he stated that he  had
                  learned from other resources that he would be able to work
                  in the UK. He stated that it was his understanding that he
                  could work in the UK and the  before  his  expiry  of  his
                  leave to remain he had applied for permission on the basis
                  of his family life and he was advised that he  could  work
                  until a decision had been made.

               3) In relation to the children he said that  he  was  a  very
                  caring person and cared for the welfare of his  daughters.
                  He said that it may not look genuine but at the end of the
                  day he was their father and that they are  his  daughters.
                  He said he would use level best for their betterment  that
                  their daughters and of learned from experience about being
                  a father. He said that he  was  happy  to  play  with  the
                  children and to go out and happy to bring  both  food  and
                  clothing his daughters.

               4) He stated that it would be impossible to  settle  back  in
                  Pakistan having been in the United Kingdom since 2010  and
                  that there was a lack of family and friends. He is now  35
                  years  of  age.  If  he  was  not  entitled   to   British
                  citizenship, he would request further leave to remain. The
                  lifestyle of the UK was better than in Pakistan  and  that
                  he could adapt to life here work hard.

               5)  His  brother,  reiterated  at  the  conclusion   of   the
                  appellant's summary, that the appellant just wanted to  be
                  with the children and see them again.

57. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  now
    give.

The issue of Citizenship:

58. The appellant's claim is that by virtue of his father's citizenship  he
    is entitled to be recognised as a British Citizen as had other  members
    of his family. Whilst the appellant claimed that he only realised  that
    this might be a prospect  when  the  judge  referred  to  this  at  the
    hearing, I do not think that that  is  correct  as  when  he  made  his
    application for further leave to remain in 2013 he  made  reference  to
    his family members being British Citizens. Notwithstanding that, he and
    his  brothers  have  provided  information  concerning   their   family
    circumstances. Having considered that information, I am satisfied  that
    the documentation provided by the respondent which in  part  replicates
    the information provided by the appellant, but provides  more  detailed
    documentation, sets out the accurate  chronology  of  events.  I  shall
    refer to that in due course.

59. The relevant extracts of law are replicated below.

60. Section 6 of the 1948 British Nationality Act sets out the following;

    "6. Registration of citizens of countries mentioned in section 1 (3) or
    of Eire and wives of citizens of the United Kingdom and Colonies

               1) subject to  the  provisions  of  subsection  (3)  of  this
                  section, a citizen of any country mentioned in  subsection
                  (3) of section 1 of this Act or a citizen of Eire, being a
                  person of full age and capacity,  shall  be  entitled,  on
                  making application therefore to the Secretary of State  in
                  the prescribed manner, to be registered as  a  citizen  of
                  the United  Kingdom  and  Colonies  if  he  satisfies  the
                  Secretary of State either -

                   a) that he is ordinarily resident in the United  Kingdom
                      and has been so resident throughout the period of  12
                      months, or such shorter period as  the  Secretary  of
                      State  may  in  the  special  circumstances  of   any
                      particular case  accept,  immediately  preceding  his
                      application; or

                   b) That he is  in  Crown  service  under  his  Majesty's
                      government in the United Kingdom."

61. This was amended by Schedule 1 of the 1971 Immigration  Act  (in  force
    from 1 January 1973). It reads as follows;

    "Schedule 1 registration as  citizen  by  reason  of  residence,  Crown
    service, Etc.

                 1. the law with respect to registration as a citizen of the
                    United  Kingdom  and  Colonies  shall  be  modified   as
                    follows:

                 a) in the British Nationality Act 1948, immediately  before
                    section 6, there shall be inserted  as  section  5A  the
                    provisions set out in Appendix A to this  Schedule,  and
                    no person shall be entitled to be registered under or by
                    virtue of section 6  (1)  of  that  Act  except  in  the
                    transitional cases allowed for by paragraph 2 below: and

                 b) in  section  8  of  the  British  Nationality  Act  1948
                    (registration outside United Kingdom) -

                      i) after the words "foregoing sections"  there  shall
                         be inserted  in  subsection  (1)  the  words  "or,
                         subject to subsection (1A) of this section,  under
                         section 5A "and in subsection (2)  the  words  "or
                         under section 5A of this Act": and

                     ii) there shall be omitted in subsection (1) the words
                         from "and as if" onwards (except for  purposes  of
                         registration by virtue of paragraph 2 below),  and
                         there shall be inserted as  subsections  (1A)  and
                         (1B) the provisions set out in Appendix B to  this
                         Schedule; and

                 c) For section 9 of the British Nationality Act 1948  there
                    shall be substituted the provisions set out in  Appendix
                    C to this  Schedule  (which  insert  in  the  section  a
                    reference to the new section 5A and  add  a  requirement
                    for  the  taking  in  certain  cases  of  an   oath   of
                    allegiance).

                 2. Notwithstanding anything in paragraph  1  above  or  any
                    repeal made by this Act  (but  subject  to  paragraph  3
                    below), a person who would but for this  Act  have  been
                    entitled under or by virtue of  section  6  (1)  of  the
                    British Nationality Act  1948  to  be  registered  as  a
                    citizen of the United  Kingdom  and  Colonies  shall  be
                    entitled to be so registered in the United Kingdom if he
                    satisfies the Secretary of State that at the date of his
                    application to be registered he had throughout the  last
                    five years or, if it is more than five years, throughout
                    the period since the coming into force of this Act  been
                    ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom without  being
                    subject, by virtue of any law relating  to  immigration,
                    any  restriction  on  the  period  for  which  he  might
                    remain."

62. From the information that I have before me I set out the chronology  of
    events as I have found them to be. The appellant's father (MI) was born
    in Pakistan in 1934. There is no dispute that he arrived in the  United
    Kingdom in 1962 (see page 3 and statement of family history)  and  that
    he was joined by his wife in or about 1966. In or  about  1973  MI  was
    provided with a stamp granting leave to enter the  UK  and  on  3  July
    1974, M I made an application whilst in the United Kingdom to the  Home
    Office under section 6 (1) of the BNA ( see partial application form in
    appellant's bundle and pages 1-9 ).

63. The file notes reveal that there was  some  discussion  as  to  whether
    absences from the UK (during the preceding five-year period) which took
    place in 1972 - 1973 and 1972 - 1974 may provide reasons  for  refusing
    to register the appellant's father MI  as  a  Citizen  of  the  UK  and
    Colonies (under the provisions of section 6 the 1948 BNA as amended  by
    the 1971 Act).

64. However from the evidence it appears that attempts to communicate  with
    MI took place but that he requested the return of  his  passport  on  9
    December 1975 so that he could return to Pakistan. The  enquiries  made
    by the Home Office make reference to the reasons the return being  that
    his wife and children were sick.  The  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    brother was that that their grandfather was ill and subsequently  died.
    On 9 December 1975, MI attended the public enquiry office was given his
    current passport so that he could travel to Pakistan.  However MI  left
    the UK on 14 December 1975. There had been further attempts to  contact
    MI at his address in the United Kingdom between 1975 and  1977  but  no
    response was received. The case was therefore sent to a hold  file  and
    treated as outstanding.

65. On 29 December 1977 M I applied for  entry  clearance  as  a  returning
    resident. At page 17 of the bundle there is a copy of  the  refusal  of
    the entry clearance officer on 30 September 1979. Entry  clearance  was
    refused because the applicant had been away from the United Kingdom the
    longer than two years. This was  the  subject  of  an  appeal  but  was
    dismissed by adjudicator Asher on 18 May 1981 (see  copy  determination
    exhibited at pages 49 - 51). The appellant's father could  not  satisfy
    Rule 46 of "statement of immigration rules to control on entry/EEC  and
    other non-Commonwealth nationals (HC 81) which required  the  applicant
    to demonstrate that he was settled in the United Kingdom when  he  left
    and that he has not been away for longer than two years.

66.  Thus the indefinite leave to remain to  enter  provided  for  in  1973
    lapsed because he was out of United Kingdom for more than two years and
    therefore he did not have ILR as it had lapsed at the end of 1977.

67. Indefinite leave to remain was also not relevant for other reasons when
    considering the chronology; the appellant was  born  in  1982  but  his
    father did not have indefinite leave to remain as it had lapsed at  the
    end  of  1977.  However  as  I  understand  it  indefinite   leave   to
    enter/remain was not the basis of his citizenship but it was  based  on
    him as a citizen of the UK and Colonies(  hereinafter  referred  to  as
    "CUCK") under the 1948 Act therefore indefinite  leave  to  remain  was
    only partially of relevance. At the time the  appellant  was  born  his
    father was a citizen of Pakistan and had not been recognised as a  CUCK
    and only for the recognition of right of abode under the  1971  Act  by
    nationality. It appears that  it  was  not  recognised  until  MI  made
    representations (see page 53) whereby an advice service  wrote  to  the
    Home Office stating that the appellant's father had told  them  of  the
    1974 application for registration and  requested  information  in  this
    regard. It is not clear what happened in the interim but thereafter the
    appellant signed and sent back an oath of allegiance document (see page
    57). At the time of that document the appellant was in  Pakistan.  This
    is consistent with the evidence given by the appellant and his brother.

68. Looking at the evidence at page 66 which  is  a  file  note,  M  I  was
    registered by the Home Office as a British citizen on 14 July  1988.  I
    accept the submission made by Mr Jarvis that that was presumably on the
    basis of section 11(1) of the  BNA  1981;  the  transitional  power  in
    Schedule 8 of the 1981 BNA and section 1 (2) relating  to  applications
    for naturalisation registration pending commencement, read with section
    6 (1) of the BNA 1948 (read with schedule one of the  1971  Immigration
    Act).

69.  The  documents  also  appear  to  demonstrate  that  MI  received  two
    endorsements of certificates of entitlement to the right  of  abode  in
    his Pakistan passport in 1993 and 1997.

70. Therefore applying the chronology and the documentation in the light of
    the provisions, MI was not a British citizen on the commencement of the
    BNA 1981 which was 1 January 1983, because he was not registered  as  a
    CUCK which did not happen until 14  July  1988.  Whilst  the  appellant
    makes reference to the application made in  1974,  it  did  not  happen
    until 1988. This meant that the appellant was born in 1982  was  not  a
    British citizen at birth because at that  date  MI  was  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan who was in the process of applying to register as a CUCK under
    the 1948 Act and the 1971 modification. He  could  not  have  benefited
    from section 7 of the BNA 1948 in respect of his descent from MI on the
    date of his birth because the BNA 1981 did not come into force until  1
    January 1983 which was after the birth of the appellant.

71. Consequently the appellant has not demonstrated that he is entitled  to
    British citizenship.

The appeal under Appendix FM and Paragraph 276ADE:

72. I now consider the appeal based on the applicant's private  and  family
    life under Appendix FM, paragraph 276 ADE and Article 8 outside of  the
    rules.

73. My starting point is the determination of the FTT and the findings made
    in 2015.

74. They can be summarised as follows:

               1) The appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph
                  E-LTRP or EX1 because the children are not seven years  of
                  age. Similarly and because the appellant cannot  meet  the
                  long residence requirements of paragraph 276 ADE he cannot
                  qualify under the rules with regard to that paragraph.

               2) Thus the applicant's case was considered under  Article  8
                  (outside of the rules).

               3) The judge found the appellant to be  a  truthful  witness.
                  The letters provided demonstrated that the  appellant  had
                  sought to have contact with the children. He was satisfied
                  that the appellant went to considerable lengths  in  order
                  to locate the children and then to persuade the sponsor to
                  allow him to see  the  children.  It  is  clear  from  the
                  letters and the oral evidence of the  appellant  that  the
                  sponsor had been very reluctant to allow  contact  but  at
                  the same time she did  not  mention  in  the  letters  any
                  reason why that might be. The judge considered it  "highly
                  likely" that if the  sponsor  had  any  potent  reason  to
                  refuse contact that stage she would have mentioned  it  in
                  the letter. Instead she simply stated  that  she  did  not
                  want to see him.  Later  letters  speak  of  the  children
                  missing the applicant for  that  reason  the  sponsor  has
                  allowed contact. The conditions she has insist upon or not
                  conditions the family court would expect  to  maintain  in
                  the long term in the absence of some very good reason  for
                  doing so.

               4) The judge was satisfied that the appellant did not realise
                  that he could take proceedings in the  court  without  the
                  assistance of a lawyer and that he had spent some money on
                  a lawyer but could no longer afford it.

               5) The  judge  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  and  the
                  children "are at the beginning stages  of  re-establishing
                  contact. The allowance of  contact  on  the  part  of  the
                  sponsor was a very fragile consent on  her  part.  She  is
                  clearly reluctant to allow contact which seems to me to be
                  figured on her own desire not see  the  appellant,  to  be
                  able to control the situation completely (hence the desire
                  that the contact is fully supervised) and to  be  able  to
                  impose conditions upon him such as the payment  of  money.
                  To her credit she has allowed some contact at the  request
                  of effect of the children."

               6) "Against these findings I do not consider it  likely  that
                  the sponsor would facilitate contact  with  the  appellant
                  from the UK  if  he  was  in  Pakistan.  In  addition  the
                  appellant would not be able to enforce such  contact  from
                  Pakistan. The judge  considered  it  "highly  likely"  the
                  contact will not exist in any form in the  appellant  were
                  to be returned to Pakistan.

               7) The judge also considered that it was "highly likely" that
                  inevitably the appellant will have to resort the court  in
                  order to achieve a sensible level of workable contact from
                  the sponsor who was the primary carry of the children.

               8) The judge found that the children had a relationship  with
                  the appellant  and  want  to  see  him.  He  reached  that
                  conclusion from the  letter  allowing  contact  which  the
                  sponsor wrote (see paragraph 32).

               9) The judge found that there were no  outstanding  childcare
                  proceedings. He found that there were no compelling public
                  interest reasons to exclude the appellant irrespective  of
                  the childcare situation and that the situation with regard
                  contact  not  been  brought   about   the   straight   the
                  appellant's removal from  the  UK.  The  judge  found  the
                  appellant   had   shown   "considerable   commitment"   in
                  establishing  contact  and  attending   contact   sessions
                  "albeit  short  in  nature  and  fraught  with  conditions
                  imposed by the sponsor."

              10) Taking into account the requirements  of  section  55  the
                  judge considered that to remove  the  appellant  would  be
                  contrary to the interests and welfare of the children  who
                  need to maintain  a  relationship  with  him.  "They  have
                  already expressed a sense of loss and they did not see the
                  appellant are set out by the  sponsor  in  her  letter  it
                  would also breach the appellant's rights under  Article  8
                  if you were removed from the UK".

75. I make the following findings of fact  from  the  evidence  before  me.
    There is no dispute from the evidence of the appellant and that of  his
    brother that the appellant and his former wife lived  together  in  the
    United Kingdom from September 2010  until  their  separation  in  2013.
    Their child H was born in Pakistan in 2010 and accompanied them to  the
    United Kingdom. In 2011 a second child was born of the relationship.

76. The First-tier Tribunal judge set out his findings as to  the  duration
    and quality of contact in March 2005 which  was  two  years  after  the
    parties separated. The findings of fact made in 2015 made reference  to
    the fact that the appellant had located the children and that there had
    been conditions of contact imposed by the children's  mother,  which  I
    assume made reference to supervised contact. The judge found  that  the
    appellant did not realise that he could take court proceedings and that
    he  had  instructed  a  lawyer  to  assist  him  (see  paragraph   35].
    Importantly he found that the father and children were at the beginning
    stages of contact. He described the contact in March 2015 as "short and
    fraught with conditions" (see paragraph 33).

77. It is therefore clear that in March 2015, two years after  the  parties
    separated, that the father had re-established contact but that  it  was
    short in duration and frequency and subject to  conditions  imposed  by
    the children's mother and that he had sought a lawyer to take steps  to
    improve that contact. The judge made reference to a commitment shown by
    the appellant to establish more contact.

78. The circumstances  in  2017  demonstrate  that  the  position  has  not
    changed. There is little evidence as to the nature and quality  of  the
    contact between the children and the appellant and what evidence  there
    is  comprises  of  the  oral  evidence  of  the  appellant   and   some
    photographs. There was no information from the children's primary carer
    to support his account of having "frequent contact" nor from any  other
    source, including from the children themselves. His brother, with  whom
    he lives a short distance away from the children's residence,  had  not
    seen the appellant with the children since separation 2013 did not know
    the details of the contact visits.

79. The appellant's explanation for the lack of evidence  from  his  former
    wife I find to be wholly unconvincing. It must have been plain  to  the
    appellant that his own case to remain in the United Kingdom  was  based
    on his relationship  with  the  children  and  therefore  it  would  be
    necessary to demonstrate the nature and quality  of  that  relationship
    with them. He has had a number of  opportunities  to  provide  evidence
    before the Tribunal including before the DUTJ in 2015 and in  2017  but
    has not taken that opportunity.

80. The appellant's evidence is that the current arrangements made are that
    he meets the children in the park which is opposite the school and that
    he takes the children to the school. He confirmed that this  had  taken
    place approximately 15 to 20 times in the year. He confirmed  that  the
    only other contact was when he had taken the children to McDonald's  as
    seen in the photographs that he had produced. Therefore contrary to the
    position outlined before the First-tier Tribunal in 2015, the appellant
    has not sought to re-establish any further meaningful contact then that
    he had in 2015. Whilst the judge had found that he was committed to re-
    establishing contact (paragraph 33) it does not appear that any further
    steps have been taken.

81. There is no up-to-date  or  recent  evidence  as  to  the  relationship
    between the children and their father from any other  source  than  the
    appellant. There is no extraneous evidence from others who are in close
    contact with the children, for  example  their  primary  carer,  family
    friends  or  evidence  from  school  to  evidence  the  nature  of  the
    relationship and importantly the parental relationship that he has  had
    with the children since separation. He does not have any information by
    way of school reports and beyond stating that they are in  good  health
    he has been unable to give little information about them.

82. At its highest and based on the oral evidence of the  appellant,  I  am
    able to accept that he has continued to see the children but that it is
    by way of short infrequent visits that do not go beyond  the  level  of
    contact that he had in 2015  and  that  has  not  increased  in  either
    frequency or quality. He has not  taken  the  steps  to  increase  that
    contact despite his claim made before the First-tier Tribunal judge  in
    2015.

83. Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  a  "parental
    relationship" between the appellant and the children. Whether a  person
    is in a  parental  relationship  with  the  child  must  depend  on  an
    individual's circumstances. It will  include  what  role  it  plays  in
    caring for and making decisions for a child alongside  the  nature  and
    quality of contact (if not living with the children). On the  evidence,
    he has not demonstrated that beyond the infrequent  level  of  contact,
    that he has been discharging any parental duties for the children.

84. As to the nature of the relationship  between  the  appellant  and  the
    children there is no supporting evidence from any source including  the
    primary care of the children, families and friends or those who are  in
    close contact with the children themselves. I would accept  that  given
    the ages of the children and that they had lived together as  a  family
    before separation when the children were approximately  two  and  three
    years of age, that they are aware of their father  and  are  likely  to
    enjoy  the  infrequent  contact  visits  that  have  taken  place.  The
    appellant pointed to the photographs which show the children enjoying a
    meal in McDonald's. Photographs are only a snapshot in time but  it  is
    likely that they do enjoy the time that they have  with  their  father.
    However it is not possible on the evidence to find that  there  is  any
    parental relationship beyond the short infrequent contact. There is  no
    evidence that he takes any active role in  their  lives  or  makes  any
    active contribution to it. The evidence demonstrates that the  children
    are residing with their primary  carer  largely  independently  of  the
    appellant. I do not doubt that he loves and cares for those children as
    he stated in his evidence  but  I  have  set  out  the  nature  of  the
    relationship as it is demonstrated by the evidence before the Tribunal.

85. I am satisfied from the evidence that there has been some change in the
    attitude displayed  by  the  appellant's  former  partner  relating  to
    contact. Whilst the judge found in 2015 that it was unlikely  that  she
    would facilitate contact  and  the  inference  is  that  she  has  been
    reluctant contact that is not the position on the evidence  before  me.
    He accepted  in  cross  examination  that  he  had  a  fairly  friendly
    relationship  with  his  wife  and  was  able  to  make  the  practical
    arrangements for contact. Therefore whilst I have found the contact  to
    be infrequent, it is not the case that his wife is obstructing  contact
    or has not  facilitated  the  contact  between  the  children  and  the
    appellant.

86. There is no up-to-date material concerning  the  circumstances  of  the
    children. The appellant has not sought to obtain information  from  his
    former partner in any form or from any other  external  source  despite
    having had the opportunity. The position relating  to  the  appellant's
    children has not changed. Whilst they are  now  older,  they  have  not
    resided in the United Kingdom for at least seven years and neither  are
    they British citizens or settled in the United Kingdom. The appellant's
    for partner also has no leave to remain.  The  present  position  as  I
    understand it is that they were granted leave to  remain  from  9  July
    2013 until 2 January 2016. On 31 December 2015 she applied for  further
    leave to remain outside of the rules on the basis of Article 8 of ECHR.
    This was refused in a decision letter dated 6  April  2017  and  it  is
    recorded in the skeleton argument that in that letter the  Home  Office
    made it plain that the previous grant of leave had been predicated upon
    a misunderstanding of the facts  of  the  case.  It  had  been  assumed
    incorrectly that the youngest child who  was  born  in  the  UK  was  a
    British citizen. As she is a Pakistani national and not resided in  the
    UK the seven years or more the appellant's former  wife  had  not  been
    able to meet the relevant eligibility criteria for leave as  a  parent.
    She has lodged an appeal against that refusal.

87. As to the appellant's private life, he arrived in the United Kingdom in
    2010 as a dependent of his wife. Following their separation in 2013  he
    has had no other basis of stay in the UK other than that based  on  his
    family life with the children. It is not suggested that he  could  meet
    the immigration rules as a student or in any other capacity. He knew at
    the time of his arrival that his status was that of a dependent of  his
    wife and that it was for temporary purposes only and could not have any
    expectation of permanent settlement on that basis.

88. There is little evidence as to the nature of  his  private  life  other
    than he has undertaken some employment post separation. There was  some
    discussion as to whether he was entitled to work but I make no  adverse
    findings of fact against the appellant as it is not  been  demonstrated
    that any work that  he  did  carry  out  was  done  in  breach  of  any
    conditions. He has not passed any qualifications  in  English  but  can
    speak and understand English. He  has  family  members  in  the  United
    Kingdom including his brothers with whom he lives. However there is  no
    evidence that the relationships that he has with them goes beyond  that
    of normal emotional ties between adult siblings.

89. As can be seen in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge,
    he dismissed the appeal under the immigration rules  (Appendix  FM  and
    Paragraph 276 ADE as the appellant could not satisfy  the  requirements
    for the reasons amply set out not only the decision letter but  as  set
    out in the determination of the judge. The judge had allowed the appeal
    on human rights grounds (outside the rules) based  on  the  appellant's
    family life with the children. That was the subject of  appeal  to  the
    upper Tribunal and was the decision which the DUTJ set aside

90. Whilst the appellant in his summary submitted that  he  would  find  it
    impossible to return to Pakistan given the time that he  had  spent  in
    the United Kingdom and that he had no family or friends in Pakistan, on
    the evidence before this Tribunal, it could not reasonably be said that
    the appellant  has  demonstrated  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration to Pakistan under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi).  His length
    of residence is from 2010 when he  entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependent of his wife. He had spent the previous  28  years  living  in
    Pakistan and contrary  to  his  account,  he  retains  family  ties  to
    Pakistan, namely his mother and sister and also retains  his  knowledge
    of both Urdu and Punjabi.

91. His appeal is based on Article 8 outside of the rules. I therefore deal
    with that appeal in the light of the findings of fact that I  have  set
    out in the preceding paragraphs.

Conclusions:


92. More recent cases indicate a departure from  the  requirement  to  find
    some additional factor before Article 8 can be considered  outside  the
    rules. In Hesham Ali (Iraq)  v SSHD   [2016]  UKSC  60   Lord  Reed  at
    paragraphs 47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach to proportionality
    and said what has now become the established  method  of  analysis  can
    therefore continue to be followed in this context.


93. That approach was also endorsed in MM  (Lebanon)  [2017]  UKSC  10  (in
    particular paras 66 and 67) and in Agyarko [2017] UKSC  11  where  Lord
    Reed in explaining how a court or Tribunal should  consider  whether  a
    refusal of leave to remain was compatible with  Article  8  made  clear
    that the critical issue was generally whether, giving due weight to the
    strength of the public interest in removal, the  Article  8  claim  was
    sufficiently strong to outweigh it.  There  is  no  suggestion  of  any
    threshold  to  be  overcome  before  proportionality   can   be   fully
    considered.

94. The question I have to decide is whether, in terms of this appellant's
    private and family life, it would be disproportionate to the public
    interest to remove him, and I need to consider that in terms of the
    provisions of s. 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002.

95. It is now clear from Agyarko and Ikuga [2017] UKSC 11 that there is no
    separate test for exceptional or compelling circumstances to be
    satisfied; but that one would expect to find such circumstances, if it
    were to be decided that it was disproportionate to remove somebody who
    could not satisfy the provisions of the Immigration Rules as on the
    facts of this appeal.

96. I am satisfied that Article 8 (1) is engaged as the appellant's removal
    will interfere with family and private life of the appellant and that
    the decision is in accordance with the law. As set out earlier in the
    determination, the appellant cannot succeed under the immigration
    rules. His removal will be for the legitimate aim of affective
    immigration control.

97. Consequently the issue relates to that of proportionality and it
    requires a fair balance to be struck between the public interest and
    the rights and interests of the appellant and others protected by
    Article 8 (1) (see Razgar at [20]).

98. In  R(MM and others) (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2017] UKSC 10, the Supreme Court at [43] set out the
    central issue as follows:

         "whether a fair balance has been struck between the personal
         interests of all members of the family in maintaining family life
         in the public interest in controlling immigration."

99. When assessing the proportionality of the removal decision I am obliged
    to consider firstly the best interests of the children who are affected
    by the decision and those best interests are assessed without reference
    to the parents' circumstances. In making the assessment of the best
    interests of the children I have also taken into account ZH (Tanzania)
    (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4 where Lady Hale noted Article 3(1) of the
    UNCRC which states that "in all Actions concerning children, whether
    undertaken by courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative
    bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary
    consideration."

100.  Article 3 is now reflected in section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 which provides that, in relation, among other
    things, to immigration, asylum or nationality, the Secretary of State
    must make arrangements for ensuring that those functions "are
    discharged having regard to the need to safeguard and promote the
    welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom". Lady Hale stated
    that "any decision which is taken without having regard to the need to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of any children involved will not be
    "in accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8(2)". Although
    she noted that national authorities were expected to treat the best
    interests of a child as "a primary consideration", she added "Of
    course, despite the looseness with which these terms are sometimes
    used, "a primary consideration" is not the same as "the primary
    consideration", still less as "the paramount consideration."

101. I have set out earlier in this determination my findings of fact
    concerning the nature of the relationship between the appellant and his
    two children. As I have found,  there has been no increase in any
    meaningful contact between the appellant's children since that
    established in 2015 and that he has not demonstrated any parental
    relationship beyond that infrequent contact for the reasons that I have
    set out. I accept that the children know their father and are likely to
    enjoy the contact that has taken place as evidenced by the photographs.
    There is however, no evidence as to the nature and quality of that
    relationship from any other source than the appellant, most notably
    from their primary carer and people who are in close contact with the
    children or form the children themselves. As I have found, the
    appellant has had a number of opportunities to provide evidence
    concerning the children's welfare and their present circumstances but
    has not done so. In those circumstances and in the light of the lack of
    evidence it is difficult to make any assessment of the best interests
    of the children as evidenced-based. It is clearly in their best
    interests for them to remain in the care of their primary carer where
    ever she may live, whether in the UK or in Pakistan; she has looked
    after them and ensured their well-being since the separation of the
    parties. There is no evidence before the Tribunal concerning the
    children's general circumstances other than their length of residence
    which at the date of the hearing is not seven years, their ages and
    that they are in education. There is no evidence for the Tribunal that
    if they were to leave the United Kingdom and reside in Pakistan that
    that would be unreasonable or cause any detrimental harm to their
    welfare. In general terms I would also accept that it is in the best
    interests of children to maintain a relationship with the non-
    residential parent and that would apply to the relevant children of
    this appeal. However how that relationship is maintained, whether by
    direct or indirect contact or the frequency of that contact is a matter
    to be considered.

102. In carrying out the  balancing  exercise  and  reaching  a  finding  on
    proportionality, the Tribunal must "have regard" to the  considerations
    set out in section 117B of the Nationality, immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 (section 117A). Section 117A (2) of the  2002  Act  provides  that
    where a Tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made under
    the Immigration Acts would be unlawful under section  6  of  the  Human
    Rights Act 1998 it must, in considering 'the public interest question',
    have regard in all cases to the considerations listed in section117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014).  Section  117  (3)  provides  that  the  'public
    interest question' means the question of whether an interference with a
    person's right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
    under Article 8(2).



103. 117BArticle 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases
    (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.

    (2)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English,
    because persons who can speak English-

    (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests of
    the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who seek to
    enter or remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent,
    because such persons-

    (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and

    (b)are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)Little weight should be given to-

    (a)a private life, or

    (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

    that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in  the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)Little weight should be given to a private life established by a
    person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

    (6)In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the public
    interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a
    qualifying child, and

    (b)it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom.



104. I am required to consider whether there are any "sufficiently
    compelling" circumstances to outweigh the public interest because the
    refusal of leave would result in "unjustifiably harsh consequences"
    (see decision in Agyarko at [48]).



105. The public interest in this appeal, includes that the appellant cannot
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules and that is entitled to
    have "considerable weight" attached to it (see decision of MM and
    others at [75] and Ali v secretary of state for the home Department
    [2016) UK CPSC 60 at [46] and R (Agyarko) v Secretary of State for the
    home Department at paragraphs [46]48]).

106. Applying the section 117 factors, the public interest in effective
    immigration control is engaged in this appeal (see s. 117B (1). Whilst
    the appellant has no qualifications in English, I am satisfied that he
    can speak English and has an understanding of it so that the public
    interest in s. 117 B(2) is not engaged but the fact that the appellant
    has an understanding and can speak English does not provide a positive
    right to leave to remain and is essentially, a neutral factor (see
    decision of Ruppiah v Secretary of State for the home Department [2016)
    EWCA Civ 803 at paragraphs [59] - [61]). The appellant, on the present
    evidence, is not financially independent for the purposes of section
    117B (3). I also take into account that his private life has developed
    whilst his presence was precarious and is therefore entitled to "little
    weight" (s 117B (5)) although the claim made is on the basis of his
    family life with his children.

107. S117B(6) provides that in the case of a person who is not liable to
    deportation, the public interest does not require the person's removal
    where, (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child, and (b) it would not be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. On the
    findings of fact that I have made the appellant cannot meet the
    criteria because the relevant children are not "qualifying children".

108.  The definition of "qualifying child" is found in section
    117D:"qualifying child" means a person who is under the age of 18 and
    who-
    (a) is a British citizen, or (b) has lived in the United Kingdom for a
    continuous period of seven years or more;"

109.  It is not been demonstrated that either child has lived in United
    Kingdom for at least seven years. H was born in January 2010 but on the
    evidence before the Tribunal the appellant was granted leave to enter
    on 21 September 2010. A was born in the UK in November 2011 and this
    has not been resident for seven years. Neither child is a British
    citizen nor has any settled status.

110. Even if they were qualifying children and consideration was given to
    this issue, whilst the appellant has a subsisting relationship with
    them it is on the basis of infrequent contact and in the light of the
    findings of fact set out earlier  he does not discharge any parental
    role in their upbringing beyond that and therefore cannot on the
    evidence satisfy the requirements of (a).

111. In those circumstances it is not necessary to consider whether he can
    satisfy (b) that it would not be reasonable to expect the children to
    leave the United Kingdom. Even if it were in MA(Pakistan)  it was held
    that in determining whether it would "not be reasonable to expect" the
    children leave the United Kingdom not only their circumstances must be
    taken into account, but also the public interest. It was explained that
    the concept of reasonableness is not limited to a focus on the child
    and that it brings back into play all potentially relevant public
    interest considerations, including the conduct of a child's parents.
    See MA (Pakistan) at [88]: "the conduct of the parents is relevant to
    their own situation which bears upon the wider public interest and does
    not amount to blaming the children even if they may be prejudiced as a
    result".

112. The judgement requires a balancing exercise taking into account the
    public interest to be carried out in determining whether it is
    reasonable to expect a child to leave the United Kingdom. As is plain
    from this determination, the appellant has chosen not to provide
    evidence about the children's present circumstances beyond that of
    their length of residence, and their age. Both children are nationals
    of Pakistan and the eldest child has lived there albeit at a very young
    age. Nothing is known of their ties to United Kingdom but neither they
    nor their primary carer have any status presently in the United
    Kingdom. Whilst the appellant's former partner has an appeal pending,
    the decision of MA demonstrates that the practicality of, or even legal
    prohibition upon leaving the UK is not a determinative factor in
    reaching a conclusion on whether it is "not reasonable" expect a child
    to do so. There is no evidence before me to demonstrate that it would
    be unreasonable for the children to return to their country of
    nationality.

113. Even if they were to remain in the United Kingdom, I am satisfied that
    in the light of the mother's facilitation of contact that there is the
    continuing possibility of contact being maintained between the
    appellant and the children. This may be in the form of direct or
    indirect contact and equally it is open to the appellant, if returned
    to Pakistan to maintain the relationship either in that country or by
    visits made to the United Kingdom.

114. Therefore taking the circumstances as a whole, as I have set out
    above, I find that the appellant's removal is proportionate having
    regard to all of those circumstances. The appellant entered the United
    Kingdom as a dependant of his wife and did so in a temporary capacity
    and had no expectation of any further leave when her status as a
    student had ended. He has spent his formative years in Pakistan and has
    family relatives remaining there. Given his continuing linguistic and
    cultural and family links, it is likely that he will be able re-
    establish his life there and remain in contact with his family members
    and nay friends he has made in the UK using modern methods of
    communication. I have taken into account the best interests of the two
    children and the public interest in effective immigration control which
    is engaged in this case and the weight attached to the fact that the
    appellant cannot meet the immigration rules. If removed, then indirect
    contact could be maintained with the assistance of the mother as could
    the possibility of direct contact given the level as it stands
    presently and it is not been demonstrated that such contact that may
    take place would be excluded as the children grow up. I have given
    primary consideration to those interests whilst acknowledging that some
    contact at the present time even if indirect could be maintained from
    UK. However having taken into account the impact upon the children and
    the appellant which will result upon the opponent's removal I find it
    is to be outweighed by the public interest. Consequently I am not
    satisfied that there are any "compelling" circumstances that produce
    unjustifiably harsh consequences to outweigh the public interest in
    effective immigration control in the light of the appellant's
    individual circumstances.

115. Consequently the appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him.  The direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed


[pic]                               Date: 31/7/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

