
[pic]

First-tier Tribunal
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal   Appeal Number: IA/45177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 6 November 2015                   |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                              MR A.P. WAKATAMA
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Mr W.M. Bebe, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 2 April 1971  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated  7
    October 2013 to refuse her application  for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom pursuant to paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and to give directions for her removal from the United Kingdom.

 2. The appellant appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated  11
    October  2013  and  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Beg   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on Article 3 and 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights  and  with  reference  to  the  Immigration  Rules,  in  a
    determination dated 11 July 2014.  Permission to appeal  that  decision
    was granted by designated First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 29 July
    2014 and it came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Mailer.  He  found
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
    material error of law and the decision of Judge Beg was set aside.

 3. The appeal was then  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davey  who
    dismissed the appellant's appeal in the determination dated 26  January
    2015. Permission to appeal against that decision was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 14 September 2015 stating that there  is
    a failure  to  properly  consider  paragraph  276ADE  and  whether  the
    appellant no longer has ties with her country of origin and by  failing
    to consider all five questions raised in Razgar.

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

    Issues in the appeal

 5. Two Judges dismissed the appellant's appeal both  under  paragraph  276
    ADE and Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.  The
    issues in this appeal  which  fell  for  determination  in  respect  of
    paragraph 276 ADE was whether the appellant  had  lost  ties  with  her
    country  of  origin,  Zimbabwe.  The   relevant   paragraph   276   ADE
    requirements, at the date of the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    beg were as follows "That the applicant is aged 18 years or above,  has
    lived continuously in the United Kingdom for less than 20 years...  but
    has no ties (including social, cultural family)  with  the  country  to
    which he would have to go if required to leave the United Kingdom".  In
    respect of Article 8 whether all five questions raised in  Razgar  have
    been answered

    The First-tier Tribunal judge's findings

 6. The Judge found that on a fair reading of  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge's decision, he finds that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  made  no
    error of law in the findings of fact  and  in  the  assessment  of  her
    Article 3 claim. There was no obvious error in law in relation  to  the
    Article 8 claim, save  insofar  as,  if  the  appellant  did  not  meet
    paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules and to the extent that bears
    on the question of Article  8  consideration  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules in terms of proportionality.

 7. The Judge made the following findings which I summarise.  The  evidence
    filed on behalf of the appellant addressing this issue of ties  to  her
    home country, is extremely limited. Plainly a  significant  portion  of
    the evidence is addressing the appellant's health  conditions  in  that
    she is HIV positive  with  its  attendant  physical  consequences,  for
    example opportunistic  infections.  The  appellant's  evidence  relates
    somewhat historically, to matters in being at or about  July  2013  and
    there was no updating of the medical evidence but four short paragraphs
    about her need for help  from  others.  There  is  no  current  medical
    evidence  of  the  appellant's   treatment,   testing,   antiretroviral
    medication, prognosis, risk from any interruption in HIV  treatment  or
    its availability or lack thereof or consequences to her on  return  for
    her health or life expectancy. The appellant said that her parents  and
    husband in Zimbabwe are deceased  and  she  does  not  have  anyone  in
    Zimbabwe to support her on a day-to-day basis or help her to look after
    herself. The  appellant  made  enquiries  on  the  Internet  about  the
    availability of treatment and found some  people  could  get  treatment
    whilst others could not.

 8. The Judge accepted the findings of first-tier Tribunal  Judge  Beg  and
    stated that  in  the  circumstances  the  lack  of  up-to-date  medical
    evidence, the lack of evidence of support by HGPC church  members,  the
    lack of any assessment by social services, the lack  of  evidence  that
    the appellant has lost social/cultural ties goes  to  show  that  there
    will be significant interference by  her  removal  in  respect  of  her
    private life, and in light of her immigration conduct, health  and  the
    public interest, was not proportionate of the objectives of  Article  2
    (2) of the EEC HR.  The  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds and under the Immigration Rules.

    Grounds of appeal

 9. The appellant in her grounds of appeal states  the  following  which  I
    summarise. It was  common  ground  that  the  appellant's  parents  and
    husband are deceased. It was also accepted that  the  appellant's  only
    sibling (brother) and his children are now residing in Tanzania. It  is
    common ground that the appellant left Zimbabwe about 15 years ago.  The
    issue therefore was whether the circumstances sufficient  to  meet  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
    paragraph 14 of  the  determination,  Judge  Davey  accepted  that  the
    appellant  has  lost  her  "social   connections   with   friends   and
    acquaintances as well as changes to her family and that is one  of  the
    aspects of connection with Zimbabwe that she no longer has

10. These findings alone are sufficient  to  meet  the  requirements  under
    paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules. Clearly the Judge  accepted
    that the appellant no longer has any social of family ties to Zimbabwe.

11. In paragraph 15 of the determination the Judge fell into error when she
    decided that apart from the loss of social of family ties the appellant
    is required to demonstrate loss of additional ties to Zimbabwe, such as
    linguistic and cultural ties. Paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules do not require the claimant to demonstrate  loss  of  all  formal
    ties to their country. The word "or" in the phrase  "including  social,
    cultural or family" serves to link the alternative ties each  of  which
    can stand alone, and satisfy the requirements in paragraph 276 ADE.

12. The Judge's interpretation in the case of Ogundimu  (Article  8  -  new
    rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC), in which that  court  explained
    at paragraph 123 is that a person's nationality  does  not  lead  to  a
    failure to meet the requirements under the Immigration Rules  as  "this
    would render the application of the  rule,  given  the  context  within
    which it operates, entirely meaningless.

13. The appellant's assessment of the  Article  8  claim  is  fundamentally
    flawed and hence an error of law. At Paragraph  20  and  21  the  Judge
    accepted that the appellant has private life in the United Kingdom  and
    that there was "no doubt that removing the appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom would interfere with her private life that in her psychological
    and  physical  condition".  There  is  no  indication  that  the  Judge
    addressed the second, third and fourth stages in the sequential  manner
    posed by Lord Bingham in the case of Razgar.

14. The procedure of addressing only the first and fifth stages of the case
    formula has been held to be an error of law. The case of WK (Article  8
    - expulsion cases - review of case law) Palestinian Territories  [2006]
    UKUT  00070 were it was stated that in many cases errors of  law  occur
    because judicial fact-finding miss out the  second  of  Lord  Bingham's
    five questions. Having found that a person  enjoys  private  or  family
    life in the United Kingdom and move straight to  Lord  Bingham's  first
    question, yet in many cases and particularly with private life alone is
    at issue, the second question, if properly addressed, will result in  a
    negative answer. The Judge  did  not  indicate  whether  Article  8  is
    engaged, and if not, why it is not  engaged.  The  Judge's  failure  to
    address Article 8 in accordance with the  formalistic  precedents  made
    his assessment not clear. The approach  taken  by  the  European  Court
    establishes that Article 8 is to be analysed according  to  a  step-by-
    step approach, asking first whether there is  an  existing  private  or
    family life, second whether there is an interference with that  private
    or family life, third whether that interference  pursues  a  legitimate
    aim, fourth whether it is  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  finally
    whether it is proportionate.

15. The judge in Miao [2006] EWCA Civ 75 in this case identified no reasons
    of interfering  with  a  protected  right  under  Article  8.  Once  in
    appellant has established that he enjoys a  protected  right  which  is
    threatened with violation, the burden shifts to the state to prove that
    the violation is nevertheless justified.

16. At the hearing I heard submissions from both parties.

    Findings as to whether  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.

17. Upper Tribunal Judge found an error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision and send it back to be reheard. It was heard again  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Davey who dismissed the appellant's appeal.

18. The Upper Tribunal Judge took into account that Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  Mailer  found  that  the  appellant  had  not   had   a   proper
    consideration of the appeal under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules and an error of law had arisen  which  meant  that  the  original
    Tribunal decision did not stand on that issue  and  would  have  to  be
    remade. Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge found that there was  no  error  of
    law in the findings of fact and in the assessment of  Article  8  claim
    under the European Convention on Human Rights. He also found there  was
    no obvious error of law in  relation  to  the  Article  8  claim,  save
    insofar as, if the appellant did not meet the paragraph 276 ADE of  the
    Immigration  Rules,  that  bore  on   the   question   of   Article   8
    considerations   outside   the   Immigration   Rules   in   terms    of
    proportionality.

19. The Judge found that  the  evidence  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  is
    extremely limited and most of the evidence  is  about  the  appellant's
    health condition in  that  she  is  HIV  positive  with  its  attendant
    physical consequences and opportunistic infections. The Judge took into
    account that the appellant did not provide an up-to-date medical report
    to know what her current condition is and that the last medical  report
    was in 2013.

20. The Judge stated whilst it appears that the  appellant  has  lost  some
    social connections with friends and acquaintances as well as changes to
    her family that is one of the aspects of connections in  Zimbabwe  that
    she no longer has. The Judge went on however to find that the appellant
    spent her whole youth and majority of her adult life  in  Zimbabwe.  He
    did not find that the appellant had lost linguistic and  cultural  ties
    with her own country. The Judge then found that the appellant  gave  no
    indication that life has changed to  the  extent  that  she  now  feels
    culturally alienated with Zimbabwe or linguistically so.

21. The Judge also found that the appellant has not demonstrated  that  she
    has lost her ties with Zimbabwe and  therefore  she  does  not  succeed
    under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

22. The Judge also adopted the findings made by Judge Beg and  stated  that
    given the lack of up to date medical evidence, the lack of evidence  of
    support by HTPC church members, the lack of any  assessment  by  social
    services,  the  lack  of  evidence  that   the   appellant   has   lost
    social/cultural ties.

23. It is clear from that stated above that further evidence is required in
    order to  make  a  fair  assessment  of  the  appellant's  claim  under
    paragraph 276 ADE and Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

24. I therefore direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, other than Judge Beg and Judge Davey, for fact-finding as  to
    whether the appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276  ADE  and
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Conclusions

DECISION

The appeal be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana Dated this 2nd day of December 2015

