
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45899/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 October 2016                            |On 13 December 2016           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                            TAMARA FYFFE-ROBINSON
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Knorr, instructed by Islington Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Jamaica.  She appealed  to  a  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  respondent's  decision  of  10
    November 2014 that further submissions she had  made  could  have  been
    made either before or during her previous appeal against a  deportation
    order made against her on 6 November 2013 or that the  application  she
    had made did not meet the test set out at paragraph 353 of  HC  395  or
    that they constituted a fresh human rights claim and as  a  consequence
    there was no appealable decision.  This decision was  endorsed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, taking into account what had  been  said  by
    the Supreme Court in BA (Nigeria) [2009]  UKSC  7,  and  following  the
    decision in Waqar [2015] UKUT 00169 (IAC).  In  effect  her  conclusion
    was that the decision was not one "to  refuse  a  human  rights  claim"
    under section 82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002, as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.

2.   The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal against  this
    decision.  It was said that all grounds might be argued.

3.   In her submissions Ms Knorr argued that in  essence  the  issue  before
    the Tribunal came down to whether the decision in Hussain  [2016]  UKUT
    409 (IAC) or that in Sheidu [2016] UKUT 412  (IAC)  was  correct.   The
    facts of this case were more on a par with those in Hussain.  It was  a
    question of whether the decision in BA (Nigeria) defining what a  human
    rights claim was had not been determined by any decision binding on the
    Upper Tribunal.  She sought an adjournment on the basis that permission
    to appeal the decision in Hussain to  the  Court  of  Appeal  had  been
    sought.

4.   Mr Tufan opposed this application  on  the  basis  that  there  was  no
    decision yet from the Court of Appeal and in the  meantime  there  were
    the decisions upon which he relied which all went the other way.

5.   Ms Knorr placed weight on what had been said in Sheidu and argued  that
    although it was not ideal for cases to sit around for a  long  time  it
    was such a fundamental matter that a decision was  needed  one  way  or
    another.

6.   I ruled that it would not  be  appropriate  to  adjourn  since  it  was
    entirely unclear  how  long  it  would  take  for  a  decision  on  the
    permission application in Hussain to come through, it was also  unclear
    whether that decision would be one to grant  permission,  it  was  also
    unclear what the basis of the challenge was and it was equally  unclear
    to what extent if at all the  actual  decision  reached  ultimately  if
    there were one would address the specific issue before me.  Submissions
    proceeded.

7.   Ms Knorr argued that in order to understand  the  appellant's  position
    it was necessary to look at the statutory framework.  At the time of BA
    (Nigeria) this was the old rights of appeal scheme.  There had to be an
    immigration decision for there to be a right of appeal.   Also  section
    113 of the 2002 Act defined  what  a  human  rights  claim  was.   That
    definition was identical to  the  current  definition.   Section  92(4)
    defined whether the right of appeal was in-country or out  of  country.
    That was still the case.

8.   In the new appeal provisions there was a definition of a  human  rights
    claim which is identical except that it added in "or refuse  him  entry
    to the United Kingdom" which ensured there would  be  an  appeal  where
    both removal and refusal of leave to enter breached  a  person's  human
    rights.

9.   The question in BA (Nigeria) had been what a human rights  claim  meant
    in the context of part 5 of the 2002 Act.  It concerned the decision as
    to whether there was a requirement that the fresh claim  test  was  met
    for there to be a human rights claim.   This  was  in  the  context  of
    understanding the situation where the claim was not certified  and  the
    Secretary of State did not accept there had been a human rights  claim.
    In essence the question was whether within section 92(4) the  Secretary
    of State had to have accepted it was a human rights claim and that this
    met the fresh claims test.  It was said for the purposes of part 5  and
    in turn interpreting the human rights claim as set out in  section  113
    it was irrelevant whether the Secretary  of  State  considered  whether
    there was a claim or not and this was because the statutory scheme as a
    whole provided for unfounded claims and it was  necessary  to  use  the
    mechanism in the statute if it was not intended that the person  should
    have a claim.  So the issue decided in BA (Nigeria) was the meaning  of
    the phrase "human rights claim" and whether  it  was  affected  by  the
    Immigration Rules and the Secretary of State's decision  on  whether  a
    fresh claim had been made or not.  It had been held that no fresh claim
    test was imported into the statute as to whether or  not  there  was  a
    fresh claim.  The test was binding if the changes in the  Act  did  not
    change things.  If that was right then the  Upper  Tribunal  decisions,
    which were not binding, were wrong.

10.  At paragraph 2 of BA (Nigeria) could be seen  the  same  test  as  that
    which the Tribunal had to decide today,  that  being  whether  a  human
    rights claim under section 82 was any human rights claim or only one if
    the Secretary of State decided it was a fresh claim.  At  paragraph  14
    in BA (Nigeria) it was the Secretary of State's view that that was what
    had been held in Hussain.  It could be seen subsequently at  paragraphs
    15 and then 29, 32 and 33 that the ability to certify claims  remained.
    The Secretary of State could still do that.  It was pretty much a minor
    provision to paragraph 353 that the Secretary of State  should  certify
    if she thought it  was  a  hopeless  claim.   It  was  argued  that  BA
    (Nigeria) established that before part 5 a human rights claim was to be
    interpreted without reference to paragraph 353 and  the  phrase  "human
    rights claim" did not mean different things in different parts  of  the
    Act.  The amendment proposed had not been put in force with  regard  to
    section 113 and the definition of "human rights claim".  The  ratio  of
    BA (Nigeria) was clear.

11.  In Hussain the Upper Tribunal had regarded itself as bound by what  was
    said by the Court of Appeal in ZA  (Nigeria).   That  was  a  different
    context but concerned whether the Secretary of State  had  to  make  an
    immigration decision thus giving rise to a right of appeal as  required
    under the old section 82.  ZA (Nigeria) said  that  that   was  outside
    whether or not to make an immigration decision so it did not get within
    part 5 so the Secretary of State was free to apply paragraph  353.   BA
    (Nigeria) was different in that it had  decided  what  a  human  rights
    claim was for the purposes of part 5 and that was the issue before  the
    Tribunal  today.   Therefore  the  Upper  Tribunal   in   Hussain   had
    misunderstood ZA (Nigeria) and the consequences of the findings  in  it
    as it was not concerned with the interpretation of  the  statute.   The
    issue is that set out at paragraph 1 at page 34 in ZA  (Nigeria).   The
    question was not one that could occur any longer under the new  section
    82 as it did not require the Secretary of  State  to  make  immigration
    decisions giving rise to rights of appeal.  The case concerned  whether
    they had to issue a decision and then removal directions which was what
    a failed asylum seeker would get in order to have a  right  of  appeal.
    The Immigration Rules told the Secretary of State when she  had  to  do
    that and that was what had been found in ZA (Nigeria).

12.  The point was that the Tribunal in this case was not  in  BA  (Nigeria)
    territory but already in part 5 territory as it had  been  amended  and
    the time when a person got a right of appeal was when  a  human  rights
    claim had been refused.  It was necessary to look at the Act to see  if
    there was a right of appeal so therefore the Tribunal  was  in  part  5
    territory and not ZA (Nigeria) territory.  So unless  one  changes  the
    meaning of "human rights claim" and there were no good  reasons  to  do
    so, BA (Nigeria) made it necessary to read in the words and  you  still
    had the provisions to deal with repeat claims or  they  would  have  to
    appeal from outside the United Kingdom and therefore the  mischief  was
    cured.  There was an argument  about  anomalies  as  to  why  a  person
    submitting a fresh claim got a right of appeal but that  was  what  the
    Act said and there had always been  anomalies,  for  example  deportees
    automatically got a right  of  appeal  because  the  Act  said  so,  in
    contrast to human rights claims where there was  no  deportation  order
    where there was no appeal unless the Secretary of State  said  that  it
    was a fresh claim and this was a consequence of ZA (Nigeria).  The  law
    was clear.

13.  Also BA (Nigeria) was relevant on how the scheme had  changed,  as  the
    definition of a human rights claim defined the right of appeal.  It was
    not longer a question of whether a person had an  immigration  decision
    but whether they had made a human rights claim within part 5 of section
    113.  Paragraph 42 in Hussain was exactly contrary to what was said  in
    BA (Nigeria).  Weight was attached to paragraph 353 as still being part
    of the Immigration Rules after the new section 82 had come  into  force
    and there was concern about that  in  Hussain  at  paragraph  48.   The
    difficulty was, as had been said, that paragraph 353 had  been  updated
    to include protection claims as  a  successor  to  section  82  in  the
    definition of various types of claims there, but it did  not  recognise
    that as section 32 of the Immigration Act 1971 was clear, the Secretary
    of State laid down Immigration Rules as to the practice to be  followed
    and the Secretary of State was the author  in  contrast  to  Parliament
    which was the author of section 82.  This was an important  distinction
    and it was not contradictory by Parliament  as  suggested  in  Hussain.
    The reality was that the Secretary of State could propose an  order  to
    amend section 82 to make paragraph 353 relevant again and amend section
    113.  Having left it in the Immigration Rules at paragraph  353  as  an
    assessment of her decision-making powers, this could  not  be  used  to
    interpret what the statute meant, and that was what was decided  in  BA
    (Nigeria).

14.  It was the case that Upper Tribunal decisions  were  not  binding.   Ms
    Knorr referred to Sheidu at paragraphs 6 and 7.  It  was  not  possible
    just to import the paragraph 353 test.  It was necessary to look at the
    words of the statute.  This was a rejection of  a  human  rights  claim
    even though the Secretary of State said  it  was  not  a  human  rights
    claim.  It was accepted that the decision letter in  the  instant  case
    was not in the same format as in Sheidu but it made it  clear  that  it
    did not just import the paragraph 353 test in.  If it was only a claim,
    if the Secretary of State said it was,  then  it  was  wrong.   It  was
    unclear whether Sheidu was being appealed so there were concerns  about
    this.  As regards disposal, there  had  been  no  need  for  a  further
    hearing as essentially if the Tribunal  found  that  the  decision  was
    marred by errors of law then the disposal of the  appeal  would  follow
    from that.

15.  In his submissions Mr Tufan relied on the authorities he  had  put  in.
    With regard to the ratio of BA (Nigeria) it was a question of  when  an
    appeal against a decision refusing to revoke a deportation order  could
    be brought in-country.  This concerned section 92(4)(a).   The  factual
    context was relevant.  Decisions under the Immigration Rules  had  been
    made and the respondent had accepted that, at paragraph 14.  The  issue
    here was very different.  In Hussain the decision not to accept further
    submissions did not mean there was a section 82 right of appeal.  There
    was not a human rights application refusal in this case but it was  not
    accepted under paragraph 353.  The cases put in  showed  there  was  no
    section 82(1)(b) right of appeal.  Sheidu, as was clear from  paragraph
    17 of that decision, had been allowed on the  particular  circumstances
    being the contents of the refusal letter.  It had not said  that  Waqar
    was wrong.  It was a decision to refuse a protection and  human  rights
    claim and was a case on its own facts.  It did not outweigh the earlier
    decisions.  Permission to appeal  from  the  Waqar  decision  had  been
    refused in HW.

16.  Ms Knorr had no points to make by way of reply.

17.  I reserved my determination.

18.  The decision of the Upper Tribunal in  Hussain  contains  a  very  full
    evaluation of the relevant principles in this  area  of  the  law.   It
    helpfully sets out relevant extracts from the leading  authorities,  in
    particular BA (Nigeria), and ZA (Nigeria), but also refers to what  was
    said by the House of Lords in ZT (Kosovo) [2009] UKHL 6.  In ZT it  was
    held that where the appellant had made asylum and human  rights  claims
    which had been refused by the Secretary of State  and  certified  under
    section 94 of  the  2002  Act  as  being  clearly  unfounded,  any  new
    submissions made by him whilst still in the United Kingdom fell  to  be
    considered in accordance with the procedures set out in paragraph  353.



19.  In BA (Nigeria), in which the leading judgment was given by Lord  Hope,
    it was concluded at paragraph 33 that Rule 353, as  presently  drafted,
    had no part to play  in  the  legislative  scheme.   This  was  however
    interpreted by Lord Neuberger MR  in  ZA  (Nigeria)  as  being  plainly
    inconsistent with the reasoning and conclusions of the House  of  Lords
    in ZT (Kosovo).  He characterised the decision in BA (Nigeria) as being
    that Rule 353 had no further part to play for the purposes  of  section
    92(4) once there was an appeal against  an  immigration  decision.   BA
    (Nigeria) had not purported to overrule or depart from the reasoning in
    ZT (Kosovo) and, for the reasons set out at paragraph 53 of Lord Hope's
    judgment, it is clear that BA (Nigeria) could not be said  to  overrule
    ZT (Kosovo).

20.  Lord Neuberger went on to make the point, at paragraph 57, that if  the
    appellant's arguments in ZA (Nigeria) were adopted, then Rule 353 would
    have had no role to play since the 2002 Act had come into force, and on
    that basis section 53 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 would have been misconceived and pointless  legislation,  amending
    as it did section 31A of the Senior Courts Act 1981 to enable  transfer
    of judicial review applications  from  the  High  Court  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal where the application called into question the decision of the
    Secretary of State not to treat submissions as an  asylum  claim  or  a
    human rights claim ... wholly or partly on the basis that they are  not
    significantly  different  from  material  that  has   previously   been
    considered.  He said that that point should have  been  considered  and
    presumably would have been considered if the Supreme Court was deciding
    in BA (Nigeria) that Rule 353 was a  dead  letter.   He  concluded,  at
    paragraph 59, that what was said in BA (Nigeria)  was  to  be  read  as
    being confined to cases  where  there  was  an  appealable  immigration
    decision.  Once there was such a decision, the complete code  contained
    in the legislative scheme applied and Rule 353 had no part to play, but
    Rule 353 still had a part to play, in that the Secretary of State could
    decide that the further submissions were not a  fresh  claim  in  which
    case one did not enter the territory governed by the complete  code  of
    the legislative scheme.

21.  This reasoning was, in effect, applied by the Upper Tribunal  in  Waqar
    [2015] UKUT 169, noting for example at paragraph 17 that  BA  (Nigeria)
    was concerned with a decision not whether there had  been  a  decision,
    and that BA (Nigeria)  was  not  authority  for  the  proposition  that
    submissions amounted  to  a  claim  and  that  the  response  to  those
    submissions was a decision within the meaning of part  5  of  the  2002
    Act.

22.  Permission to appeal against that decision was refused by the Court  of
    Appeal, noting for example at paragraph 20 that it was  not  legitimate
    to take isolated statements from BA (Nigeria) out of context, and  that
    it was not in issue in that case that there was an appealable decision,
    only the locus of the appeal.  The right to that appeal existed whether
    or not it was repetitious.  BA (Nigeria) was not concerned with whether
    a right of appeal should arise at all.  That was what ZA (Nigeria)  was
    concerned with.

23.  Further support for this line of argument if needed is to be  found  in
    Robinson [2016] UKUT 133 and in MG [2016] UKUT 283 (IAC).

24.  The Upper Tribunal in Hussain was firmly of the view that it was  bound
    by the ratio of ZA (Nigeria) and stated that the present applicant  had
    to fail unless he could demonstrate that the legislative regime  as  it
    stood after the amendments  made  by  the  2014  Act,  required  to  be
    interpreted in a way that changed the function of paragraph 353 of  the
    Rules.  The decision in the instant case was made on 10  November  2014
    and therefore the post 2014 Act amendments do  not  apply.   I  do  not
    propose to rehearse the discussion in  Hussain.   It  is  thorough  and
    comprehensive  and  I  am  entirely  persuaded  that  it  is  a  proper
    evaluation of the relevant issues in the case.

25.  Nor do I see the position as weakened in any respect by what  was  said
    in Sheidu.  This expresses doubts rather than a firm disagreement  with
    the earlier authorities, and the appeal was allowed on the basis of the
    contents and structure of the decision letter in that case.   Ms  Knorr
    has accepted, quite rightly, that the decision letter  in  the  instant
    appeal is not couched in such terms, and, like the decision  letter  in
    Hussain, I consider that it is properly to be construed as comprising a
    decision to refuse the appellant's submissions as a fresh claim.

26.  Accordingly, although I am grateful to Ms Knorr  for  her  helpful  and
    thorough submissions, I see no reason to depart from the  reasoning  in
    Hussain in this case and as a consequence I conclude that the judge was
    right to decide that there was no valid appeal before her and there  is
    no error of law in her decision.

No anonymity direction is made.

I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

