
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45738/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2014                               |On 25th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           PRANESH ARUN MAHENDRAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Salam, Solicitor, Salam & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's challenge to  the  decision  of  Judge
    Upson made following a hearing at Bradford on 10th February 2014.

Background

 2. The claimant came to the UK on 9th October 2008 with entry clearance to
    study at the University of York valid to 31st October  2011.   On  23rd
    November 2011 he made an out of time application to extend his leave as
    a Tier 4 Student which was granted on 2nd  March  2012  valid  to  28th
    October 2013.

 3. During the second year of his studies, in 2011 to 2012,  the  Appellant
    failed his end of year exam and was placed on leave of absence in order
    to allow him to resit, and he subsequently successfully passed.  He was
    due to return to the university on 6th October 2013. According  to  his
    statement the claimant says that his course ends on 27th June 2014.

 4. On 11th February 2013 the Secretary of State  wrote  to  the  Appellant
    stating that the UK Border Agency had been informed by  the  University
    of York on 8th November 2012 that he had ceased studying with them.  As
    he had ceased studying as notified by his Tier 4 Sponsor the  Secretary
    of State decided  to  curtail  the  claimant's  leave  under  paragraph
    323A(a)(ii)(2) and 323(ii) of the Immigration Rules  until  12th  April
    2013.

 5.  This  was  not  an  appealable  decision  since  Section  82  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 does not provide  a  right
    of appeal where an applicant still has leave to enter or remain in  the
    UK and so is entitled to stay here.  The  claimant  was  advised  that,
    although he was not required to leave the UK at the present  time,  his
    leave was due to expire on 12th  April  2013  and  he  needed  to  make
    arrangements to plan his departure.

 6. The claimant had advised the Secretary of State that he lived with  his
    mother outside term time and in York during term time. The  curtailment
    decision was served on the  Appellant  at  his  solicitors,  Salam  and
    Company, 44 Brook Street, Chester, Cheshire.

 7. He did not receive the notice.

 8. York University applied  for  a  new  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for
    Studies at the start of the academic year in October 2013 and  at  this
    point became alerted to the fact that the  claimant's  leave  had  been
    curtailed on 11th February 2013.

 9. The matter was listed for hearing at Bradford. The Secretary  of  State
    wrote to the Tribunal prior to the  hearing  arguing  that  the  appeal
    should not be listed since there was no right of appeal.  Reference  is
    made to that in the determination in that Judge Upson,  who  states  at
    paragraph 6 that there was a preliminary matter to be  resolved,  which
    related to whether the curtailment of the leave was properly served.

10. The argument was  put  that  the  curtailment  decision  had  not  been
    lawfully served, because it was only served on his previous  solicitors
    who had been engaged solely for the purpose of making  the  application
    for leave, and were no longer in contact with the claimant, even though
    the Secretary of State had an address, namely that of  his  mother,  on
    the file.

11. The judge stated that he had had regard to the guidance notes that  the
    Secretary of State relies upon when serving curtailment decisions which
    state that a non-appealable curtailment notice to a UK address  can  be
    served "if you cannot give  notice  to  the  migrant  in  person".   He
    concluded that the Secretary of State was under a  duty  to  serve  the
    notice on the claimant in person if at all possible and since they  had
    an address where they could find him and they knew  that  he  had  been
    studying  at  York  University  they  could    have   established   his
    whereabouts.

12. He accepted that the involvement of the previous  solicitors  ended  on
    the determination of the application in the claimant's favour,  and  it
    was incumbent upon the Secretary of State to establish whether  or  not
    they were still acting for him when they chose to serve the notice upon
    them.  The claimant had not paid them any form of  retainer.  The  fact
    that the engagement of the same firm by the claimant to deal  with  the
    present matter did not absolve the Secretary of State  of  their  duty.
    Salam and Company were  not  the  claimant's  representatives  for  the
    purpose of the receipt of this notice.

13. He wrote as follows:

         "I do not accept the submission that the lack of  action  by  Salam
         and Company upon receipt of the notice is a matter between him  and
         them.  I have found that they were not his representatives for  the
         receipt of this notice and I have found that there was  a  duty  on
         the Respondent to establish that before relying on the  sending  of
         the notice to them as proper service of it. I find  therefore  that
         the Appellant's  leave  has  not  been  terminated.  I  invite  the
         Respondent  to  reconsider  this  matter  in  the  light  of   this
         decision."

14. On that basis he allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

15. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  on  the  following
    grounds.

16. First, the judge had erred in finding that there was a right of  appeal
    at all.  The only decision in this case was  the  curtailment  decision
    taken in February 2013 which is not  a  decision  taken  under  Section
    82(2) of the 2002 Act.  There has never been any jurisdiction  to  hear
    the appeal.  This is a distinguishable matter from that in the case  of
    Syed (Curtailment of leave - notice) [2013]  UKUT  00144  which  was  a
    removal decision i.e. one falling within Section 82(2).  In the present
    case, the leave  was  curtailed,  there  has  never  been  any  further
    application made by the  claimant  and  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  the
    appeal.

17. Second, the judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  leave  had  not  been
    curtailed.   The  claimant  had  given  the   address   of   his   then
    representatives Salam and Company as his correspondence address of  his
    application.  He  did  not  give  a  personal  address  and  when  York
    University contacted the Secretary of State  to  inform  her  that  the
    claimant did not study there any more the Secretary of State  used  the
    last  known  contact   address   for   him,   namely   that   of    his
    representatives.  The claimant's mother's house had never been given to
    the Secretary of State as the  correspondence  address,  there  was  no
    indication that his mother still lived there in February 20123 and  the
    letter specifically stated that he lived  with  her  in  the  holidays.
    11th February was in term time. At no stage did the claimant inform the
    Secretary of State that the correspondence address which had been given
    with the application was any different.  This  was  his  responsibility
    not  that  of  the  Secretary  of  State.   It  was  incumbent  on  the
    representatives to inform the Secretary of  State  that  they  were  no
    longer acting and to return the curtailment letter, which they did  not
    do.   Neither  did  Salam  and  Company  inform  the  claimant  of  the
    curtailment letter.

18. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge MacDonald for  the
    reasons stated in the grounds on 14th April 2014.

Submissions

19. Mrs Petterson relied on the grounds and argued that the non-receipt  of
    the curtailment letter could not create a right of  appeal  on  a  non-
    appealable decision.

20. Mr Salam relied upon the wording in Section 82(2)(e)  which  creates  a
    right of appeal against a decision where:

         "Variation of a person's leave to enter or remain in the UK if when
         the variation takes effect the person has  no  leave  to  enter  or
         remain."

21. He argued that in this case the curtailment only took effect  when  the
    claimant became aware of the decision on 17th October  2013,  by  which
    stage the leave had been curtailed and he no longer had  any  leave  to
    remain.

22. He relied on the arguments put forward to  Judge  Upson  and  submitted
    that according to the Secretary of State's own guidance the curtailment
    decision should have been served personally.  Salam  and  Company  only
    had authority to make  the  application  and  since  the  claimant  had
    provided his mother's address and his address in York the Secretary  of
    State was obliged to serve him at either his York address or his out of
    term address.  He relied on the decision of  Syed  and  submitted  that
    since the curtailment decision had not been communicated to the  person
    concerned, it was not effective until October 2013 by  which  time  the
    claimant had no leave to remain and accordingly had a right  of  appeal
    against the decision within Section 82(2)(e).

Findings and Conclusions

23. Syed was concerned with a decision of the Secretary of State to  remove
    an Appellant who had applied for indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK
    on the grounds of long  residence,  but  whose  prior  leave  had  been
    "curtailed" and not received by him.  The main issue was  whether  that
    Appellant's leave had been validly curtailed in the absence of evidence
    that he had known of the curtailment.  The Secretary of State had  sent
    the notice by Recorded Delivery twice but it had been returned and  the
    notice was then served on file.

24. Syed held that the Secretary of State has to  be  able  to  prove  that
    notice of the decision was communicated to  the  persons  concerned  in
    order for it to be effective.  Communication will be effective if  made
    to a person authorised to receive it on that person's behalf (Hosier  v
    Goodall [1962] 1AER 30 but the Secretary  of  State  cannot  rely  upon
    deemed postal service. The  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    leave to remain had  not  been  validly  terminated  by  the  attempted
    service by Recorded Delivery and, since it had not been terminated, the
    decision to remove him from the UK was unlawful.

25. The argument is different here.  Mr Salam is attempting to argue that a
    non-appealable decision becomes  an  appealable  one  if  not  properly
    communicated to the claimant within the currency of his  leave,  solely
    on the basis that by the time the claimant  become  aware  of  it,  his
    leave had been purportedly curtailed some six months earlier, and  when
    the curtailment became effective the consequence was  that  he  had  no
    leave to remain.

26. If Mr Salam's argument is right on the issue  of  service,  the  effect
    would be that the claimant's leave had not  been  lawfully  terminated,
    but it does not convert a non- appealable  decision  to  an  appealable
    one.  A non-appealable decision cannot become appealable simply on  the
    basis of the time when it reaches the claimant.

27. In any event, I am not satisfied that communication of the  curtailment
    decision was not effective.

28. The guidance relied on by Mr Salam states that:

         "Where possible unless records show the person is not in the UK you
         must serve non-appealable curtailment services to a UK  address  if
         you cannot give the notice to the migrant in person."

29. In order of preference the notice must be sent to:

         "The UK postal address  of  the  migrant  or  their  representative
         provided for correspondence."

30. The guidance does not impose on the Secretary of State an obligation to
    serve the claimant in person.  She complied  with  it  in  serving  the
    address on the correspondence address given in the last application  on
    file.   There would be good reason for her not to  serve  on  the  only
    other address on file, the  York  address,  since  on  the  information
    before her he was no longer studying there.

31. The responsibility for communicating the  notice  of  curtailment  lies
    expressly with Salam and Company  who  failed  in  their  duty  to  the
    claimant, both by not informing him of the letter and by not  informing
    the Secretary of State, if this was the case  that  they  were  not  in
    contact with him.  Their position is difficult to maintain  given  that
    this is the same set of solicitors, ability different branches, in both
    applications.

32. Accordingly I conclude that the curtailment was  lawfully  served,  and
    the judge erred in law in finding otherwise.

Decision

33. The original judge erred in  law.   His  decision  is  set  aside.  The
    claimant's appeal is dismissed for want of jurisdiction.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


