





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/45074/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |     Decision and Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                         |
|On 3rd May 2016                       |     On 16th May 2016               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between


                  Mr Gerritt Keith George Dirching Cardones
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a national of the Philippines, born on 5 March  1972.
      His appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  respondent  refusing  his
      application for a residence card as the spouse of an EEA citizen under
      the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006  Regulations"),  was
      dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal in a decision  promulgated  on  5
      June 2016.


   2. In a decision dated 19 February 2016, the Upper  Tribunal  found  that
      the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law and was set aside. The  Judge, having accepted  that  the
      appellant and his partner may have spent time together for  meals  and
      also spent time together at the same property,  did  not  provide  any
      reasons as to why in the circumstances this led to  the  finding  that
      theirs is not a "genuine" or "durable" relationship.


   3. Nor did the Judge properly  direct  himself  in  accordance  with  the
      relevant authorities when assessing whether the  appellant's  marriage
      was one of convenience.


   4. It was directed that the Upper Tribunal would re-make the decision  at
      a hearing on a date to be arranged.


   5. The resumed hearing took place on 3 May 2016.


   6. On the morning of  the  hearing  the  appellant's  former  solicitors,
      Universal Solicitors, sent the Tribunal a fax  headed  "Withdrawal  of
      Instruction."  The letter is  dated  29  April  2016.  The  solicitors
      stated that their office had tried to contact the appellant on several
      occasions in relation to the appeal hearing. Unfortunately he did  not
      respond. In the circumstances, "we are  unable  to  take  any  further
      instructions." They stated that they would therefore not represent the
      appellant at the hearing scheduled for 3 May 2016.


   7. On 3 May 2016 the appellant attended the hearing in person. I drew his
      attention to the letter that the Tribunal had received.  He  confirmed
      that its contents are true.


   8. He the informed  the  Tribunal  that  he  and  his  partner  have  now
      separated. They went to solicitors last week.  He  said  that  "things
      then fell apart." It was his wife who wanted to separate. She left him
      a week ago. He does not know where she is.


   9. He does not work and has failing health.


  10. Mr Walker submitted that the whole basis of his claim  that  they  had
      been in a genuine and subsisting relationship  has  now  fundamentally
      changed. They have now separated. He pointed out that the  appellant's
      partner did not attend the earlier hearing which had been scheduled on
      7 April 2016. On that occasion it was asserted that  the  sponsor  was
      not in the UK, having gone to visit her sick mother abroad.


  11. Mr Walker stated that although the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      has been set aside, the respondent persists  in  her  refusal.  It  is
      still asserted that they do not have a durable relationship.  This  is
      clearly the position now as there is no longer any  relationship.  The
      appeal should be dismissed.


  12. Mr Cardones accepted that his wife is no longer supporting  his  case.
      He said that "she has given up on the relationship."


  13. He  stated  that  he  has  various  health  problems  which  he  wants
      considered by the secretary of state.


  14. I afforded the appellant the opportunity to contact his solicitors  by
      telephone. The case was stood  down.  He  returned  and  informed  the
      Tribunal that he had spoken to his solicitors. He has been advised  to
      make  an  application   in   due   course   based   on   "humanitarian
      considerations."


Assessment


  15. Having  regard  to  the  circumstances  disclosed,  I  find  that  the
      appellant and his wife are not in a durable or any  relationship.  The
      circumstances have fundamentally changed following the decision of the
      First-tier Tribunal and the subsequent finding of an error of  law  in
      February 2016.


  16. I find that their relationship is no longer existing. Accordingly, the
      appellant is not entitled to be issued a residence card under the 2006
      Regulations.


      Notice of Decision


      The appellant's appeal is dismissed.


      No anonymity direction is made.














      Signed                                       Date 16 May 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer








