
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45687/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 22 October 2015                   |On 3 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     KB
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Solanki, instructed by Lawrence Lupin
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  against
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  KB's  appeal  against  the
decision to deport him  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  Regulation
19(3)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  ("the
EEA Regulations").

For the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the Secretary  of  State
as the respondent and KB as the appellant,  reflecting  their  positions  as
they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant is a citizen of Portugal, born in Luanda, Angola on 9  January
1979, who lived in Portugal from the age of 17 years until he  came  to  the
United Kingdom in November 2003. He first  came  to  the  attention  of  the
authorities in the United Kingdom in July 2005 when  he  was  cautioned  for
travelling on the railway without paying a fare. Between  October  2005  and
January  2010  he  was  convicted  19  times  for  37  offences,   including
possessing an offensive weapon in a public place, failing  to  surrender  to
custody, attempting to travel without paying rail fare, breach of  community
order, battery, using threatening abusive insulting words or behaviour  with
intent to cause fear or provoke violence, destroying or  damaging  property,
breach  of  suspended  sentence,  drunk  and  disorderly  and  making  false
representations.

On 12 November 2009 he  was  convicted  at  Ipswich  Crown  Court  of  false
imprisonment, rape of a male aged 16 years or over, wounding with intent  to
do grievous bodily harm and robbery. On 12 January 2010 he was sentenced  to
a hospital order under section 41 of the  Mental  Health  Act  1983  without
limit of time, having  been  diagnosed  as  suffering  from  schizoaffective
disorder.

On 13 August 2014 the appellant was served with a  notice  of  liability  to
deportation. He responded on 1 September 2014. On 14 November  2014  he  was
served with a notice of decision to make a deportation order under  the  EEA
Regulations.

The respondent, in making that decision, considered that the  appellant  had
not exercised Treaty Rights in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period
of five years or more and had therefore not acquired the right of  permanent
residence. As such he could be deported  on  grounds  of  public  policy  or
public security. Having considered the circumstances of  the  index  offence
and the sentencing judge's remarks, and having taken account of  his  mental
health and diagnosis as suffering from schizoaffective disorder, as well  as
his established pattern of  repeated  offending,  the  respondent  concluded
that the appellant had a propensity to re-offend and that he  represented  a
genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to the  public  to  justify
his deportation on grounds of public  policy.  The  respondent  went  on  to
consider  proportionality  as  required  under   Regulation   21(5)(a)   and
considered the various factors under Regulation  21(6),  taking  account  of
his relationship with his father  who  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom,  his
single status, his health, his length of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom
and his rehabilitation prospects in the United  Kingdom  and  Portugal,  and
concluded that the decision to remove him was justified  and  proportionate.
It was considered that the appellant's deportation would not  be  in  breach
of the United Kingdom's obligations under the EEA  Regulations  and  neither
would it breach the appellant's human  rights  either  under  Article  3  or
Article 8 of the ECHR.

The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal on 14 May 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Wellesley-Cole and  was
allowed under the EEA Regulations and on Article 8 grounds. In allowing  the
appeal the judge concluded that the appellant did not now pose any level  of
risk to the public since his hospital confinement under  the  Mental  Health
Act appeared to have had a positive effect on his rehabilitation.

The respondent sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  four
grounds:  that the judge had applied the  wrong  public  policy  test  under
Regulation 21 and that her  proportionality  assessment  was  thus  unsound;
that the judge had erred by conflating the appellant's risk  of  reoffending
with  his  mental  health  condition;  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  her
consideration of the appellant's rehabilitation;  and  that  the  judge  had
erred in her assessment of Article 8 by concluding that section 117  of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 did not apply in EEA cases.

Permission to appeal was granted on 7 July 2015, with specific reference  to
the first ground of appeal.

The appeal came before me on 22 October 2015.  I heard  submissions  on  the
error of law and have concluded that  the  judge's  decision  is  materially
flawed and cannot stand, for the following reasons.

Conclusions on the Error of Law

I find myself in agreement with the respondent's assertion  that  the  judge
appears to have applied the wrong public  policy  test  in  the  appellant's
case, or at the very least that it is difficult to ascertain which test  she
applied.

Whilst it is the case, as Ms Solanki submitted, that paragraphs 6 and 13  of
the judge's decision  refer  to  the  correct  test,  that  being  the  test
applicable to persons not having acquired a permanent  right  of  residence,
it is clear that those paragraphs are simply a  record  of  the  submissions
made by the representatives. At paragraph  16,  however,  the  judge  stated
that the starting point in the appeal was the  "serious  test".  Ms  Solanki
submitted that that referred simply  to  the  "serious  threat"  within  the
correct public policy test at Regulation 21(5) and was not an indication  of
any higher test being applied by the judge. However that does not appear  to
be the case when  considered  in  the  light  of  the  judge's  comments  at
paragraph 18, that "the serious test is the residence of  five  years".   It
is also relevant to note that the judge referred,  at  paragraph  16,  to  a
tension between the respondent's decision that the appellant did not have  a
permanent right of residence and the case that he posed  a  serious  threat,
also suggesting that the  judge  proceeded  on  a  misunderstanding  of  the
correct test. I do not agree with Ms Solanki that the fact that the test  is
set out in full at the end of paragraph 18 indicates that the judge had  the
correct test in mind, since those provisions apply also to the higher  test,
as indicated by the judge's statement that  "I  have  also  weighed  in  the
balance the principles set out in Regulation 21(5)".

On that basis alone I find that the judge's decision cannot  stand.  As  the
judge recognised at paragraph 16, the starting point for her assessment  was
the correct test under Regulation 21. Clearly, all other findings flow  from
that assessment and if those findings were  founded  upon  the  wrong  test,
they simply cannot be sustained.

In any event I find merit in the  respondent's  other  grounds.  Whilst  the
judge,  in  her  Article  8  assessment,  refers  to   the   appellant   not
representing a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat to  society,
there is no clear finding in that regard within  her  assessment  under  the
EEA Regulations.

The judge put significant weight upon the positive rehabilitative effect  of
the appellant's hospital treatment and the lack of comparable  treatment  in
Portugal in concluding that his removal would be disproportionate.  However,
in so doing, she concentrated solely on the  index  offence  and  failed  to
take account of, or make considered findings on, other relevant  factors  in
assessing risk,  in  particular  the  fact  that  his  history  of  criminal
offending appeared to pre-date his  mental  health  problems.  Although  she
referred to the appellant's previous criminal convictions, in so far as  she
recognised  that  Regulation  21(5)(e)  provided  that  they  did   not   in
themselves justify the decision to remove, she did not appear to have  given
his offending history any weight in the assessment of risk  of  re-offending
and  thus  in  her  consideration  of  whether  he  posed  a  current  risk.
Furthermore,   the   significant   weight   that   she   attached   to   his
rehabilitation, in the face of a lack of comparable facilities in  Portugal,
is inconsistent with the approach taken in SSHD v  Dumliauskas  [2015]  EWCA
Civ  145  and  also  reinforces  the  suggestion  that  she  approached  the
appellant's case on the basis that the relevant public policy test  was  the
higher one applicable to those with permanent residence.

Finally, as regards her Article 8 assessment, the  judge  plainly  erred  by
considering that  section  117  of  the  2002  Act  did  not  apply  in  the
appellant's case, when it did. Aside from a failure to consider  the  public
interest  considerations  in  section  117,  the   judge's   proportionality
findings under Article 8 were clearly marred by the same  failings  referred
to above  in  relation  to  her  decision  under  the  EEA  Regulations  and
accordingly her Article 8 assessment must also be set aside.

For all of those reasons the judge's decision cannot stand and must  be  set
aside and re-made. Both parties agreed that in the event  an  error  of  law
was found in respect to the first ground the most appropriate  course  would
be for the case to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
rehearing and a fresh decision on all grounds. I  therefore  set  aside  the
judge's decision and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with respect both  to
the EEA Regulations and Article 8, involved the making  of  an  error  on  a
point of law. The decision is set aside  in  its  entirety.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice  Statement  7.2,  to
be dealt with afresh, before any judge aside from Judge Wellesley-Cole.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order pursuant to rule 13  of
    the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)(immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014. I continue that order, pursuant to rule 14 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




                               Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
