
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45603/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 April 2016                                 |On 19 May 2016             |
|                                                 |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                sadia parveen
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Ell, instructed by Bukhari Chambers Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 29  October
    2014 to refuse her application  for  a  derivative  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right of residence under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (the  2006  Regulations).  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lloyd-Smith allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated
    on 3 March 2015. The Secretary of State appeals with permission to this
    Tribunal.

 3. The relevant provision of the 2006 Regulations for the purposes of this
    appeal are as follows;





      "Derivative right of residence

      15A. (1) A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who satisfies
      the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of this
      regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the United
      Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.
      ...
      (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
           (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ("the relevant
           British citizen");
           (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United
           Kingdom; and
           (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in
           the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.
      ...
      (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if
           (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
           and
           (b) P-
                 (i) is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                 person's care; or
                 (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's
                 care with one other person who is not an exempt person.
      ..."

 4. The background to this appeal, based on the evidence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge, is that the appellant's child was born on [ ] 2009
    and is a British citizen because his father is a British  citizen.  The
    appellant and her husband separated before the birth of their  son  and
    divorced in 2013 and he has had no contact since  then.  The  appellant
    and her son live with  the  appellant's  brother,  his  wife  and  five
    children. They eat together and the appellant occasionally  helps  with
    the care of her brother's children. The appellant has  another  brother
    and a sister in the UK both of  whom  also  have  children.  The  child
    attends primary school. In the Reasons for Refusal letter the Secretary
    of State said that the appellant's son could be  looked  after  by  the
    appellant's brother and would not therefore have to leave the UK if the
    appellant left.

 5. The appellant's brother said  in  his  witness  statement  that  he  is
    willing to support  the  appellant  but  the  appellant  said  in  oral
    evidence that it would be different if she weren't there and that  they
    would be unwilling to  care  for  her  son  if  she  were  returned  to
    Pakistan.  The appellant said that if she were required to leave the UK
    she would take her son with her. In his oral evidence  the  appellant's
    brother said that he believed that  a  mother  should  look  after  her
    child, that he has five children of his own to look after and that  his
    wife would not be happy to have an additional child to look  after  but
    that, if his sister was no longer around and if he was forced to,  they
    would care for the child.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted that the appellant  has  primary
    responsibility  for  her  son's  care.  In  considering   whether   the
    appellant's son would be unable to reside in the UK  if  the  appellant
    were required to leave the Judge considered the best interests  of  the
    child. He took into account the fact that  the  child  is  making  good
    progress in school and that the appellant would take him  with  her  if
    she were required to leave the UK. The Judge concluded that it would be
    in the child's best interests to remain in the UK with his  mother  and
    allowed the appeal on  the  basis  that  the  appellant  satisfies  the
    requirements of regulation 15A.

 7. The Secretary of State contends in the grounds of appeal that the Judge
    had failed to consider whether the child is 'unable' to live in the  UK
    or another European Economic Area state if his mother  is  required  to
    leave the UK (regulation 15A (4A)  (c)).  Reliance  is  placed  on  the
    decision in MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside  EU)  Iran  [2013]
    UKUT 380 and it is contended that the child in this case would  not  be
    compelled to leave the EU if his mother was removed.  It  is  contended
    that the child lives with the appellant's brother as part of his family
    and that, should the appellant be required to leave the UK,  the  child
    would still remain with the family. It is submitted that it is  unclear
    how the Judge reached the conclusion that the child would be unable  to
    live in the UK in light of his uncle's oral evidence that if  they  had
    to they would look after the child.

 8. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety submitted that the  issue  here  is
    compulsion. He submitted that  alternate  care  is  available  for  the
    appellant's child and the Judge failed to explore that in the decision.
    Mr Ell submitted that the evidence before the  Judge  was  set  out  in
    paragraph 7 and 8 of the decision and that this included evidence  that
    the uncle would care for the appellant's son if he was  forced  to  and
    that this was clearly considered by the Judge. He  submitted  that  the
    Judge also heard evidence from the appellant that she  would  take  the
    child with her if she were removed  from  the  UK.  He  relied  on  the
    decision in Ayinde and Thinjom (Carers -  Regulation  15A  -  Zambrano)
    [2015] UKUT 00560 (IAC).

Error of Law

 9. Whilst the Judge identified the central question at  the  beginning  of
    paragraph 11 I accept that the rest of the decision concentrates on the
    best interests of the child without specifically addressing the central
    question identified. I accept that the Judge appears to have emphasised
    the best interests of the child at paragraphs 11-14. However I consider
    that it is clearly implicit in the reasoning at paragraphs  13  and  14
    that the Judge accepted the oral evidence from the  appellant  and  her
    brother that she would take the child with her if removed from  the  UK
    and that the appellant's brother and his wife would  not  be  happy  to
    have another child to look after  but  would  care  for  the  child  if
    'forced to'. In this context I consider the guidance from the  Tribunal
    in Ayinde to be relevant. There, Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan said;

      "It is beyond the range of proportionate responses that a minor should
      be required to go into some form of alternative care (be it  adoption,
      foster-care or residential care) in order to enjoy his EU rights  were
      both his parents required to leave" [54].

10. In this case the First-tier Tribunal Judge was looking  at  what  would
    actually happen if the appellant was required  to  leave  the  UK.  Her
    evidence was that she would take the child with her. This  was  in  the
    context of her brother's evidence that they would only look  after  the
    child if forced to and the appellant's evidence that  her  family  were
    only willing to support her and care for son whilst she was in  the  UK
    due to their own family commitments In the light of this evidence I  am
    satisfied that it was open to the Judge to have found as  he  did  that
    the appellant's child would be unable to reside in the UK if  she  were
    removed. The  evidence  supported  a  finding  that,  as  a  matter  of
    practicality, the EU citizen would be compelled to leave the UK if  his
    mother is removed.

11. I conclude that there is no material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusion

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of a material error on a point of law.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

14. I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                                       Date: 12 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                                       Date: 12 May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
