
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45831/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 March 2016                          |On 7 June 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                     carlos arturo jaramillo gallego (1)
                      MRS JUDITH  ZEPATA ECHEVERRI (2)
                                  [D Z] (3)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Rene, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Thoree &
Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Paul Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant's appeal, with permission, against a  decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Monro who in a determination promulgated  on
    21 May 2015 dismissed the appeals of the appellants against a  decision
    of Secretary of State to refuse to grant them leave to remain on  human
    rights grounds.

2.   The  principal  appellant  (the  appellant),  Carlos  Arturo  Jaramillo
    Gallego was born on 20 October 1962.  The other appellants are his wife
    who was born on 13 June 1975 and their daughter, [DZ], who was born  on
    [ ] 2007.  The appellant  entered  Britain  on  15  February  2003  and
    claimed asylum.   His  application  was  refused  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed in June that year.  An application  for  reconsideration  was
    made in January 2011 which was refused the  following  year.   Judicial
    review proceedings were refused after an oral hearing in  October  2013
    and an application to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  was  refused  in
    February 2014.  In September 2014 the application for leave to  remain,
    the refusal of which is the subject  of  this  appeal,  was  made.   It
    appears that his wife entered Britain in January 2004 as a visitor  and
    overstayed.  [DZ] was, of course, born here.

3.   The detailed letter of refusal considered both family and private  life
    and gave reasons why the appellant and his dependants could not succeed
    under the Immigration Rules.  In particular the letter dealt  with  the
    rights of the appellants' child noting that it  was  asserted  she  had
    lived in Britain continuously for over seven years.  It was stated that
    it was considered that she would be able to adapt to life  in  Colombia
    with her parents and it was stated  that  she  would  be  returning  to
    Colombia as part of a family unit and that the principal appellant  and
    his wife would be able to support their child, who is also a citizen of
    Colombia, to enjoy her full rights as a Colombian  citizen.   Therefore
    it was considered reasonable for  the  family  to  return  to  Colombia
    together.  It was accepted that there would be some disruption  but  it
    was  considered  that  it  was  proportionate  in  order  to  meet  the
    legitimate aims of the State.

4.   The fact that the child had enrolled in education in Britain was  taken
    into account but it was stated that there  was  adequate  education  in
    Colombia.

5.   Exceptional circumstances were considered but weight was placed on  the
    fact that both the appellant and  his  wife  had  entered  Britain  and
    remained without authority.

6.   Before the hearing the appellants' solicitors  lodged  statements  from
    the appellant, his wife and from his daughter and a psychiatric  report
    from Dr Anjum Bashir who  described  himself  as  a  consultant  neuro-
    psychiatrist.  He noted  that  her  parents  had  said  that  [DZ]  was
    basically a social child and took an  active  part  in  extracurricular
    activities and liked playing with her friends.  They had said that [DZ]
    was "very much an English child and they  did  not  see  any  Colombian
    traits in her".  They had also told the  psychiatrist  that  her  first
    language was English and that she  did  not  even  comprehend  Spanish.
    They had said that they did speak their own language at home  but  with
    [DZ] they had to revert to English as she felt comfortable  with  that.
    They had told Dr Bashir that [DZ]  was  distressed  about  leaving  her
    school and going to school in Colombia where she would  not  speak  the
    language and might be laughed at.  She identifies London  as  her  home
    and the talk of another home made no sense to her.

7.   The  neuro-psychiatrist  stated  that  [DZ]  came  across  as  a  busy,
    articulate and delightful youngster who talked readily about her school
    friends and activities.  She had told them that she wanted to  live  in
    London and would cry if she were asked to move.  He stated "coached  or
    spontaneous this thought or cognition  dominated  this  young  person's
    mind".  The appellant and his wife  had  said  that  they  avoided  any
    discussion which might escalate her fears.  [DZ] said that she did  not
    want to live in Colombia and knew nothing much about it.  He said  that
    [DZ] came across as an intelligent child whose general information  was
    quite appropriate to her age and "except from the frequent  crying  and
    anxiety reported by her family and obvious in her examination, she  was
    not suffering from any other health issues".  There is no  evidence  of
    any other normal belief or perception and she did not  present  of  any
    phobias or obsessions.  She had  partial  insight  into  her  emotional
    distress but could not work out a solution.

8.   His opinion was that:

         "7.1 [DZ] is a playful, intelligent young girl,  who  has  achieved
             her psychomotor development normally.  She  has  no  cognitive
             difficulties and was achieving to  her  potential  in  school.
             She has had a normal  social  development.   Her  relationship
             with her family are close and she has secure and  affectionate
             attachment with her parents."


         8.2  [DZ] was  identified  with  her  parental  fears  about  their
             country of heritage and has  been  presenting  with  fear  (of
             moving, missing her  familial  school,  social  contacts,  not
             being able to speak another language)  and  excessive  crying.
             It seems that discussions about having  to  leave  London  has
             been a source of her fears and anxiety.  She has ingrained the
             fears of relating to above and had developed cognitive  errors
             (elaboration,  arbitrary   interference,   magnification)   to
             include catastrophic consequences if she were taken away  from
             this country.  These fears and anxiety  are  maintained  by  a
             parental pessimistic evaluation of their future if  they  left
             London.  It seems that due to  their  circumstances  [DZ]  has
             been stuck in her dysfunctional emotional predicament."


    He went on to say that he thought that [DZ] was picking up on the fears
    of her parents.  However, he stated that  he  had  no  doubt  that  the
    parents loved their daughter dearly and would  do  all  they  could  to
    protect her from emotional distress.

9.    He  concluded  that  [DZ]  did  not  need  any  active  interventional
    counselling for the time being as  "rehearsing  her  anxious  narrative
    would escalate her dysfunction".  He went on to say that however if the
    symptoms were maintained there is risk of symptom escalation and if she
    developed physical symptoms then she would need to be referred  to  her
    GP to seek a referral to the local child and adolescent  mental  health
    service for support and therapy.  He ended by saying:

         "In the meanwhile  her  parents  need  to  maintain  a  climate  of
         reassurance, regular education and other activities of daily living
         so that her behaviour remains as normalised as  possible.   I  have
         warned her parents that she was at risk of a culture shock and that
         they would need to take appropriate steps to support  her  if  they
         moved from London to live elsewhere."

10.  Having heard evidence from the appellant, his wife and  from  [DZ]  the
    Judge set out her conclusions in  her  determination.   She  noted  the
    parents' evidence regarding [DZ] and that the appellant  said  that  he
    only spoke Spanish but that his wife spoke Spanish and some English and
    that their daughter spoke English but he would speak to her in  Spanish
    and she would understand - they spoke Spanish in the household.  [DZ]'s
    best friend [T] was born in Britain but was of Colombian nationality.

11.  She noted it had been put to the appellant that he had told  Dr  Bashir
    that [DZ] understood and spoke a little Spanish.  He  said  that  there
    were times when [DZ] would not understand.  The Judge  noted  that  the
    appellant had told her  that  he  had  two  children  from  a  previous
    relationship who were in Colombia as well as five brothers and that  he
    had contact with them every month or two and  that  his  wife  had  her
    mother  and  sisters  in  Colombia  and  a  daughter  from  a  previous
    relationship was in contact with [DZ].   His  daughter  speaks  to  the
    other children in Colombia.

12.  The Judge  set  out  her  consideration  of  the  relevant  matters  in
    paragraphs 24 onwards.   She  noted  the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant and his wife and submissions by the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer that there was much conflicting  evidence  in  the  case.   The
    Presenting Officer relied on Section 117B of the 2002 Act and that  the
    fact that languages and financial independence were relevant  and  that
    cultural and language ties had been maintained and they could return as
    a family unit.

13.  Having referred to the relevant Rules - E-LTRPT.1.1 and  ELTRPT.2.2  to
    5.2 and the terms of paragraph EX.1 of the Rules is stated that:

         "EX1.    This paragraph applies if


                (a)(i) the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental
                    relationship with a child who -


                    (aa)   is under the age of 18 years, or  was  under  the
                        age of  18  years  when  the  applicant  was  first
                        granted leave on  the  basis  that  this  paragraph
                        applied;


                    (bb)   was in the UK;


                    (cc)   is a British citizen or has lived in  the  United
                        Kingdom continuously for at least the  seven  years
                        immediately preceding the date of application; and


                (ii)   it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                    leave the UK."

14.  In paragraph 31 she considered  the  report  of  Dr  Bashir  which  she
    summarised in some detail not only with regard  to  what  he  had  said
    about [DZ]'s fears of leaving Britain but also the fact  that  she  did
    not needed counselling for the time being.  In paragraph 33  she  noted
    that Dr Bashir had stated that he had been told that  [DZ]  could  only
    speak English but understood Spanish and that he  had  been  told  that
    [DZ] did not even comprehend Spanish although that  the  parents  spoke
    Spanish at home.  The Judge  said  that  she  found  that  it  was  not
    credible that [DZ] was limited in her Spanish language  skills  as  her
    parents asserted but accepted that as she had been educated in  English
    medium her Spanish may well not be fluent.

15.  When considering specifically the position of [DZ] the Judge  referred,
    in paragraph  34,  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 as well as the judgment of the Supreme Court in ZH
    (Tanzania)  [2011]  UKSC  4   and   other   relevant   Upper   Tribunal
    determinations.  She referred to the Supreme Court judgment in  Zoumbas
    [2013] UKSC 74 before noting that  [DZ]  knew  no  country  other  than
    England and had friends here and that it would be a  major  wrench  for
    her to move.  She went on to state that "however children  do  relocate
    with their parents when the latter have to move for  work  purposes  or
    when a parent is in the  Armed  Services,  and  that  both  adults  and
    children have to adjust to their new life".  It was her view,  however,
    that if the members of the family were supportive to each  other  which
    was how she considered that the appellant and his  wife  had  presented
    themselves then  it  must  follow  the  impact  of  the  move  will  be
    minimised.  She stated:

         "The fact that the appellant and his wife have  communicated  their
         own misgivings about the move to [DZ] is not of itself a reason for
         leave to remain being granted.  [DZ] told the doctor that she would
         cry and hide if she were told that she had to move.  Many  children
         resist decisions that their parents make  for  them;  whether  this
         pertains to bedtime, the  need  to  do  homework,  restrictions  on
         contact with friends; and a child of 7 cannot be allowed to be in a
         position to make decisions about where her family may live.  It  is
         for her parents to work through any difficulties she may experience
         and to provide positive messages about the move.   I  am  not  sure
         that Dr Bashir was right in his assessment that  the  parents  have
         tried to protect [DZ] from anxiety about the  proposed  move;  they
         brought her to the court hearing instead of sending her  to  school
         and that must have been a source of anxiety for her."

16.  Having stated she  found  the  parents  as  unreliable  witnesses,  she
    stated that she concluded that there was  no  evidence  before  her  to
    demonstrate that it would be unreasonable for [DZ] to leave the  United
    Kingdom to make a new life with her parents in Colombia.

17.  She therefore dismissed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

18.  The grounds of appeal stated that the Judge had erred in  her  approach
    to [DZ]'s welfare and that it was  unfair  for  her  to  have  used  Dr
    Bashir's report against the parents.

19.  Permission  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  PJM
    Hollingworth who stated that an arguable error of  law  had  arisen  in
    relation to the report of Dr Anjum Bashir.  He stated it  was  arguable
    that the Judge had set out the weight which she attached to that report
    and elements "within it in a specific analysis relating to that  report
    in the light of his findings as  to  the  nature  and  quality  of  the
    evidence which he had received during the hearing".

20.  He stated that the Judge had referred to the issue of  whether  or  not
    [DZ] comprehended Spanish and said that as she  is  being  educated  in
    English medium her Spanish may well not be fluent.  His conclusion  was
    that it was arguable that the  references  made  by  the  Judge  to  Dr
    Bashir's report were insufficient.

21.  At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr Rene argued  that  the  Judge
    had not properly considered the best interests of [DZ] in the light  of
    the report of Dr  Bashir.   He  referred  me  to  the  judgment  in  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and in particular  the  criteria  set
    out in paragraphs 35 and 36 of that judgment.   The  Judge,  he  stated
    should have considered, in particular, the extent of which  [DZ]  would
    have linguistic medical or other difficulties in adapting  to  life  in
    Colombia.  He stated that the Judge had  not  properly  considered  her
    best interests.  He went through the various paragraphs  in  which  the
    Judge had addressed the matters in Dr Bashir's report before suggesting
    that the Judge, by asking [DZ] questions had exacerbated the  situation
    and had diluted Dr Bashir's findings.  He put to me that the  issue  of
    possible integration into Colombia had not been properly considered and
    he argued that insufficient weight had been put on the report.

22.  He particularly emphasised paragraph 6.2 of  the  report  in  which  Dr
    Bashir had noted that [DZ] had insisted that she would not like to live
    in Colombia, that she was scared to go there and would cry and hide  in
    her house if asked to go.  She had gone on to say how happy she was  in
    her school here.  He stated that the Judge had not properly  considered
    the rights of [DZ] under Section 55 of the  2009  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act.

23.  Mr Duffy stated that the Judge had  properly  taken  into  account  the
    report of Dr Bashir and that the impression which came  over  from  the
    report was that [DZ] was a normal  child  and  that  her  parents  were
    worried about returning to Colombia and that she had picked up on that.
     He stated that there was  nothing  in  the  determination  that  would
    indicate that the Judge had not properly considered the  evidence  from
    Dr Bashir.  The reality was, he stated, that  there  was  nothing  that
    flowed from the report that would indicate that that here was weight in
    the assertions made by Me Rene.    It  would  not  be  unreasonable  to
    expect [DZ] to go to Colombia with her parents.

Discussion
24.  I consider that there is no material error of law in the  determination
    of the Judge of the First-tier.  She did properly consider all relevant
    factors and I consider that she properly took into account the terms of
    the report from Dr Bashir.  The report is relatively short but it makes
    it clear that [DZ] is a healthy happy girl  whose  only  anxiety  comes
    from the fact that she wishes to remain  in  Britain.   The  judge  was
    entirely right to point out that the information given by  the  parents
    to Dr Bashir regarding  the  ability  of  [DZ]  to  speak  Spanish  was
    misleading given that the appellant himself spoke no English and I note
    that [DZ] speaks to his parents and other children in Colombia and must
    therefore speak to them, on the telephone, in Spanish.

25.  I consider that there was nothing in the report that  would  mean  that
    it would not be reasonable for [DZ] to go to Colombia with her  parents
    and, as Dr Bashir pointed out the reality is  that  the  parents  would
    have a decisive role in ensuring that [DZ] made as smooth a  transition
    as possible.  The reality is that [DZ] has no psychiatric condition  or
    any health issues which would mean that  she  should  not  be  able  to
    adjust to living in Colombia with her parents: the Secretary  of  State
    and indeed the Judge were correct  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  this
    family would be returning to Colombia together.  Moreover they will  be
    returning to a country where they have a large number of relations with
    whom [DZ] has already been in contact.

26.  I consider that there is nothing to indicate that  the  Judge  did  not
    properly consider the report of Dr Bashir or any other matter and  that
    her conclusions were  entirely  open  to  her.   She  was  entitled  to
    conclude that it was not unreasonable for this family  to  relocate  to
    Colombia.  There is nothing to indicate that the judge did  not  follow
    the dicta of the Court of Appeal in their judgment in EV (Philippines).
     The Judge did properly consider all relevant factors  and  considered,
    as was accepted by Mr Rene, the report in some detail. I consider  that
    her conclusions thereon were entirely open to her.  I  would  note,  of
    course that Mr Rene accepted before me that the way in which the  Judge
    had heard what [DZ] had to say was an entirely appropriate way in which
    to hear evidence from a child and that she properly gave  [DZ] a chance
    to say what she wished about her situation here  and  about  living  in
    Colombia.

27.  Accordingly I find no material error of law  in  the  determination  of
    the Immigration Judge and her  decision  dismissing  these  appeals  on
    Article 8 grounds shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy                7th June 2016
