
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                                    Appeal No: IA/45280/2013


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 March 2014                                |On 31 March 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                              AHMAD RASOOL BUTT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Eaton, instructed by Appleby Shaw Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 11 June 1980 and is a citizen of Pakistan.

 2. On 20 July 2012 the appellant applied for leave to remain as a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant. It is common ground that at that  time  he  did
    not have leave to remain. His application was refused by the respondent
    on 17 October 2013.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 27 January 2014 found that  there  was  no
    jurisdiction.

 4. The appellant then applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Chohan  on  20
    February 2014. Thus the matter came before me. I heard  submissions  of
    both representatives and reserved my determination.

 5. The essential issue in this appeal is whether the service of an  IS151A
    form, as was issued to this appellant on 18 October 2013, amounts to an
    immigration decision affording an appeal right under s.82(2)(g) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 6. It is my view that it does not.

 7. In order for  a  decision  to  give  rise  to  an  appeal  right  under
    s.82(2)(g), it must be:

           a decision that a person  is  to  be  removed  from  the  United
           Kingdom by way of directions under section 10(1)(a),  (b),  (ba)
           or (c) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (c.33) (removal of
           person unlawfully in United Kingdom)

 8. The IS151A form is not "a decision that a person is to be removed".  It
    is, as stated on  the  document,  a  "Notice  to  a  Person  Liable  to
    Removal". It is the not the removal decision itself.   Nothing  on  the
    face of the document  served  on  18  October  2013  indicates  to  the
    contrary.

 9. Mr Eaton argued that the case of Singh (paragraph  320  (7A)  -  IS151A
    forms - proof) [2012] UKUT 00162(IAC) supported his submission that the
    IS151A form did amount to a decision that came within the provision  of
    s.82(2)(g). I found that that Singh is authority for the  opposite.  It
    states in the second paragraph of the head note that:

        "Form IS151A does not require the recipient "to  leave  the  United
        Kingdom." Such a requirement is made, for example, by Form IS151B."

10. The status of the Form IS151B referred to in Singh is set  out  in  the
    respondent's Enforcement Instructions and Guidance (Chapter 7)  and  as
    the same section further clarifies the correct status of Form IA151A, I
    set it out here:


        "The procedures to be followed once authority to  serve  papers  is
        obtained are as follows:
        Serve form IS151A - (Notice that a person is to be  treated  as  an
        illegal entrant/a person liable  to  administrative  removal  under
        section 10 of the 1999 Act). This informs the person that they  are
        an illegal entrant/immigration offender  and  they  are  liable  to
        removal and detention.


        Serve immigration decision to remove, either
        IS151A part 2 - (Notice of decision to remove an illegal entrant/ a
        person liable to administrative  removal)  This  notice  informs  a
        person that a decision has been made to remove them from the UK and
        that they can appeal against this decision but  only  from  outside
        the UK : or
        IS151B - (where asylum or Human Rights claim has been refused) this
        notice informs a person that a decision has  been  made  to  remove
        them from the UK and that their asylum/human rights claim has  also
        been refused. It notifies them that they have an "in-country" right
        of appeal against the decision.
        For both the IS151A part 2 and the IS151B it is possible to specify
        more than one country to which the person may be removed.  This  is
        for disputed nationality cases, dual nationals etc."

11. Thus, Form IS151A only "informs the person that  they  are  an  illegal
    entrant/immigration  offender  and  they  are  liable  to  removal  and
    detention." As identified in Singh, only the further step of service of
    Form IS151A part 2 or Form IS151B  following  service  of  Form  IS151A
    constitutes an immigration decision to remove.

12. There was no argument before me that either a Form  IS151A  part  2  or
    Form IS151B have been served on this appellant. There is  therefore  no
    decision which affords him an appeal right.

13. Although set out relatively simply above, this  point  and  its  answer
    does not arise so easily from the history of this matter.

14. Firstly, the respondent's refusal letter dated 17 October 2013 told the
    appellant that he had an out of country appeal. He did not.  As  above,
    he had no appeal right at all.

15. Secondly, even though he was informed (wrongly) that he had only an out
    of country appeal, the appellant made an in country appeal.

16.  Thirdly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Duty  Judge   correctly   queried
    jurisdiction and asked  for  information  from  the  appellant's  legal
    advisers. They replied in a letter dated 14 November 2013 that:

           "The Appellant's application was  refused  on  18  October  2013
           without a right of appeal however, the Appellant has been served
           with a Section 10 Notice which has triggered an in country right
           of appeal under Section 82(2)(g). The Appellant was also given a
           Form IAFT1 to exercise the same."

17. That letter is incorrect in a number of regards. The refusal letter did
    not state that there was no right of appeal. As above,  it  erroneously
    stated that there was an out of country appeal. The appellant  was  not
    served with a "Section 10 Notice" affording him an appeal right for the
    reasons set out above. I also wondered if it could be  right  that  the
    respondent provided the appellant with Form IAFT1 which relates  to  an
    in country right of appeal rather than IAFT3, the form for  an  out  of
    country appeal. I cannot say whether or not  the  respondent  routinely
    issues appeal forms to those whose applications are refused or  whether
    the respondent's officer here, in error as to  there  being  an  appeal
    right  at  all,  compounded  that  error  by   issuing   appeal   forms
    inconsistent with the right of appeal identified in the refusal letter.
    The appeal was lodged online with the Tribunal  so  any  physical  form
    provided to the appellant was not used. In any event, being issued with
    an appeal form could not amount to the appellant being given an  appeal
    right on which he was entitled to rely.

18. Fourthly, although First-tier Tribunal Maxwell correctly identified  at
    [3] of his determination that the appellant had not received a decision
    affording him a right of appeal to the  Tribunal,  the  point  was  not
    litigated before him at all so the  appellant  had  no  opportunity  to
    address it.

19. Fifthly, following the grant of permission to  appeal,  the  respondent
    provided a Rule 24 letter dated 5 March 2014. This conceded the  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal on the basis of procedural  error  as  there  had
    been no opportunity to address  the  jurisdiction  point  before  Judge
    Maxwell. On the day of the hearing before me, Mr  Melvin  withdrew  the
    Rule 24 letter, maintaining that Judge Maxwell  had  been  correct  and
    that no material error arose.

20. Be all those factors as they may, for the reasons set out above, it  is
    my settled view that this appellant did not and does not have  a  right
    of appeal to the Tribunal.

21. It is also my view, however, that even though his  legal  analysis  was
    correct, a clear procedural error occurred when Judge Maxwell failed to
    give the appellant an opportunity to address that matter at the hearing
    on 16 January 2014.

22. Having found what amounts to an error of law, under section 12 (2)  (a)
    of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007,  I  "may  (but  need
    not) set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal".

23. This is not an appeal where it is appropriate for me to set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Maxwell. If I did so, the appellant would still be in
    exactly the same position, without an appeal  right  and  any  remaking
    would immediately be void for want of jurisdiction. I therefore decline
    to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does not disclose an error  on
    a point of law such that it should be set aside and it shall stand.




Signed: [pic]                                      Date:  24 March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
