

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/45505/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 22 July 2014                        |On 25 July 2014           |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between


                           MRS MABEL MERCY FRANCE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel
      (instructed by Visalogic.net)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted on 6 May 2014  by
           First-tier Tribunal Judge PJG White against the dismissal of her
           appeal seeking the issue of a residence card under regulation 7,
           alternatively  regulation  8,  of  the   Immigration   (European
           Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as   amended)   ("the   EEA
           Regulations")  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Kelsey   in   a
           determination promulgated on 26 March 2014.  The Appellant is  a
           national of Ghana, born on 20 October 1960.   She  claimed  that
           she was married to an  EEA  national  exercising  free  movement
           rights in the United Kingdom.


      2.    Judge Kelsey found that the Appellant had not shown that she had
           satisfied the EEA Regulations.   The  Appellant  had  failed  to
           prove either a valid marriage (see Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU
           law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC)) or a  durable  relationship.   The
           judge went on to consider very briefly the Article 8 ECHR  claim
           which the Appellant had raised in  her  Notice  of  Appeal,  but
           there were no Removal Directions  and  no  Section  120  Notice.
           Hence the First-tier Tribunal had  no  jurisdiction  to  address
           Article 8 ECHR: see Lamichhane [2012] EWCA Civ 260.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           PJG White because he considered it arguable that the  judge  had
           failed to  take  into  account  and/or  make  adequate  findings
           concerning the Appellant's evidence as to  her  claimed  durable
           relationship, even if he had found for good  reasons  that  they
           were not lawfully married.


      4.    By notice under rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,
           in the form of a letter dated 16 June 2014, the Respondent  (the
           Secretary of State) indicated that she opposed  the  application
           for permission to appeal.


      5.    Mr Bandegani for the Appellant accepted that there could  be  no
           challenge to  the  proxy  marriage  findings.   The  judge  had,
           however, misdirected himself as to  the  meaning  of  regulation
           8(5), which did not prescribe living together nor  any  specific
           period for a relationship to be considered durable.  The judge's
           findings about the  durable  relationship  could  be  contrasted
           unfavourably with  the  depth  of  his  analysis  of  the  proxy
           marriage issue.  The judge failed to address the evidence  which
           had been provided by the Appellant, which was  more  substantial
           than  the  judge  had  stated.   There  was  a  lack  of   clear
           credibility findings, and some contradiction as  the  judge  had
           described  the  Appellant  and  her  partner  as  "pleasant  and
           straightforward people": see [16].  The determination should  be
           set aside for the failure to provide adequate and clear reasons.


      6.    Mr Bandegani further submitted that the judge's treatment of the
           Article 8 ECHR claim raised had  also  been  inadequate.  Razgar
           [2004] UKHL 27 should have been followed and a  proper  analysis
           provided. The tribunal referred him to Lamichhane (above).


      7.    Mr Wilding for the Respondent (the Secretary of State) submitted
           that the determination contained no material error of law.   The
           determination had addressed the durable  relationship  point  at
           [20] and [21].  The witness statements provided had  been  vague
           and there was little  independent  evidence  as  the  judge  had
           correctly said.   There  had  been  nothing  to  show  that  the
           relationship could  be  seen  as  durable.   There  was  nothing
           further required so far as Article 8 ECHR was concerned.


      8.    In reply Mr  Bandegani  reiterated  his  submission  as  to  the
           judge's treatment of the evidence of the relationship relied on.
             There  was  a  lack  of  clarity  and  [16]  to  [21]  of  the
           determination were addressed to the proxy marriage  issue.   The
           judge had misunderstood about living together.


      9.    The tribunal reserved  its  decision  which  now  follows.   The
           tribunal finds that there was no material error of law in First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Kelsey's determination.


      10.   The judge had noted that the Appellant had admitted to  being  a
           long term overstayer who had breached her visit  visa.   At  [9]
           and [10] the judge summarised the brief witness statements.   At
           [11] and [12] the oral evidence given was summarised.   Even  by
           then cracks in the  evidence  were  apparent.   The  judge  then
           inadvisably and somewhat surprisingly  described  the  Appellant
           and her partner as  "pleasant  and  straightforward  people"  at
           [16], perhaps in the hope of softening the blows which  were  to
           follow at [20] and [21].


      11.   When analysed in detail by the judge  from  [16]  to  [21],  the
           Appellant's evidence fell apart.  The judge found that there was
           a lack of detail and explanation,  and  there  was  very  little
           evidence of living together.  Yet the Appellant claimed to  have
           been living with her claimed partner since January 2009,  having
           met him in 2008.  That was her definition of  the  relationship,
           not the judge's. Here it is important to note that at  [21]  the
           judge  was  evaluating  the  evidence  to  support  the   claims
           presented to him, not misdirecting himself as to the meaning  of
           regulation 8(5).   As the judge  did  not  accept  the  evidence
           provided, there was no need for  him  to  consider  whether  the
           gloss on regulation 8(5) offered by the Secretary  of  State  in
           the reasons for refusal letter was correct.


      12.   The Appellant's evidence  was  exceedingly  thin.   The  witness
           statements were short  and  perfunctory.   There  was  confusion
           about addresses.   There were no independent  documents  jointly
           addressed to the Appellant and her partner at  the  same  place.
           The judge's description of the evidence at [21] was accurate.


      13.   The durable relationship issue had been raised by the  Secretary
           of State in the reasons for refusal  letter,  and  was  not  the
           primary case advanced by the Appellant.  It was secondary.   The
           Appellant's counsel at the hearing before Judge Kelsey  (not  Mr
           Bandegani) said as much at [8] of her skeleton argument.  Having
           given ample reasons for rejecting  the  Appellant's  main  case,
           which was based on cohabitation pursuant to marriage, there  was
           little more which the judge needed to say about  a  relationship
           which he found had not been proved.


      14.   It has  to  be  said  that  the  judge  might  have  avoided  an
           application for permission to appeal had  he  been  rather  more
           explicit in the  rejection  of  the  Appellant's  evidence,  and
           perhaps discussed the secondary case in  a  separate  paragraph.
           But when the determination is read as a whole it is  plain  that
           the judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  claims  had  not  come
           anywhere near to being substantiated.  Those findings were  open
           to the judge on the evidence which the Appellant had produced.


      15.   For the reasons given  above,  the  Appellant's  onwards  appeal
           fails and the determination stands.


      DECISION


      There was no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      determination, which stands unchanged


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
























































































































































































































































































