

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/45563/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |                  Decision and Reasons   |
|                                  |Promulgated                              |
|On 10 February 2016               |                  On 22 February 2016    |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              DAVINDERJIT SINGH
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  absent

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hussain,  promulgated  on1  September
2015 which allowed the Appellant's appeal.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 4 August 1990 and is a national of India.


4. On 29 October  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (general) student.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hussain ("the Judge") allowed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and, on 8 January 2016, Judge  Fisher  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "3. In his decision, the Judge made reference to Paragraph 43  of  the
      Respondent's Tier 4 Guidance, which stated that, where a CAS has  been
      withdrawn, the same procedure applies as when a CAS  becomes  invalid.
      However, the section of the Guidance to which the Judge refers appears
      to contemplate a situation where  the  Tier  4  sponsor's  licence  is
      suspended or revoked, preventing the assignment of any new CAS or  the
      invalidation of any existing CAS, respectively.
      "4. There does not appear to have been any evidence before  the  Judge
      to demonstrate the circumstances of the withdrawal of the CAS, and  so
      it is arguable that he erred in finding that the Guidance in  question
      applied. In those circumstances, permission to appeal is granted."


The Hearing

7. The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was  he  represented  at  the
appeal. By letter  dated  8th  February  2016,  the  appellant's  solicitors
indicated that neither the appellant nor they would attend  the  hearing.  I
am therefore satisfied that having been served notice  of  the  hearing  and
not attended it is in the interests of justice to proceed with  the  hearing
in the Appellant's absence as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph  38
of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

8. Ms Everett, for the respondent, adopted  the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal. She told me that the focus in this case is at [6], [7] & [8] of  the
decision, and that the  Judge  has  misunderstood  (or  misinterpreted)  the
respondent's Tier 4 guidance. She told  me  that  the  Tier  4  guidance  is
arguably misleading because the meaning that it intends to  convey  is  that
only if a CAS is withdrawn by the respondent then the respondent will  treat
the appellant's case in the same way as if the CAS becomes invalid. In  this
case it is beyond dispute that the sponsoring college withdrew the  CAS.  Ms
Everett told me  that  that  is  an  important  distinction  because  it  is
incumbent upon the appellant to make sure that his CAS is valid.  She  urged
me to set the decision  aside  and  substitute  a  decision  dismissing  the
appellant's appeal.

9. I take account of  the  contents  of  the  letter  from  the  appellant's
solicitors dated 8 February 2014, which argues that the  decision  does  not
contain an error of law material or otherwise,  and  that  the  decision  is
made in contravention of the respondent's own guidance.

Analysis

10. It is common ground that  the  appellant  relies  on  a  CAS  which  was
subsequently withdrawn by his sponsoring college. It is clear from [6],  [7]
& [8] that the Judge reached a decision in  this  case  by  considering  the
respondent's own tier 4 guidance. I exhibited a copy of the tier 4  guidance
which was before the Judge to Miss Everett, who confirmed that  it  was  the
correct version of the Tier 4 guidance to be considered.

11. The Judge, at  [6],  found  that  the  fulcrum  of  this  case  lies  at
paragraph 43 of the respondent's Tier  4  guidance.  Paragraph  43  of  that
guidance is the last  paragraph  in  the  section  headed  "When  is  a  CAS
valid?", And says

   "Your CAS can be withdrawn or cancelled at any time by either  us  or  by
   your tier 4 sponsor. Where your CAS has been withdrawn or cancelled,  the
   same procedures apply as where a CAS becomes  invalid.  These  procedures
   are explained in more detail in annex 2 of this document."

12. The Judge refers to  annex  2  of  that  the  document  in  [7]  of  the
decision, where he finds that the guidance indicates that the  Secretary  of
State will "delay consideration of the application for 60 days to allow  the
appellant to obtain a CAS". It is argued that at [6], [7] &  [8]  the  Judge
creates  a  material  error  of  law  because  he  has  misinterpreted   the
respondent's own guidance. It is argued that the respondent's  own  guidance
only applies to a situation with a CAS is withdrawn by the respondent.

13. There is no error of law in the decision.  It  was  not  wrong  for  the
Judge to consider the respondent's Tier 4 guidance. The respondent's Tier  4
guidance clearly envisages situations  where  a  CAS  is  withdrawn  by  the
sponsor, and not just the respondent. The passage quoted above  at  [11]  of
this decision (taken together with annex 2 of the document)  clearly  states
that when a tier 4  sponsor  withdraws  a  CAS  the  respondent  will  delay
consideration of an application for  60  days  to  allow  the  appellant  to
obtain a CAS.

14. The Judge's decision  is  that  the  respondent  has  not  followed  the
respondent's own guidance, so that  the  appellant  still  awaits  a  lawful
decision. That is a decision which was open to the  Judge  on  the  evidence
presented. It is a decision which is entirely supported by the  respondent's
own tier 4 guidance.

15.    In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

16. I find that the Judge's  decision,  when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

CONCLUSION

17. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

18. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 15
February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


