
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/45256/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 4 February 2016                         |On  29 February 2016             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   LINA WU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss J Bond, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a national of The People's  Republic  of  China.   She
    was born on 20 May 1988.

2.   The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department, who I will continue to refer to as  "the  respondent",
    her designation before  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  (FTT)  despite  the
    reversal of roles before the Upper Tribunal.

3.   The appellant first came to the UK on 17 October 2011  as  the  partner
    of a points-based migrant with leave to remain  until  12  April  2014.
    The appellant's husband has been present in the UK since September 2007
    and, having been granted work permit visas in  the  past,  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 9 April 2013.  The appellant applied  for
    leave to remain as his spouse (spouse of a Tier 2 Migrant) on 10  April
    2014.  The respondent decided to reject her application on  27  October
    2014 because the English language certificate provided  was  not  by  a
    provider approved by the Secretary of State as specified in Appendix  O
    of the Immigration Rules.  The  appellant  subsequently  appealed  that
    refusal to the FTT.

4.   The appellant's appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  I  Ross
    (the Immigration Judge), who decided that although  the  appellant  had
    not satisfied  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  the
    respondent  had  correctly  found,  she  nevertheless  qualified  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  on  Human  Rights
    (ECHR), on the basis that she had formed a family relationship with  Mr
    Wu and the respondent's decision would unlawfully interfere  with  that
    relationship.   The   requirements   for   maintenance   of   effective
    immigration  control   and   the   public   interest   generally   were
    insufficiently  weighty  considerations  to  justify  refusal  of   her
    application.  It was accepted that the appellant was  in  a  subsisting
    relationship with a person settled here. The respondent  accepted  that
    the appellant had an "exemplary" immigration history and that  she  met
    all the other requirements of the Immigration Rules, beside the English
    language test requirement. Therefore, the public interest in  effective
    immigration   control   did   not   outweigh   other    considerations.
    Accordingly, the appeal was allowed by the  Immigration  Judge  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

5.   The respondent appealed the decision of the FTT to the  Upper  Tribunal
    by notice of appeal dated 18 June 2015.  In her grounds, the respondent
    states that the Immigration Judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for finding that the respondent's decision was disproportionate.   Rule
    284(ix)(a) required  the  appellant  to  produce  an  English  language
    certificate from an  approved  provider.   The  Immigration  Judge  had
    materially misdirected himself on the  law  by  describing  this  as  a
    "bureaucratic hurdle" to be satisfied. Mr Staunton said it amounted  to
    a failure on the part of  the  appellant  to  satisfy  the  substantive
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The Chikwamba  [2008]  UKHL  40
    principle had no application here, because it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant would not be able to meet the entry clearance requirements if
    she applied for entry clearance from abroad.

6.   I can find no evidence that the appellant  provided  a  response  under
    Rule 24 of the 2008 Immigration and Asylum Chamber  (Procedure)  Rules.



7.   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Fisher  initially  declined  to  give
    permission to appeal, indicating that the  Immigration  Judge  had  not
    "applied" Chikwamba but, in any event, he had  given  adequate  reasons
    for his assessment of proportionality and the respondent had not  shown
    that there was any arguable error of law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
    reasoning.

8.   The respondent renewed her application before the Upper Tribunal on  21
    September 2015, stating that the fact that the appellant could  satisfy
    different  English  language  requirements  (the  principal  ground  of
    appeal) from those which she was required to  satisfy  did  not  itself
    make the decision "disproportionate".   The  respondent  relied  on  SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and in particular the judgment of  Richards
    LJ at paragraph 33 of that decision.  An oral hearing was requested.

The Hearing

9.   At the hearing I heard submissions from both  representatives.  At  the
    end of the hearing I reserved my decision as to  whether  there  was  a
    material error of law.

10.  On behalf of the respondent  it  was  submitted  that  there  were  two
    essential grounds:

    (i)  that there was a lack of adequate reasons to support  the  finding
        that the decision was disproportionate;

    (ii)     that Chikwamba did not apply

11.  The appellant failed to meet the requirements of the Rules  because  of
    her  failure  to  fulfil  the  English  language   requirements.    Her
    application was not likely to succeed if it was made again.  SS (Congo)
    provided that there  must  be  the  most  compelling  circumstances  to
    support  a  claim  for  the  grant  of  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular the requirements  of  Appendix  FM,
    which dealt with family life under those Rules, had  to  be  met.   The
    formulation was not as strict as "exceptionality" or  "very  compelling
    reasons" but appropriate weight  had  to  be  given  to  the  "focussed
    consideration of public interest factors" expressed by  the  "Secretary
    of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix FM".  He went on to
    say that the formulation in the case  of  Nagre  at  paragraph  29  had
    survived the scrutiny of the Court of Appeal in the case of Haleemudeen
    at paragraph 44, per Beatson LJ.

12.  Mr Staunton submitted that there were  no  reasons  why  the  appellant
    could not return to China and continue her family life  there  with  Mr
    Wu.

13.  The appellant, on the other hand, considered that the case was a  "near
    miss" type case. It was submitted  that  the  leading  case  of  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL 27 provided the answer.  The Immigration Judge had  applied
    the principles in that case "through the lens" of Chikwamba.   However,
    the college at which the appellant had obtained  her  qualification  (a
    company trading under the name of 'Gatehouse Awards Limited')  did  not
    meet the requirements of the rules (specifically, paragraph ELTRP.4.2).
      It was submitted nevertheless that the appellant had sufficient skill
    in the English language to fulfil the respondent's requirements, albeit
    that she did not have the required test.

14.  I was then referred to paragraph 319E of the  Immigration  Rules  (page
    865 in Phelan's Immigration Law Handbook) which provides  a  number  of
    requirements for indefinite leave to remain as the partner of a points-
    based migrant.  It was submitted that most of  these  requirements  had
    been met and the appellant had come close to  complying  with  all  the
    requirements of the rule. In the circumstances it was  disproportionate
    to dismiss her application. The respondent's appeal should therefore be
    dismissed.

15.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision as  to  whether  there
    was a material error of law and, if so, what steps should be  taken  to
    remedy that error.

Discussion

16.  The Immigration Judge apparently took  a  common-  sense  view  of  the
    matter. On the face it, if the appellant returned to China to  make  an
    application for entry  clearance,  she  would  be  likely  to  qualify.
    However, the position is more complex than that.

17.  With respect  to  the  Immigration  Judge,  it  is  not  clear  why  he
    concluded that it would be "unduly harsh on both the appellant and  her
    husband" for the respondent to require the appellant to return to China
    to make a proper application for entry clearance.   As  the  respondent
    pointed out, in her revised grounds dated 21 September  2015  the  fact
    that the appellant "may" be able to satisfy different English  language
    requirements of Rule 284 did not  mean  she  met  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  The respondent's insistence that the appellant should  be
    required to comply with the same requirements as other applicants  does
    not strike the Tribunal as an unreasonable position to take.

18.  The need to keep the appellant and her husband together  is  a  weighty
    factor but it appears the respondent fully  considered  this  when  she
    made her decision.  This  did  not  make  the  family  life  which  the
    appellant had formed in the UK a factor which outweighed  the  need  to
    maintain effective immigration control in the  wider  public  interest.
    This public interest includes  such  factors  as  the  need  to  foster
    greater  integration  between  immigrant  groups  and  the   indigenous
    population. The facts of this case do not appear  either  "exceptional"
    or "compelling".

19.  It has not been established that the appellant would  necessarily  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules if she  applied  from  abroad
    and thus, I agree with the respondent, the Chikwamba principle  has  no
    application.

20.  In the circumstances, there being no children to the relationship,  the
    fact that the appellant has established an enduring relationship with a
    person present and settled in the  UK  does  not  outweigh  the  public
    interest in effective immigration control and it was not in  accordance
    with the law as presently interpreted  for  the  Immigration  Judge  to
    conclude that the respondent's decision was disproportionate.

Conclusion

21.  For understandable reasons the Immigration Judge decided the appeal  in
    the appellant's favour.  I am satisfied that the Immigration Judge  did
    not apply the law as discussed in SS (Congo) and in the circumstances I
    will allow the respondent's appeal.

Notice of Decision

22.  The appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  allowed.
     I substitute my decision which is to dismiss the  refusal  of  further
    leave to remain.

No anonymity direction is made.

Fee award

As this appeal has been successful I set aside the fee  award  and  make  no
fee award before this tribunal.


Signed                                  Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



