
[pic]
Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        IA/45014/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Taylor House                                 Decision  and  Reasons
                                             promulgated
On 23 October 2015                                       On  19  April  2016



                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                               Mahabubul Rana
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For  the  Appellant:      Ms  A  Brockleby-Weller,  Home  Office  Presenting
                       Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Simon  Noble
                       Solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Morgan promulgated  on  11  June  2015,  allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr
      Mahabubul Rana against the decision of the Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department dated 27 October 2014 to refuse variation of leave  to
      remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  and  to  issue  removal  directions
      pursuant to section 47 of the Immigration Asylum and  Nationality  Act
      2006.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant and Mr Rana
      is the respondent, for the sake of consistency  with  the  proceedings
      before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to Mr  Rana  as
      the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


   3. The Appellant's personal details and immigration history are a  matter
      of record on file and known to the parties; they are also set  out  in
      the body of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. It is unnecessary
      to re-rehearse all such matters here. What is  particularly  pertinent
      for present purposes is that following a period of leave  as  a  Post-
      study work migrant, the Appellant made an application for variation of
      leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) migrant on 22 August  2014.
      The application was refused on 27 October 2014 for reasons set out  in
      a combined Notice of Immigration Decision and  'reasons  for  refusal'
      letter, with particular reference to the requirements  in  respect  of
      marketing and advertising materials (Immigration  Rules,  Appendix  A,
      paragraph 41-SD(b)(iii)).


   4. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons   set   out   in   his
      determination.


   5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  FTTJ
      Cox on 24 August 2015.


Consideration: Error of Law

   6. The Respondent did not award the Appellant the  points  claimed  under
      'Attributes' because it was considered that there was no evidence that
      the leaflet and business card submitted by the  First  Appellant  with
      his application as marketing material and advertising  material  -  as
      required pursuant to paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) - were 'active' prior  to
      11 July 2014.


   7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge -  whom  it  seems  did  not  hear  oral
      evidence, but proceeded by way of  submissions  only  -  concluded  in
      these terms at paragraphs 7 and 8:

"7. In summary in light of the documentary evidence outlined  above  I  find
      that the specified documents were in the requisite format and that the
      documentary evidence submitted to the respondent demonstrated that the
      appellant had been conducting the business since before 11  July  2014
      and up to the date of the application and that the  contract  provided
      was also the specified format.

8.  In  summary  I  find  that  the  appellant  did  provide  the  specified
      documentation to demonstrate that he  satisfies  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 245 of the Immigration Rules and consequently  I  allow  the
      appeal under the immigration rules."


   8. Judge Cox in granting permission to appeal  helpfully  summarises  the
      basis of the Respondent's  challenge in these terms:

"The  grounds  in  essence  contended  that  there  was  unfairness  in  the
      proceedings because the Judge insisted that he did not  need  to  hear
      from  [the  Appellant]  and   thereby   prevented   pertinent   cross-
      examination; and,  secondly,  that  he  failed  to  give  adequate  or
      sustainable reasons for finding [the Appellant] had met the evidential
      requirements of paragraph 41-SD."


   9. In all of the circumstances I have reached  the  conclusion  that  the
      second of those bases of challenge identified by  Judge  Cox  is  made
      out, and in consequence it is unnecessary for me to  consider  further
      the issue of procedural unfairness.


  10. I take as my starting point the relevant requirement set  out  in  the
      Rules in respect of advertising and marketing material. Paragraph  41-
      SD(b)(iii) of Appendix A of the Rules, when applicable,  requires  the
      applicant to provide  one  or  more  of  the  documents  specified  at
      paragraphs  (1),  (2),  (3)  and  (4)  "covering  either  together  or
      individually a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014 up  to
      no earlier than 3 months before the date of application".


  11.  A  difficulty  identified  by  the  Respondent  in  the   Appellant's
      application is that the domain name of his website was not  registered
      until after 11 July 2014.


  12. It is to be noted that whilst the Appellant produced a business  flyer
      with his application, it made use of the  domain  name,  both  as  the
      website address and also the email address for information:  e.g.  see
      photocopy of leaflet contained in the Appellant's  bundle  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal at  page  43,  and  identified  in  the  index  as
      'Advertisement Sent with the application'.


  13. I pause to note that the leaflet at page 43 is in a slightly different
      format from the leaflet that is attached to the printers'  invoice  at
      page 30 of the Appellant's bundle, but even that leaflet makes use  of
      the domain name in the  email  address.  It  is  a  curiosity  as  yet
      unexplored as to how it came to be that the printer  was  commissioned
      to produce a leaflet, for which an invoice was rendered purportedly on
      30 June 2014, including a domain name that was  not  registered  until
      some time later. This issue may require further exploration at a later
      stage in these proceedings, and both parties should now be  considered
      'on notice' as to its pertinence both in respect of the issue  of  the
      date of  use  of  the  marketing  material,  and  in  respect  of  the
      reliability and credibility of the Appellant's documents and narrative
      account.


  14. In any event, what emerges, is that clearly the documents  in  and  of
      themselves did  not  provide  reliable  or  determinative  evidence  -
      without at the very least some further  exploration  by  way  of  oral
      testimony - that the materials relied upon by the Appellant in respect
      of paragraph 41SD(b)(iii) were in use prior to the key date of 11 July
      2014.


  15. Whilst I accept that Judge Morgan was correct to observe at  paragraph
      6 that it would be unusual to expect the business flyers themselves to
      be dated, I am not satisfied that he has thereafter appropriately  and
      sustainably reached a conclusion based on  his  consideration  of  the
      documentary evidence, or given clear and adequate reasons for any such
      conclusion, that the business flyers were in  use  prior  to  11  July
      2014. Indeed, in the  conclusions  set  out  at  paragraph  7  (quoted
      above), whilst the  Judge  states  that  he  was  satisfied  that  the
      documentary evidence was "in the requisite format" he does not make an
      express finding as to when the business flyers were in use.


  16. In this context I am not prepared to infer that the subsequent finding
      -that he was satisfied that the Appellant had been conducting business
      since before 11 July 2014 - is demonstrative of a finding  in  respect
      of the date of use of the business flyers: it is not congruent with  a
      finding that the business flyers were in use since before  that  date,
      and may in itself  have  been  based  on,  for  example,  the  Judge's
      satisfaction in respect of the  contract  for  services.  If,  in  the
      alternative, however such an inference was being  drawn,  then  in  my
      judgement the Judge has set out no adequate reasons to support such an
      inference - and in particular has not identified or otherwise  engaged
      with the tension between the date of registration of the  domain  name
      and its appearance on publicity leaflets said  to  have  been  in  use
      prior to the date of registration.


  17. In all such circumstances I am satisfied that  there  was  a  material
      error in law in that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  lacks
      adequate  sustainable  reasoning.  The  decision  of  the   First-tier
      Tribunal must be set aside accordingly, and  requires  to  be  remade.
      Because there was no oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, and
      such evidence is required, the decision in the appeal is to be  remade
      before the First-tier Tribunal.


  18. In such circumstances it is unnecessary for me  to  make  any  further
      comment on the first basis of challenge identified in the  summary  of
      Judge Cox.


  19. Finally I note that the combined Notice of  Immigration  Decision  and
      'reasons for refusal' is essentially silent on the  viability  of  the
      Appellant's business. It does not  include  the  paragraph  frequently
      seen in 'Entrepreneur' decisions to  the  effect  that  in  line  with
      paragraph 245DD(l) of the Immigration Rules an assessment as  detailed
      in paragraph 245DD(h) has not been carried out because the application
      has been refused, and  reserving  the  right  to  carry  out  such  an
      assessment in any challenge of the decision or in future applications.
      In the event that the Respondent may in this particular case  wish  to
      challenge the viability of  the  Appellant's  business,  consideration
      should be given to raising any such issue formally in order to put the
      Appellant on notice of the nature of any such challenge.


Decision

  20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  21. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal before any Judge other than Judge Morgan with all  issues  at
      large.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     16 April 2016




