
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45044/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 June 2014                                 |On 11 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                             MRS JUSTICE SIMLER
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              fatEma Choudhury
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hassan, Kalam Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Fatema Choudhury, was born on 19 February 1948 and is a
    citizen of Bangladesh.  We shall hereafter in this determination  refer
    to the respondent as "the appellant" and to the Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department as the  "respondent"  (as  they  were  respectively
    before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant had applied for further leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 31 August 2012, having entered the country on 22 August 2012
    with a valid visit visa obtained out of country.   Her  application  to
    remain was subsequently varied to include an application under  Article
    8 ECHR.  On 15 October 2013, a decision was made to refuse to vary  the
    appellant's leave to remain and also to remove her by way of directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2006.
    The appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal
    (Judge S Miah) which, in a determination promulgated on 14 March  2014,
    allowed the appeal on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8  ECHR).   The
    Secretary of State appealed to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  was  granted
    permission by Judge Lambert on 23 April 2014.

 3. The appellant has six adult children  all  now  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her husband died  in  Bangladesh  in  2009.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal had before it a bundle of  documents  (indexed  on  its  face)
    which contained, inter alia, the statements of the appellant  and  also
    Syeda  Jahera  Akter,  a  British  citizen  and  the  daughter  of  the
    appellant.  The appellant's statement indicates that she first  visited
    the United Kingdom in 2007 with her husband and visited again  in  2009
    after he had died.  She had made two further visits in order  to  spend
    time with her children here.  On each occasion, she returned to live in
    Bangladesh but, as noted above, when she arrived  in  August  2012  she
    decided to apply to remain indefinitely.  She states  that  she  had  a
    "minor stroke" after her husband had died and had fallen  in  her  home
    breaking her ankle.  The children have become concerned for her welfare
    and they support her application to remain in the United  Kingdom.   In
    Bangladesh, the appellant had a housemaid who  assisted  her  but  this
    woman,  because  she  was  illiterate,  had  "aggravated  my  sense  of
    helplessness".  In her statement [9], the appellant asserts that she is
    "neither physically nor mentally fit to travel to  Bangladesh"  but  Mr
    Hassan, for the appellant, acknowledged that there was  no  independent
    medical evidence which supported that assertion.

 4. Mrs Akter, in her statement in support, says that the appellant has  no
    access to "the required level of care" in Bangladesh although  she  was
    provided for financially by the United  Kingdom  family  whilst  living
    there.   Mrs  Akter  says  that  the  appellant  would  be   adequately
    maintained and accommodated at her home in Ilford, Essex.

 5. The  remainder  of  the  documentary  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal consisted of receipts for sums paid to the  appellant  by  the
    United Kingdom family and particulars  of  Mrs  Akter's  own  financial
    circumstances.  At [14-22] there are  a  number  of  items  of  medical
    evidence.  These include two medical reports written by Dr R K  Yadava,
    a consultant physician.  The reports are dated 25  August  2012  and  9
    March 2013 and record that the appellant suffers from chronic bilateral
    hip pains and left ankle pain.  Her mobility  is  described  as  "poor"
    and, at the time of the report on 9 March 2013 she required "one person
    to assist her in walking".  She takes  regular  analgesia  for  chronic
    pain but also suffers from tiredness and breathlessness on exertion.  A
    later report also records that the  appellant  has  not  suffered  from
    recent episodes of central chest discomfort (referred to in the earlier
    report).  In March 2013, she had presented as "alert oriented with time
    and person."  She had clinical features of  a  depressed  mood  but  no
    visio-sensory inattention or motor sensory deficit in  the  limbs,  her
    hand coordination was intact.  Mr Hassan told us that  the  appellant's
    family had  paid  for  the  medical  services  provided  by  Dr  Yadava
    privately.

 6. The reasons for refusal letter of 15  October  2013  explains  why  the
    appellant could not succeed in her application to vary her leave as her
    application was contrary to the provisions of paragraph 44  of  HC  395
    (as amended):

         Requirements for an extension of stay as a general visitor

          44. Six months is the maximum permitted leave which may be granted
         to a general visitor. The requirements for an extension of stay  as
         a general visitor are that the applicant:




         (i) meets the requirements of paragraph  41  (ii)-(vii)  and  (ix)-
         (xii); and




         (ii) has not already  spent,  or  would  not  as  a  result  of  an
         extension of stay spend, more than 6 months in total in the  United
         Kingdom or not more  than  12  months  in  the  case  of  a  person
         accompanying an academic visitor as a general visitor. Any  periods
         spent as a child visitor are to be counted as a period spent  as  a
         general visitor; and




         (iii) has, or was last granted, entry clearance, leave to enter  or
         leave to remain as a general visitor or as a child visitor; and




         (iv) must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration  laws  except
         that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less will
         be disregarded.

 7. The refusal letter recorded that,

         You entered the United Kingdom on  22  August  2012.   Your  period
         permitted at the time of entry  was  six  months  therefore  on  22
         February 2013 you will have had the maximum  time  permitted  to  a
         visitor.  Therefore the Secretary of State is not satisfied that if
         you were granted [leave to remain] you would not  spend  more  than
         six months in the UK as a visitor and your application  is  refused
         under the requirement for 44(ii).

 8. The application was considered also under R-LTRPT of  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE;







         Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain  on  the
         grounds of private life




         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:




         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and




         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and




         (iii) has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or




         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or




         (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has  spent  at
         least half of his life living continuously in the  UK  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or




         (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or  above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but  has  no  ties  (including  social,
         cultural or family) with the country to which he would have  to  go
         if required to leave the UK.







 9. The appellant had not been living continuously in  the  United  Kingdom
    for the period of time required by the Rules.   As  regards  Article  8
    ECHR outside the Rules, the letter records:

         I have also considered whether your application raises or  contains
         any exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the  right  to
         respect for private and family life contained in Article 8  of  the
         European Convention on Human Rights, might warrant consideration by
         the Secretary of State of a grant of leave to remain in the  United
         Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I  have
         decided that it does not.  Your application for leave to remain  in
         the United Kingdom is therefore refused.

10. The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal are brief:


         The IJ (sic) has not considered the guidance in the case of Gulshan
         (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)
         namely if there are good grounds regarding leave to remain  outside
         the Immigration Rules it is necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go
         on to consider  whether  there  are  compelling  circumstances  not
         sufficiently  recognised  under   the   Rules   ...   The   Gulshan
         determination has further been endorsed by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         Shahzad (Art. 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC) per head note
         (iv).  It is submitted this is a relevant omission as  the  IJ  had
         not given any consideration as to whether there  are  good  grounds
         for granting leave outside the Rules  in  compelling  circumstances
         not recognised under the Rules.  Permission is sought on the  basis
         that the IJ has  not  considered  the  case  specific  guidance  on
         departing from  the  Immigration  Rules  when  further  considering
         Article 8.

11. The determination of Judge Miah is equally brief,  running  to  sixteen
    paragraphs.  In our view, that determination  contains  errors  of  law
    such that it falls to be set aside.  We have  reached  that  conclusion
    for the following reasons. First, at [a], the judge  has  set  out  the
    citations of a number of cases (including MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ
    1192 but not Gulshan - see above) and states that he has considered the
    cases.  He has made no attempt whatsoever to identify the principles of
    law within those cases which  he  considers  relevant  to  the  instant
    appellant's circumstances nor, so far as we can see, has  he  attempted
    to apply those principles.  The judge's failure to refer to Gulshan  is
    not, in itself, an error of law but his failure to apply the principles
    set out in that determination constitutes a legal error  on  his  part.
    The head note of Gulshan reads as follows

    On the current state of the authorities:

     (a)    the maintenance requirements of E-LTRP.3.1-3.2 stand,  although
    Blake J in R (on the application of MM)  v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  1900  (Admin)  said  that  they   could
    constitute an unjustified and disproportionate  interference  with  the
    ability of spouses to live together; he suggested that  an  appropriate
    figure may be around �13,400, and highlighted  the  position  of  young
    people and low wage earners caught by the higher figure in the rules;

    (b)    after applying the requirements of the Rules, only if there  may
    be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them  is
    it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether  there
    are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them:  R
    (on the application of)  Nagre  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin);

    (c)    the  term  "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  provisions  such  as
    Section EX.1 are not obstacles which are  impossible  to  surmount:  MF
    (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 (IAC); Izuazu  (Article
    8 - new rules)  [2013]  UKUT  45  (IAC);  they  concern  the  practical
    possibilities of relocation. In  the  absence  of  such  insurmountable
    obstacles, it is necessary to show other  non-standard  and  particular
    features demonstrating that removal will be unjustifiably harsh: Nagre.




    The Secretary of State addressed the Article 8 family  aspects  of  the
    respondent's position through the Rules, in  particular  EX1,  and  the
    private life aspects through paragraph 276ADE. The  judge  should  have
    done likewise, also paying attention to the Guidance.  Thus  the  judge
    should have considered the Secretary of State's conclusion  under  EX.1
    that there were no insurmountable obstacles preventing the continuation
    of the family life outside the UK. Only if  there  were  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside the rules was it necessary
    for him for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there  were
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.




12. The judge at [11] briefly records that the appellant did not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  He then went on  to  find  that
    the appellant and her daughter (who  both  gave  oral  testimony)  were
    "entirely credible  witnesses.   None  of  the  cogent  testimony  they
    provided  was  undermined   during   their   cross-examination."    The
    credibility of the testimony given by the witnesses does not appear  to
    have been at issue. The judge continued at  [14]  to  state  that  "the
    evidence supports the contention that all of the  appellant's  children
    are very close to her.  They support her emotionally and  financially."
    He notes that the appellant is receiving private medical treatment  for
    her "medical ailments" but he does not particularise those ailments and
    made  no  attempt  to  explain  why  they  may  amount  to   compelling
    circumstances.  At [15], the judge found that,

         the essential care and support  being  provided  primarily  by  the
         appellant's daughter who gave evidence, alongside  the  other  five
         children in the UK, amounts to significant family-life [sic]  under
         Article 8.  Following the well-established five stage test set  out
         in Razgar, I find that the decision is in accordance with  the  law
         and that it is to  the  legitimate  aim  of  maintaining  effective
         immigration control.   However,  that  said  I  find  that  in  the
         particular circumstances of the appellant's case, namely her mature
         age, medical symptoms and wider circumstances, the  fact  that  she
         has no-one to turn to [in] Bangladesh for  any  kind  of  financial
         emotional support swings the Article 8  proportionality  assessment
         in balance in her favour.

13. We find that analysis to be wholly  inadequate.   The  judge  fails  to
    appreciate that the complete code now provided in relation to Article 8
    by the Immigration Rules sets out in detail provisions, consistent with
    both  United  Kingdom  and  Strasbourg  jurisprudence,  which  must  be
    satisfied in order for an applicant to achieve  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain.  By definition, where  an  applicant  fails  to  satisfy  those
    provisions, the public interest as defined by the Rules  will  outweigh
    and  render  proportionate  any  interference  which  the   immigration
    decision will cause to the private and/or family life of the applicant.
     Only appeals with unusual or compelling facts (that  is,  facts  which
    have not been anticipated in the complete code provided by  the  Rules)
    require  consideration  outside  those  Rules.    The   decision-maker,
    therefore, must not only make a judgment as to whether the facts  in  a
    given case are sufficiently  compelling  to  require  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules but also, importantly, will be  aware  that
    his or her analysis should be informed by the fact the requirements  of
    the Rules had not be met.  As the Tribunal in Gulshan noted at [27]:

         The judge then embarked on  a  free-wheeling  Article  8  analysis,
         unencumbered by the rules. That is not the  correct  approach.  The
         Secretary of State had addressed the Article 8  family  aspects  of
         the respondent's position through the rules,  in  particular  EX.1,
         and the private life aspects through paragraph  276ADE. The  judge
         should have done likewise, also paying attention to  the  Guidance.
         Thus the judge should have  considered  the  Secretary  of  State's
         conclusion under EX.1 that there were no  insurmountable  obstacles
         preventing the continuation  of  family  life  outside  the  United
         Kingdom. Only if there were  arguably  good  grounds  for  granting
         leave to remain outside the rules was  it  necessary  for  him  for
         Article 8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
         compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
         rules (see paragraph 24(b) above).

14. A "freewheeling Article 8  analysis,  unencumbered  by  the  Rules"  is
    exactly what  Judge  Miah  embarked  upon  in  his  determination.   He
    approached the Article 8 analysis outside the Rules as  if  it  were  a
    tabula rasa  on  which  Appendix  FM  had  no  bearing  whatever.   The
    appellant's "mature age and medical symptoms" were not circumstances to
    which Appendix FM gave any weight and they are hardly unusual  in cases
    of this kind involving elderly individuals.  Further, we have no proper
    idea of the "wider circumstances" which the judge clearly  did  believe
    had some bearing on the outcome of  his  analysis.   Whilst  the  judge
    makes the assertion at [16] that the "connection  that  exists  between
    the appellant and her children in the UK can reasonably be said  to  go
    beyond normal emotional ties than might  usually  be  expected  between
    adult relations (Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31)" that  assertion  is  not
    supported by any reasoning.  We observe,  on  the  contrary,  that  the
    "emotional ties" existing between this aging appellant  and  her  close
    family members in the United Kingdom are entirely "normal".

15. The judge goes on to find that "the legitimate aim the respondent seeks
    to achieve by requiring this appellant to leave the UK is abated, to  a
    large extent,  as  a  result  of  the  appellant's  current  cumulative
    circumstances."  Presumably, the judge is here  referring  to  question
    (4) of the "well-established five stage  test"  contained  at  [17]  of
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27:
      (1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
      with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his private
      or (as the case may be) family life?
      (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
      potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
      (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
      (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in
      the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-
      being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
      protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
      and freedoms of others?
      (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
      end sought to be achieved?




16. We cannot see how the "legitimate aim"  or  public  interest  concerned
    with the appellant's removal (that is, the economic  wellbeing  of  the
    country of which effective control of immigration forms  part)  can  be
    "abated" by the appellant's circumstances.  Presumably, the  judge  had
    intended here to refer to proportionality, but  he  does  not  say  so.
    Indeed, the judge goes on at [16] to find  that  "it  [presumably  'the
    appellant's current cumulative  circumstances']  outweighs  any  public
    interest argument  the  respondent  might  have  argued  in  favour  of
    requiring this appellant to leave the UK now  (sic)."   The  judge  has
    made no attempt to define what might be the public  interest  arguments
    in this particular case.  The public interest is  never  a  fixity  and
    should be examined and defined on a case by case basis.  We  find  that
    the public interest concerned with the removal of an appellant who  has
    made an application to remain permanently in the United Kingdom  having
    arrived with a visit visa  (which  she  would  only  have  obtained  by
    persuading the Entry Clearance Officer that she intended to  return  to
    Bangladesh at the conclusion of her visit) is a strong one.   Not  only
    has the judge failed to describe the "wider circumstances" in favour of
    the appellant remaining, he has also completely failed  to  define  the
    public interest.

17. In the light of these observations and findings, we set aside the First-
    tier Tribunal  determination.   The  representatives  of  both  parties
    agreed it was not necessary for the Tribunal to hear any  further  oral
    evidence and that we should remake the decision on the  evidence  which
    was before the First-tier Tribunal.

18. As we have noted above, our first task is to consider  whether,  having
    failed to meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  there  are
    compelling or unusual circumstances in this case which  require  us  to
    consider Article 8 ECHR outside the  Immigration  Rules.   As  we  have
    noted  above,  there  is  nothing  particularly   unusual   about   the
    circumstances in which this appellant finds herself.  We have no  doubt
    that she would prefer to be in the company of and be cared for  by  her
    United Kingdom family members and also that they would wish to have her
    living with them.  We have described the appellant's  medical  symptoms
    above and, whilst we find that her medical  conditions  may  limit  her
    mobility to some extent, they are not, as at  the  date  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing, so serious as to require her  to  receive  care  from
    third parties.  Significantly, the appellant's  United  Kingdom  family
    members  have  indicated  that  they  are  prepared  to   support   her
    financially wherever she may be living.  The appellant  previously  had
    the assistance of a maid in Bangladesh.   We  see  no  reason  why  she
    should not do so in the future.   The  private  medical  treatment  for
    which the family currently pay here in the United Kingdom can as easily
    be purchased for the appellant if she were living  in  Bangladesh.   We
    are aware that the appellant has not been living in the United  Kingdom
    illegally at any time but, equally, there must be some doubt as to  the
    bona fides of her representations to the ECO concerning her application
    for a visit visa.  Further, we find that, in deciding whether or not  a
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR  outside  the  Rules  is  required,  we
    should have regard also to  the  public  interest  concerned  with  the
    appellant's removal which, for the reasons we have given  above,  is  a
    strong one in this instance.  We  have  concluded  that,  applying  the
    principles of Gulshan, the  circumstances  of  the  appellant  are  not
    unusual or compelling to the extent that a consideration of  Article  8
    outside the Rules is required.

DECISION

19. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    14 March 2014 is set aside.  We have remade the decision.   The  appeal
    against the Secretary of State's refusal to vary  leave  to  remain  is
    dismissed.





Signed                              Date 25 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
