
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45334/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 29 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RAZA SALEEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    The Respondent did not appear and was not
represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I see no need for, and do not make, an order restricting publication  of
    the details of this appeal.

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the  respondent,  hereinafter
    "the claimant", against the decisions of the Secretary of  State  on  14
    October 2013 to refuse him leave to remain as a student  and  to  remove
    him from the United Kingdom. The appeal was brought and allowed on human
    rights grounds.

 3. The claimant did not appear before  me  today.  I  did  not  expect  the
    claimant to come. I had had a telephone message drawing to my  attention
    that he had been involved in a domestic  accident.  A  full  adjournment
    application had  been  considered  the  day  before  the  hearing  by  a
    colleague  and  was  renewed  before   me   possibly   with   additional
    information.

 4. There is very clear evidence that the claimant  has  complained  to  his
    doctor that he has injured his back in a fall at home.  The injuries  do
    not sound trivial and some of them I am sure would be  very  unpleasant.
    However there is no evidence before me that he is not fit  to  attend  a
    Tribunal hearing.  The opinion of the medical practitioner he is not fit
    to attend work is not the  same  at  all.   It  follows  therefore  that
    although I have very clear evidence that he has been injured  I  do  not
    have any independent evidence that he could not attend a hearing.

 5. I have particularly considered a medical practitioner's letter dated  23
    November 2015 which rehearses the history of the injury but which  fails
    to say that the claimant is not fit to attend the Tribunal  hearing.   I
    note that the claimant lives in East Ham which is not very far away from
    the hearing centre. Attendance would not involve  a  long  or  difficult
    journey. I cannot conclude on the evidence that the claimant is not able
    to attend and I therefore  see  no  reason  whatsoever  to  adjourn  the
    hearing.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal was plainly wrong to allow the appeal, at  least
    for the reasons given.  It is a  matter  of  record  that  the  claimant
    cannot satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    says as much. The difficulty is that if the application was  allowed  he
    would have been allowed to remain in the United Kingdom  for  more  than
    five years as a Tier 4 (General) Student and that  is  not  permissible.
    Thus there is no question of this claimant satisfying  the  requirements
    of the Rules.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has decided  that  removing  the  claimant
    would interfere with his private and family  life.   I  regard  that  as
    completely uncontroversial.  The claimant has been in the United Kingdom
    since September 2007.  In fairness to him it should be made  plain  that
    he has always had permission to be in the United Kingdom  and  requiring
    him to go to Pakistan against his wishes does interfere with his private
    and family life although I think I must also add the rider that it  does
    not interfere very much, by which I mean it is plainly  a  proportionate
    decision.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal  said  that  this  was  not  a  case  where  the
    claimant's immigration status was precarious.  This was clearly a nod to
    Section 117B(5) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    which requires that "little weight should be given  to  a  private  life
    established by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status
    is precarious".  The word "precarious" is not defined in the  Rules  but
    has been considered in the jurisprudence of the Tribunal particularly AM
    (s.117B (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) where it was  found  to  include
    any person whose status in the United Kingdom was less than  that  of  a
    citizen or a person with indefinite  leave.   The  point  is  that  such
    people are only able to remain with permission if a  further  successful
    application is made.  The claimant plainly had a precarious  status  and
    the judge was wrong to rule otherwise.

 9. It follows therefore that little weight should be given to  his  private
    life but even without the help of the section it is plain to me there is
    little weight that can be given to the private and family  life  alleged
    here. This is not a case where the claimant seeks  to  rely  on  a  life
    partner or a relationship with children or similar  relationships  which
    can, sometimes, very important in an Article 8 analysis.  He is simply a
    person who has remained in the United Kingdom ostensibly studying.

10.  I  understand  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  reasons  for   being
    sympathetic to the claimant.  The claimant gave convincing evidence that
    he had been let down badly by a college on an earlier occasion. If  that
    is right the claimant might conceivably have had a  remedy  against  the
    college. That is not something I have to determine but it  does  not  in
    any way affect the Secretary of State's decision.

11. It was open to the claimant to return to  Pakistan  and  then  apply  to
    return to the United Kingdom to resume his education if that is what  he
    wanted to do.  Indeed it still is but I cannot see on  any  analysis  of
    the evidence under the Rules or at all that the  circumstances  of  this
    case enable the claimant to stay when the rules say  that  he  does  not
    qualify.

12. The claimant refers to nothing in his evidence and  no  finding  of  the
    judge which would justify such a conclusion.

    Notice of Decision

13. It follows therefore that I set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which was based on an erroneous understanding of the law and  I
    substitute a decision  dismissing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's decision.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 January 2016                |

