
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45908/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th November 2015                |On 16th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Ms Esamine Sharpe
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Otchie, Counsel instructed by Calices
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Anstis promulgated  on  17th  June  2015,  in
    which he allowed the appeal of Ms Sharpe on Article  8  grounds  within
    the Immigration Rules.  Ms Sharpe's appeal had been against a  decision
    of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  28th  October  2014  refusing  her
    application for leave to remain and issuing directions for her  removal
    pursuant to  section  10  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth by a decision dated 4th September 2015.

Decision of Judge Anstis

 2. Judge Anstis noted that the Secretary of State was not  represented  at
    the hearing before him and that the evidence provided by Ms Sharpe  was
    unchallenged.  There were no issues of credibility in the  reasons  for
    refusal letter and as a result Judge Anstis accepted the evidence of Ms
    Sharpe and her  husband  Mr  Brown  to  be  credible  in  all  material
    respects.

 3. The judge set out Ms Sharpe's own history and then in  paragraph  9  of
    his decision found that Mr Brown was a British citizen born in  Jamaica
    on 26th March 1939.  The judge found that Mr Brown had lived and worked
    in the United Kingdom for the last fifty-four years  and  had  acquired
    British citizenship in 1964.  It was  found  that  he  had  friends  in
    Jamaica but no remaining close relatives, and that he  visited  Jamaica
    about every three or four years to stay for about two weeks at a  time.
    In this country he worked full-time and he has seven children,  six  of
    whom were adults but one of whom was still a minor, born  on  20th  May
    2000.  He had regular direct contact with his  minor  daughter,  albeit
    that she lived with her mother and not with Mr Brown.

 4. Having made his primary findings of fact,  Judge  Anstis  went  on  and
    directed himself to the relevant law.  He considered  paragraph  276ADE
    in respect of Ms Sharpe herself.  He concluded on that issue  that  she
    could not satisfy the Rule in her own right.

 5. The judge then went on to consider the case under  the  exception  EX.1
    and EX.2 within Appendix FM to the Rules.  He found that Mr Brown would
    face "very significant difficulties" in continuing his family life with
    Ms Sharpe back in Jamaica.  These very  significant  difficulties  were
    said to flow from the length of time  Mr  Brown  had  been  living  and
    working  in  this  country  and  the  presence  of  his  children   and
    grandchildren within the United Kingdom.  It was said by the judge that
    Mr Brown would be regarded as a foreigner if he went to live in Jamaica
    and that Jamaican society  had  developed  and  changed  so  as  to  be
    unrecognisable from that which Mr Brown would have known when  he  left
    many years ago.

 6. The judge then went on to conclude that even if  the  very  significant
    difficulties could be overcome if he went to  Jamaica  it  would  still
    impose "very serious hardship" upon Mr Brown and it was said that  this
    would arise primarily because it  would  involve  separation  from  his
    seven children and four grandchildren, all of whom live in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. As a result of the foregoing Judge Anstis allowed the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules and did not go on to consider  the  Article  8  claim
    outside of the Rules.





The hearing before me

 8. Ms Fijiwala sought to rely on  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  of
    appeal.  She referred me to the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 at paragraph  21.   Ms  Fijiwala  submitted
    that insurmountable obstacles imposed a high threshold and in this case
    the First-tier Judge had not applied the correct test and had  not  had
    regard to the fact that Ms Sharpe and her husband Mr Brown did not have
    a choice as to where they wanted to live.

 9.  Mr  Otchie  submitted  that  the  reasons  given  by  the  judge  were
    sufficient, there were correct self-directions as to the law, and  that
    the judge considered relevant factors and gave due weight to them.   He
    referred me to paragraph 23 of the Agyarko decision and to paragraph 18
    of the case  of  AB  (Jamaica)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2007] EWCA Civ 1302.

10. In response Ms Fijiwala submitted that the judge should have been aware
    of  the  Secretary  of  State's  guidance  as   to   the   meaning   of
    insurmountable obstacles.  Although she accepted that that guidance was
    not before Judge Anstis she noted that it was a document  that  was  in
    the public domain.

Decision on error of law

11. I conclude that there are no material errors of law in the decision  of
    Judge Anstis.

12. He was fully entitled to make the relevant findings  of  fact  that  he
    did, the credibility  of  Ms  Sharpe  and  Mr  Brown  not  having  been
    challenged by the Secretary of State at any  stage.   There  are  clear
    findings of primary fact made, particularly at paragraphs 8  and  9  of
    the decision.  In respect of the law Judge Anstis in my  view  directed
    himself impeccably, setting out the relevant provisions, in  particular
    EX.1 and EX.2  of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Rules  (the  suitability  and
    eligibility  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  having  been  accepted  as
    satisfied by the Respondent previously).

13. The judge then proceeded to consider to the relevant  questions  to  be
    asked when applying  EX.1  and  EX.2.   The  judge  took  into  account
    relevant factors and attributed to them the weight he deemed  fit.   In
    my view the  factors  accounted  for  were  all  relevant  and  nothing
    relevant was left out of the equation.  In particular,  the  judge  was
    fully entitled to have regard to,  and  to  place  whatever  weight  he
    deemed fit, upon Mr  Brown's  very  lengthy  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom (some fifty-four years) and the fact that he still had a  minor
    daughter in the United Kingdom with whom  he  had  regular  and  direct
    contact (putting to one side the existence of the six adult  children).
    This important factor  is  something  to  which  the  grounds  make  no
    reference.

14. The judge then quite properly went on to consider the  second  limb  of
    EX.1, namely whether or not the very significant difficulties could  be
    overcome, or if they would in any event cause  very  serious  hardship.
    The judge at paragraph 18 gave careful consideration  to  the  relevant
    questions and concluded that although the difficulties may possibly  be
    overcome it would nonetheless cause him  very  serious  hardship,  that
    being the applicable  test  under  EX.2.   The  judge  made  particular
    reference to the fact that going to live in Jamaica would  separate  Mr
    Brown from his seven children and four grandchildren, and on that basis
    he allowed the appeal under the Rules.

15. Turning to the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal. In my view  they
    amount  to  what  I  described  at  the  hearing  as  a  thinly  veiled
    irrationality challenge, and I quote from paragraph 3 of  the  grounds:
    "It is submitted on the facts of this case that the judge was wrong  in
    law to come to that conclusion" (i.e. the conclusion relating  to  EX.1
    and EX.2).  The contents of paragraphs 3 and indeed 4  of  the  grounds
    are in essence asserting that the conclusions reached by  Judge  Anstis
    were simply not open to him.  I have in mind the recent decision of the
    President in Greenwood (No. 2)  [2015]  UKUT  629  (IAC)  in  which  he
    reminded tribunals to keep a careful eye  out  for  such  irrationality
    challenges, and if they were in substance being raised, to  then  apply
    the elevated threshold appropriate in  such  cases.   In  my  view  the
    present case is just such an example: the  Secretary  of  State  is  in
    effect asserting that the judge's conclusions were perverse in light of
    the applicable law.  It is clear to me that  such  a  challenge  fails,
    given the correct legal direction by Judge Anstis, the primary findings
    of fact made and the fact that the weight attributable to the  relevant
    facts was a matter for that judge.

16. In the  alternative,  if  the  grounds  are  actually  to  be  properly
    classified  as  a  reasons  challenge  rather  than  an   irrationality
    challenge, I nonetheless conclude that there are no material errors  of
    law in that regard.  Adequate reasons were given within the context  of
    very clear and correct legal direction.  The judge has  not  sought  to
    conflate a reasonableness test with that of  insurmountable  obstacles,
    as there is nothing whatsoever to  suggest  that  he  was  applying  an
    impermissible lower threshold when reaching his conclusions  under  the
    Immigration Rules. The Secretary of State's challenge  has  in  reality
    been nothing more than a disagreement with a well-reasoned decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal.

17. I would add that the failure of the  judge  to  expressly  mention  the
    Respondent's guidance is immaterial. Quite  apart  from  the  fact  the
    guidance was not before the judge, and was not, as far as  I  can  see,
    specifically relied on by the Respondent (bearing in mind  her  absence
    at the hearing before the judge), Ms Fijiwala has not provided me  with
    any tenable submission as to how  the  document  could  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome. The guidance is what it says it is, and as I
    have made clear earlier, the judge directed himself correctly as to the
    law.

18. For all these reasons the Secretary of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore
dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 4 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date: 4 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
