
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45716/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th November 2015                |On 15th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                             burhan uddin ahmed
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Biggs instructed by Universal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge K Lester, promulgated on 28th May 2015,  dismissing
    his appeal against refusal to extend his leave and  to  remove  him  to
    Bangladesh.  Briefly the background is that the Appellant had  been  in
    this country as a student since October 2009 and had leave  until  30th
    January 2015.  He had married his wife, who is a  British  citizen,  on
    10th July 2014 and had applied on 30th July 2014 for further  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his family and private life.  At very nearly the
    same time as that application was made the Respondent made  a  decision
    to remove him on the basis that he  had  allegedly  used  deception  in
    obtaining a TOEIC (Test of  English  for  International  Communication)
    certificate through Eden College in Mile  End,  London  in  late  2012.
    Following judicial review proceedings the Respondent accepted that  the
    Appellant had an in-country right of  appeal.   The  application  as  a
    spouse was supported by  an  English  language  certificate  issued  by
    Trinity College, London  on  1st  July  2014  in  which  the  Appellant
    obtained a distinction.  The validity of that later certificate is  not
    impugned.

 2. At the hearing the judge had before  her  evidence  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State consisting of  copies  of  witness  statements  from
    employees of the Respondent, namely Peter Millington, Rebecca  Collings
    and Matthew Harold and she heard oral evidence from the Appellant.  Her
    findings are set out at paragraphs 27 to 47 of her decision.  She found
    that the Respondent had established that deception  had  been  used  in
    connection with a TOEIC certificate and that refusal under paragraph S-
    LTR.2.1. of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules  was  appropriate,  as
    was contended by the Respondent.  She concluded (at paragraph 39 of her
    decision) that the Secretary  of  State  had  established  that  "false
    information,  representations  or  documents  have  been  submitted  in
    relation to the application", which would normally lead to  refusal  on
    grounds of  suitability  under  S-LTR2.2.(a).  The  judge  went  on  to
    consider Article 8 ECHR having regard to paragraphs EX.1  and  EX.2  of
    Appendix FM and under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  In doing  so  she
    said that she bore in mind the best interests of the  Appellant's  son,
    who had been born on 6th March 2015, which were to be with his parents,
    particularly his mother.

 3. In the grounds of application it was contended that the judge  had  not
    applied the correct burden of proof, which was  on  the  Respondent  to
    show that the Appellant had  cheated,  that  she  had  failed  to  make
    rational,  adequate  or  adequately  reasoned  findings  and  that  the
    findings she made were not open to her on the  evidence  produced.   It
    was also said that  there  was  a  material  mistake  of  fact  as  the
    Appellant was now aware of a detailed expert report by Professor Philip
    Harrison produced on behalf of the National  Union  of  Students  which
    stated that it was almost  certain  that  the  set  of  verified  match
    results would contain  false  positive  errors.   With  regard  to  the
    application under Appendix FM it was contended that the Respondent  had
    relied upon paragraph S-LTR.2.2.(a) which referred to  false  documents
    being submitted in connection with "the application" but the  Appellant
    had relied on other evidence of his English proficiency, as  the  judge
    accepted.  That, it was said, was material as it had led the  judge  to
    consider the application under EX.1 and 2  when  it  should  have  been
    considered under the substantive paragraphs of Appendix FM.  Finally it
    was said that the judge had erred in her analysis  of  Article  8.   In
    particular it was said that she had failed to consider  the  importance
    of the wife's British citizenship and apply the  elements  set  out  at
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended.  The wife could not be expected to leave the UK as she  was  a
    British and an EU citizen.

 4. At the hearing Mr Biggs for the Appellant relied upon the grounds  upon
    which he briefly expanded.  He said with regard to the burden of  proof
    the Secretary of State had accepted that the burden was  upon  her  but
    the judge had not set that out explicitly.   The  allegation  made  was
    serious and was of great importance to the  Appellant.   He  had  given
    evidence in rebuttal.  It was just such a case where the application of
    the burden was highly relevant.

 5. He continued that there had been no adequate reasons  given  to  reject
    the Appellant's  evidence  as  the  judge  appeared  to  have  done  at
    paragraphs 38 and 39 of her decision.  There  had  been  no  engagement
    with that evidence or assessment of his credibility.  She had given  no
    reasoned basis as to why she had rejected it.   On that basis  he  said
    it was not open to the judge to find  that  the  burden  of  proof  was
    discharged.  The evidence on behalf of the Secretary of State had  been
    generic and even with the additional statement from Matthew  Harold  it
    could not be regarded as dispositive.  There was reference in the Upper
    Tribunal decision in R (on the application  of  Gazi)  v  SSHD  (ETS  -
    judicial review) IJR  [2015]  UKUT  327  (IAC)  as  to  the  inevitable
    incidence of false positive results.  The judge was required to come to
    the conclusion that the Appellant's evidence was false but she did  not
    reach that point.  She had before her his evidence and  also  the  test
    results showing that he had passed with distinction.  He accepted  that
    the report by Philip Harrison had not been before the  judge  but  that
    too referred to the incidence of false positives.

 6. Mr Biggs then briefly addressed paragraph S-LTR.2.2.(a) of Appendix  FM
    and the fact that the alleged deceit had to apply to  the  application,
    which was not the case in the Appellant's circumstances.   He  had  met
    the  other  requirements  of  the  Rules  and  the  judge  should  have
    considered the matter under the  substantive  provisions.   Finally  he
    relied on the submissions in the  Grounds  of  Appeal  with  regard  to
    Article 8.

 7. In response Mr Mills submitted that it was  difficult  to  sustain  the
    argument that the burden of proof was wrongly applied.  The  judge  had
    frequently referred to the Secretary of State  establishing  the  facts
    relied upon and had done so at paragraphs 20 and 24  of  the  decision.
    In her findings at paragraph 33 she referred to  the  conclusion  being
    "highly likely" and subsequently  to  the  Secretary  of  State  having
    produced the evidence necessary.

 8. With regard to the evidence itself it was a very  high  hurdle  to  say
    that it was not  open  to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  burden  was
    discharged.  He said that all the Appellant had put  forward  was  oral
    evidence and the results of the test taken two  years  later  than  the
    TOEIC test.  He accepted that the judge did not make  express  findings
    on the Appellant's evidence but said that she had inherently found that
    the Appellant's explanation was not satisfactory.  As  to  adequacy  of
    reasons the judge had  set  out  in  some  detail  her  reasoning.   At
    paragraph 33 of her  decision  she  stated  how  the  conclusions  were
    reached.  With regard to Professor Harrison's report, which  did  state
    that false positives could occur, he reminded me that the Secretary  of
    State was not required to prove to the criminal standard but rather  on
    the balance of probabilities. It was open to the judge to find  on  the
    evidence to find that the burden was discharged.  The  printout,  which
    was exhibited to the statement of Mr Harold, he said, was important  as
    the spreadsheet related to the Appellant himself.  The  judge  accepted
    that there was sufficient generic  evidence  and  the  spreadsheet  did
    relate specifically to the Appellant.  Her conclusion at paragraph  38,
    he said, was perfectly appropriate.

 9. He accepted that there was some merit in the point with  regard  to  S-
    LTR.2.2.(a)  which  specifically  referred  to  the  application  under
    consideration.  However he reminded me that sub-paragraph (b)  of  that
    section referred to non-disclosure of material facts  which  would,  he
    said, have led to the same conclusion.  It was  also  likely  that  the
    application would have been refused under S-LTR.1.6.  namely  that  the
    Appellant's presence was not conducive to the public good.

10. As to  Article  8  he  said  that  the  challenge  was  really  just  a
    disagreement.  Although Section 117B of  the  2002  Act  had  not  been
    referred to what mattered was substance rather  than  form.   The  fact
    that the Appellant spoke English and would not be  a  financial  burden
    did not reduce the public interest element, as was made clear in Forman
    (ss117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC).

11. Finally in response Mr Biggs  said  that  although  perversity  was  an
    extreme position there had to be adequate reasons for a conclusion  and
    that oral  evidence  and  a  new  certificate  was  the  only  evidence
    available to the Appellant and it was inappropriate to infer  that  his
    evidence was not found credible.  More evidence was required  from  the
    Secretary of State to displace  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence.   The
    burden of proof could not be implied.   With  regard  to  paragraph  S-
    LTR.2. of Appendix FM he  said  Mr  Mills  made  an  interesting  point
    concerning the possible application of sub-paragraph (b) but  that  had
    not been referred to in the refusal letter nor  even  in  the  Rule  24
    response which had been filed.

12. Having heard those submissions I reserved my decision which I now give.
     As to the burden of proof it would have removed doubt  had  the  judge
    stated explicitly that the burden was upon the Secretary of  State  but
    reading the decision as a whole I think it is apparent that that is the
    burden which she applied.  There was a  sufficiency  of  references  to
    such matters as the "Secretary of  State  establishing"  or  that  "the
    Secretary of State has produced" to show that was the burden which  she
    had in fact utilised.  I do not find a material error in that regard.

13. However there were other challenges which I found had more merit.   The
    judge set out the Appellant's response  to  the  charge  of  deceit  at
    paragraph 37 of her decision.  She went on to state as follows:

         "38. My own view is while the Respondent's  evidence  is  'generic'
             there would be little  alternative  in  a  situation  of  such
             widespread cheating.  The evidence does  describe  a  detailed
             and  rigorous  procedure  in  respect  of  each  test   taken,
             involving not only mechanical checking  but  checking  by  two
             separate  OTI  employees  on  two  different  occasions.   The
             Respondent's test was declared invalid and  not  questionable.
             He was thus not offered a free re-test.

         39.   I  conclude  therefore  that  the  Secretary  of  State   has
             established  that  'false   information   representations   or
             documents have been submitted in relation to the  application'
             this would lead  to  the  Appellant's  application  'normally'
             being refused on grounds of suitability."

14. It will be seen that the judge did not  give  reasons  as  to  why  she
    rejected the Appellant's evidence and in my view those  reasons  cannot
    be inferred.  It was made clear in the reported decision of MK (duty to
    give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) that:

         "If a Tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
         unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,  it  is
         necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to
         be supported by reasons.  A bare statement that a witness  was  not
         believed or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely  to
         satisfy the requirement to give reasons."

    The importance of that assessment is also made clear in Gazi, in  which
    it was found that a hearing before the  Tribunal  was  the  appropriate
    forum for resolution of such matters, rather than judicial review.  The
    President stated, at paragraph 36, of his judgment:

         "I consider it appropriate to highlight what this  judicial  review
         hearing  lacked:  there  was  no  examination-in-chief  or   cross-
         examination of the applicant or any witness on his behalf; nor  was
         there any live evidence from any witness on behalf of the Secretary
         of  State;  and  there  was  no  examination-in-chief   or   cross-
         examination of Dr Harrison or any other  expert  witness.   All  of
         these missing factors arise in a litigation context  in  which  the
         bona fides and character of the  applicant  are  important  issues.
         However there  was  no  opportunity  to  evaluate  the  applicant's
         demeanour or to assess his performance under cross-examination."

15. The judge's failure to make explicit findings upon the oral evidence of
    the Appellant in my view amounts to a material error of law  sufficient
    to require the decision to be set aside.   I  agree  that  to  reach  a
    finding of perversity is to cross a high  hurdle  which  would  not  be
    appropriate here; there was evidence from the  Secretary  of  State  on
    which the judge might rely but it  is  the  lack  of  findings  on  the
    Appellant's own answer to the allegations which undermines the decision
    reached.  As to the alleged material mistake of fact  it  is  the  case
    that the evidence of  Professor  Harrison  was  not  available  at  the
    hearing and the judge could not be expected to have judicial notice  of
    it.

16. I also found there was force  in  the  challenge  with  regard  to  the
    finding under paragraph S-LTR.2.2 of Appendix  FM.   Sub-paragraph  (a)
    refers   explicitly   to   the   submission   of   false   information,
    representations or documents in support of the application.   That  was
    the element relied upon by the Secretary of State.  However it was  the
    case that the Appellant had submitted with his application his new test
    certificate, which he had  passed  with  distinction  and  he  had  not
    therefore relied upon any earlier test certificate.  The judge accepted
    (at paragraph 42)  that  "Had  the  Appellant's  application  not  been
    refused under the suitability requirement, I have little doubt that  he
    would otherwise meet the requirements of Appendix FM."   The  Secretary
    of State had failed to  show  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of S-LTR.2.2(a).  Mr Mills submitted that in any event the
    Appellant would  have  failed  under  sub-paragraph  (b)  but  that  is
    speculative.  He also referred to paragraph 1.6 but  the  Secretary  of
    State had not sought to rely upon that.  It is the  case  that  if  the
    Appellant had succeeded under the suitability requirements there  would
    have been no need to go on to consider paragraph EX.1.  The judge erred
    in this regard also.

17. Finally it was said that there was a material error in  the  assessment
    under Article 8 ECHR, bearing in mind that  the  Appellant's  wife  and
    child were British.  The judge did refer to Section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (at paragraph 46) but she did  not
    refer to Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act.   Sub-Section  117B(6)  was
    potentially relevant as the Appellant's  child  was  British  and  that
    issue was not addressed.

18. I accordingly find that there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and that decision is set aside.   I
    had enquired of the representatives as to the appropriate course  if  I
    reached that conclusion.  Mr Biggs submitted that as there have been no
    findings upon the Appellant's evidence a fresh hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal was the appropriate course. Mr Mills did not  demur  from
    that view.  As fresh hearings need to be made upon  oral  evidence  and
    bearing in mind the further rights of appeal which may  be  relevant  I
    have decided to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  under  the
    provisions of Practice Statement 7.2(b) and Section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the
    Tribunal's Courts and Enforcement Act  2007,  in  accordance  with  the
    directions which follow.

Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  directions  for  its
reconsideration.

There was no application for an anonymity order and none is made.


Signed   Date 03 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

DIRECTIONS (SECTIONS 12(3)(a) AND 12(3)(b)  OF  THE  TRIBUNAL'S  COURTS  AND
ENFORCEMENT ACT 2007

    1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  with  no
         findings preserved and the appeal is to be heard afresh.

    2.    The  members  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  are  chosen  to
         reconsider the case should not include  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Lester.

    3.   The appropriate hearing centre is Taylor House.  The time estimate
         is two hours.  If an interpreter is  required  a  request  to  that
         effect must be made at least fourteen days before the hearing.

    4.   Any witness statements or other documents upon which either  party
         intends to rely must be served upon the Tribunal and upon the other
         party at least seven days before the hearing.


Signed        Date 03 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

