
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45419/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Oral determination given following   |On 24 August 2015                    |
|hearing on 7 July 2015               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
              DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PROFESSOR N M HILL QC


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                YEE CHOON LIM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    no appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent to this appeal, Mr Lim was the  original  appellant  and
    for ease of reference I will refer to him throughout this  decision  as
    "the claimant" and to the Secretary  of  State  who  was  the  original
    respondent as "the Secretary of State".

 2. The claimant is a national of Singapore who was  born  on  24  November
    1978.  On 18 December 2013 he was granted leave to enter as  a  Tier  2
    (General) worker but it is the Secretary of State's case  that  he  was
    subsequently made redundant.  For this reason when he  applied  to  re-
    enter under his existing visa on 19  November  2014  the  Secretary  of
    State refused him leave to enter at Heathrow Airport when  he  returned
    from  Iceland  on  the  grounds  that  there  had  been  a  change   in
    circumstances since he had been granted leave to remain in the UK.

 3. For the reasons which  follow  it  is  not  necessary  to  explore  the
    circumstances of this case beyond saying  that  the  claimant  appealed
    against this decision, his appeal was subsequently  considered  on  the
    papers by First-tier Tribunal Judge L Murray at Columbus House  Newport
    and in a determination prepared on 16 February 2015 and promulgated  on
    18 February 2015 the judge allowed his appeal.

 4. Unbeknown to the judge the claimant had in fact left the UK voluntarily
    on either 31 January 2015 or 1 February 2015 (it is not entirely  clear
    from the evidence which I have seen whether or not his flight left just
    before or after midnight on those dates).  Certainly,  however,  it  is
    clear that the claimant did in fact leave the country before his appeal
    had been determined.

 5. Pursuant to Section 104(4) (b)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 which was in force at  the  relevant  time,  an  appeal
    under Section 82(1) of this Act  is  to  be  treated  as  abandoned  in
    circumstances where an applicant has left the United Kingdom before his
    appeal has been determined.  As this claimant had done so,  his  appeal
    ought to have been treated as abandoned and  doubtless  had  the  judge
    been aware that the claimant had left the country, his appeal would not
    have been entertained.

 6. In  these  circumstances  we  are  satisfied  that  there  has  been  a
    procedural irregularity such that the decision must be set  aside.   We
    do not remake the decision but note that the appeal must be treated  as
    abandoned for the reasons already stated.

Decision

We set aside the determination of judge  Murray  on  grounds  of  procedural
irregularity,  because  the  claimant  had  left  the  UK   prior   to   the
determination of his appeal.

We  record  formally  that  the  claimant's  appeal  is  to  be  treated  as
abandoned.


Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 17 August 2015

