
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45018/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Bradford                             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th March 2015                             |On 22nd April 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              SHALINI DA'SILVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Wilson, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  Judges
    Bartlett and George made following a hearing at Taylor  House  on  29th
    October 2014.





Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of India  born  on  9th  May  1985.   On  3rd
    December 2012 she made an application for a derivative  residence  card
    in terms of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    but was refused on 21st October 2013.

 3. The judge found that the claimant had  established,  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that she was the  primary  carer  of  a  British  citizen
    child, but in order to be able  to  establish  a  derivative  right  of
    residence she was also required to show that the relevant  child  would
    be unable to reside in the UK or another  EEA  state  if  she  were  to
    leave. He was not so satisfied and dismissed the appeal under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

 4. The judge said that it was clear  from  the  refusal  letter  that  the
    claimant, in her original application, had made reference to her rights
    in terms of Article 8 and  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  against  the
    refusal decision raised detailed Article 8 claims.

 5. It is right to say that in the original letter written by Howe & Co  on
    11th October 2011 the representatives state:

         "We submit an application based on her roles as a primary carer for
         her British daughter Maria Theresa. In the alternative we  ask  our
         client application to be considered under Article 8 of the ECHR."

 6. The refusal letter acknowledges that the claimant  wishes  to  rely  on
    family or private life in the UK but states:

         "If you wish the Home Office to consider  an  application  on  this
         basis you must  make  a  separate  charged  application  using  the
         appropriate specified application form FLR(M)  for  the  five  year
         partner route or FLR(O) for  the  five  year  parent  or  ten  year
         partner or parent route or FLR(O) for the  ten  year  private  life
         route.  Since you have not made a valid application for  Article  8
         consideration has not been given as to whether  your  removal  from
         the UK would breach Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   Additionally  it  is
         pointed out that a decision not to  issue  a  derivative  residence
         card does not require you to leave the  UK  if  you  can  otherwise
         demonstrate that you have a right to reside under the Regulations."

 7. The letter then goes on to say:

         "As you  appear to have  no alternative basis of stay in the UK you
         should now make arrangements to  leave.   If  you  fail  to  do  so
         voluntarily your departure may be enforced."

 8. The judge recorded the Secretary of State's position as follows:

         "The respondent's approach in  this  regard  is  to  refer  to  the
         refusal letter advising the Appellant that if she wished  to  raise
         Article  8  of  the  1950  Convention  she  should  do  so  in  the
         appropriate  form  of  application.    It   is   the   respondent's
         representative's contention at  the  appeal  hearing  that  as  the
         appellant has been advised that she is entitled to make  a  further
         application and as there is no question of removal directions being
         issued - that whilst Article 8 may be  considered  at  this  appeal
         hearing it should only be considered in the limited light of  those
         submissions.  Namely that there are not only no removal  directions
         but also that a further application may be made."

 9.  The  judge  said  that  he  did  not   understand   the   respondent's
    representative to suggest that it would not be appropriate to  consider
    Article 8 outside the  Rules.  He  relied  on  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1402 and allowed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The grounds make no challenge to the judge's substantive  consideration
    of Article 8 but confine the submission as to  whether  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider Article 8 at all.

11. First, it was said that the judge failed to properly apply binding case
    law which it is said was misunderstood, but JM (Liberia) should in  any
    event be distinguished on its facts.

12. Second, the  judge  failed  to  resolve  a  conflict  in  binding  case
    authorities and should have been aware of  the  decision  in  Lamachane
    [2012] EWCA Civ 260 where the Court of Appeal held:

         "I  conclude  that  therefore  that  the   Secretary   of   State's
         contentions as to the effect of Section 85(2) are well-founded  and
         an appellant on whom no Section 129 notice has been served may  not
         raise before the Tribunal any ground for  the  grant  of  leave  to
         remain different from that which was the subject of the decision of
         the Secretary of State appealed against.  The answer to question  C
         above is  no."

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge P  J  White  on  5th  January
    2015.

14. The claimant served a detailed Rule 24 response.

15. First, the grounds of challenge now relied upon were not  submitted  to
    the judge on the Secretary of State's behalf.  It  was  argued  at  the
    hearing that although Article 8 could be considered by the panel, since
    there was no removal decision, the assessment of proportionality should
    be limited to whether Article 8 would be breached  by  the  refusal  to
    grant a derivative right of residence.

16. The claimant relies on JM (Liberia) which held that  an  applicant  who
    has been refused a variation of leave, with  the  consequence  that  he
    would become an overstayer here, is entitled to raise Article 8 grounds
    an approach  consistent  with  the  aims  of  the  appeals  legislation
    confirming that all relevant matters ought to be pursued at one hearing
    before the appellate court.

17. Second, there was no failure to resolve a conflict in  opinion  and  in
    any event Lamachane is distinguishable on the facts. In that  case  the
    appellant had been  give leave to enter as a student  and  remained  in
    the UK with periods of extended leave.  He applied for indefinite leave
    to remain on the grounds that he had at  least  ten  years'  continuous
    lawful residence in the UK.  The Secretary of State's refusal  did  not
    include a notice under Section 120 of the 2002 Act.  In his  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal the appellant in that case set  out  additional
    grounds making a formal request to remain in the UK as a student  under
    the Tier 4  points-based  system.   Lamachane  related  to  a  specific
    submission as to whether a Tier 4 application could be made in  a  case
    where no Section 120 notice had been served and the principle does  not
    extend to a blanket submission that human rights grounds  would  always
    be excluded.

Submissions

18. Mr Diwnycz accepted that no specific mention of Lamachane had been made
    by the Presenting Officer, since there was nothing in the note  of  the
    hearing which referred to it.  It was clear that the position taken  by
    the Presenting Officer was that there was  no  Article  8  interference
    since the decision under appeal was simply the refusal of  a  residence
    card.

19. Mr Wilson relied on his  Rule 24 response  and  his  skeleton  argument
    provided for this hearing and submitted that there was no error of  law
    in the judge's decision.

20. The court in JM (Liberia) held that in  interpreting  Section  84(1)(g)
    namely

         "... that removal of the Appellant from the UK  in  consequence  of
         the immigration decision ... would be unlawful under Section  6  of
         the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  as  being  incompatible   with   the
         Appellant's Convention rights"

    should be given a wider interpretation so as to  include  circumstances
    where removal may at least be an indirect consequence of the refusal to
    vary, not the narrower sense so that it referred only  to  an  imminent
    removal.  There was a direct reference in the  refusal  letter  to  the
    requirement that the claimant should now make arrangements to leave.

21. In his submission Lamachane had no bearing on the facts of this  appeal
    because it was concerned with  the  issue  of  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was bound to consider entirely new grounds i.e.  those  raised
    for the first time  at  the  appeal  stage  where  there  had  been  no
    determination by the Secretary of State.  In  this  case  the  claimant
    raised her rights in terms of Article 8 in the first instance upon  her
    application to vary her leave to remain in the UK.

Findings and Conclusions

22. Neither of the arguments put forward in the grounds were  made  to  the
    Immigration Judge.  The judge's attention  was  clearly  not  drawn  to
    Lamachane.

23. In the event of an alleged conflict of authority, it  is  difficult  to
    see how it could be an error of law for the judge to rely on one  line,
    to which he was referred, rather than that of another to which  he  was
    not.

24. In any event there would have been good reasons for him to  distinguish
    Lamachane on its facts since in this case it is absolutely  clear  that
    Article 8 was raised at the first available stage.

25. The question of whether JM (Liberia) properly applies to EEA cases  has
    yet to be resolved by the Upper Tribunal.   My  understanding  is  that
    there is to be a Presidential decision shortly.

26. On the one hand JM predates the coming into force of Appendix FM. There
    is now the ability  to  make  a  specific  application  for  Article  8
    consideration.

27. Moreover there is no question that a refusal to issue a residence card,
    in itself, puts an applicant at risk of remaining in the UK unlawfully.
    Indeed the claimant was invited to submit a further application if  she
    considered that she had a right to reside in the  UK  as  a  matter  of
    European law.

28. On the other, the existence of a procedure which enables a human rights
    claim to be made, and which requires payment of a fee, does not absolve
    the Tribunal from its duty to consider whether there could be a  breach
    of its obligations under the Human Rights Act.

29. Furthermore, the claimant was told that she should make arrangements to
    leave. Removal could properly therefore  be  said  to  be  an  indirect
    consequence of the decision.

30. She could therefore argue that her hypothetical  removal  could  breach
    her Article 8 human rights.  In JM (Liberia) the court said

         "The short but important position is that once a human rights point
         is properly before the AIT they are obliged to deal with  it.  That
         is consistent  with  the  general  jurisprudence  relating  to  the
         obligations of public bodies under the Human Rights Act  and  seems
         to me to be the proper result of the construction of  the  relevant
         provisions."

31. In the absence of clear guidance from the  Upper  Tribunal  I  conclude
    that it was open to the judge to apply JM (Liberia)  to  the  facts  of
    this case and to rely upon Section 84(1)(g) of the 2002 Act.

32. On that basis the Secretary of State has not established that the judge
    erred in law and his decision shall stand.

Decision

33. The Secretary of State's appeal  is  dismissed.  The  original  judge's
    decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 10th March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

