
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45146/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 July 2016                               |On 23 November 2016           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         OLIVER BASTAZINI DE MORAES
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Pulman, Counsel, instructed by Nabal Legal LLP
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I see no need for and do not make any order restricting  the  publication
of any details about this case.

2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of the  respondent,  a  citizen  of
Brazil, against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State  refusing  him  a
residence card as confirmation  of  his  right  to  reside  in  the  United
Kingdom.

3. At the risk of over-simplification he exercised his right to  be  in  the
United Kingdom as the husband of an EEA national exercising treaty  rights.
The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that he did meet the requirements  of
the rules and allowed the appeal.

4. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal (not drawn  by  Mr  Whitwell)
are misconceived and I adopt the criticism elegantly coined by Mr Whitwell.
 They conflate being a job seeker with one who was not seeking work but who
is registered as unemployed.

5. Mr Whitwell then applied to amend the  grounds  particularly  drawing  my
attention  to  paragraph  14  of  the  decision  where   the   judge   said
unequivocally "I am satisfied that for the short gap  between  January  and
July 2007 that the  appellant's  ex-wife  was  seeking  employment".   That
finding is essentially to  a  finding  that  the  appellant  satisfied  the
requirements of the Rules.

6. Mr Whitwell had not been able  to  find  any  evidence  to  support  that
contention and he invited me to accept an  application  to  permit  him  to
amend the grounds suggesting that that finding was irrational.

7. I declined to permit him to do that.  On the face of it  Mr  Whitwell  is
right in the  sense  that  I  cannot  find  anything  on  the  papers  that
unequivocally supports that finding.  However,  oral  evidence  was  given.
There are some notes in my papers which indicate that there might have been
some discussion on the point (I can put it no higher than that,  and  I  do
not) but neither Mr Whitwell nor Mr Pulman for the respondent were  present
at the First-tier hearing and I was left in the position of having  judge's
notes, which might have been illuminating, but no opportunity to check them
without a further adjournment.  The adjournment would  have  involved  cost
and I found that the cost would have been unfair to the respondent  because
it would have involved costs for him that were in no way his fault.

8. I also regard the proposition that  the  respondent's  wife  was  seeking
work to be inherently reasonable.  This is  based  on  the  fact  that  the
respondent's wife had always shown herself willing to work  and  had  shown
herself able to  get  work,  either  in  the  catering  industry  or  as  a
hairdresser.  It is therefore by no means unlikely  that  she  was  seeking
work. Indeed she had to support herself one way or  another  and  there  is
nothing in the papers to suggest  she  was  the  kind  of  person  who  had
accumulated vast sums in capital.  She is a person who would be expected to
be looking for work as she did on other occasions and I  do  not  find  the
judge's finding fanciful.

9. It is unlikely that a judge  would  have  acted  irrationally  and  given
these findings it did not seem to me fair to the respondent to  permit  the
Secretary of State to amend the grounds in support of  a  contention  which
had some theoretical justification but was not likely to be right and which
could not easily be checked.  Once I refused that application  Mr  Whitwell
had to concede that he could not challenge the  decision  and  I  therefore
dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

10. I apologise for the late promulgation of this decision. I  believe  that
I gave a binding extempore judgment. As far  as  I  am  aware,  no-one  has
chased me for a decision. I finalised the draft on the same afternoon  that
I realised it had not already been done.

Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 22 November 2016               |

