
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/45559/2014
                                                               IA/45566/2014
                                                               IA/45571/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th December 2015                |On 6th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            PAE (FIRST APPELLANT)
                           CDE (SECOND APPELLANT)
                            CME (THIRD APPELLANT)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss C Querton of Counsel instructed by Curling
Moore Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS





Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a decision of Judge Jackson of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated following a  hearing  on  18th  May
    2015.

 2. The Appellants are Nigerian citizens, the  First  Appellant  being  the
    mother of the Second and Third Appellants who were  both  born  in  May
    2008 and are therefore minors.

 3. The Appellants appealed against decisions made by the Respondent  dated
    10th November 2014 to revoke their existing EEA residence cards, and to
    refuse their applications to be  issued  new  EEA  residence  cards  as
    family  members  with  a  retained  right  of  residence  pursuant   to
    regulation  10(5)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the 2006 regulations).

 4. The Appellants had previously been issued with EEA residence  cards  on
    the basis that they were family members of an EEA  national  exercising
    treaty rights.  The First Appellant had married an EEA national on  9th
    June 2010.  At the time of the marriage the EEA national  was  working,
    but in November 2011 commenced studies and he was a student, completing
    his studies in June 2014, and his certificates  were  awarded  in  July
    2014.

 5. The First Appellant filed for divorce on 5th December 2013.  The decree
    nisi was made on 14th May 2014 and the  decree  absolute  on  2nd  July
    2014.

 6. The applications were refused on 10th November 2014, and the subsequent
    appeals were heard by the FTT on 18th May 2015.

 7. The FTT gave three reasons for dismissing the appeals with reference to
    the 2006 regulations.

 8. Firstly the FTT considered whether regulation 4(1)(d)(i) was  satisfied
    and whether the First Appellant's former spouse was a qualified  person
    by reason of being a student.  The FTT decided that the  relevant  date
    for consideration, was the date of divorce which  was  2nd  July  2014.
    The FTT decided that the EEA national was no longer a student  at  that
    date, because his course had been completed  on  19th  June  2014,  and
    although his certificates were not issued until 9th  July  2014,  after
    the date of divorce, the EEA national was not a student at  that  time,
    and therefore did not satisfy regulation 4(1)(d)(i).

 9. Secondly the FTT decided that regulation 4(1)(d)(ii) was not  satisfied
    because it had not been proved that the EEA national had  comprehensive
    sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom.

10. Thirdly regulation 4(1)(d)(iii) was not satisfied as it  had  not  been
    proved that sufficient resources were available at the date of  divorce
    on 2nd July 2014 to prove that the Appellants had sufficient  financial
    resources.

11. The FTT therefore dismissed the appeals under the 2006 regulations, but
    decided, in relation to Article 8 of the 1950  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) that it was appropriate to remit the
    case back to the Respondent to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the
    Second and Third Appellants pursuant to  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

12. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,
    contending that the FTT had erred in  its  consideration  of  the  2006
    regulations.  Permission to appeal was granted.

13. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT had  erred  in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Appellants' Submissions

14. Miss Querton relied upon her written skeleton argument and the case law
    referred to therein.

15. In brief summary it was contended that the FTT had erred in considering
    whether the First Appellant's former  spouse  was  a  qualified  person
    pursuant to the 2006 regulations at the date of divorce.  Reliance  was
    placed upon Singh and Others [2015] EUECJ C-218/14 which confirmed that
    the relevant date to be considered when  deciding  whether  individuals
    have retained the right of residence is the  date  of  commencement  of
    divorce proceedings rather than the date of the decree absolute.

16. Therefore it needed to be proved  that  the  First  Appellant's  former
    spouse was a qualified person on 5th December 2013 which  is  when  the
    divorce proceedings were initiated, rather than 2nd July 2014 when  the
    decree absolute was pronounced.  The evidence before the FTT  indicated
    that the First Appellant's former spouse was a student in December 2013
    as his course had not finished, and therefore he  satisfied  regulation
    4(1)(d)(i).

17. In relation to the issue of health insurance, it was contended that the
    FTT conclusion  that  the  EEA  national  did  not  have  comprehensive
    sickness insurance was against the weight of evidence.  Again, the  FTT
    had considered the wrong date, having considered 2nd July  2014  rather
    than 5th December 2013.  It was submitted that the FTT had been  unduly
    influenced by the fact that EEA national had taken out a new  insurance
    policy on 9th July 2014, but  this  did  not  mean  that  comprehensive
    sickness insurance cover was not in force in December 2013.

18. Thirdly it was contended that the FTT had erred in law when considering
    sufficiency of resources and had failed to take into account  extensive
    documentary evidence, and had again considered the position at 2nd July
    2014, rather than 5th December 2013.



The Respondent's Submissions

19. Mrs Sreeraman accepted that Singh was authority  to  confirm  that  the
    relevant date to be  considered  in  a  case  such  as  this,  was  the
    commencement of divorce proceedings rather than the conclusion.

20. Mrs Sreeaman's position was that Singh may be relevant in  relation  to
    Grounds 1 and 3 relied upon by the Appellants, but notwithstanding that
    decision, the FTT had not erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the  First
    Appellant's former spouse did not have comprehensive sickness insurance
    cover, and adequate reasons  for  reaching  that  conclusion  had  been
    given.  As there was no error of law on this point,  any  other  errors
    were immaterial, as the appeals could not  succeed  because  regulation
    4(1)(d)(ii) was not satisfied.

21. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons


22.  The  FTT  cannot  be  blamed  for  taking  as  a  relevant  date   for
    consideration,  the  date  of  termination  of  marriage.   Singh   was
    published after the FTT decision was promulgated.

23. As conceded on behalf of the Respondent, I find that Singh is authority
    to confirm that the relevant date to be considered  is  the  date  when
    divorce proceedings are  commenced.   In  this  case,  that  means  the
    relevant date is 5th December 2013 rather than 2nd July 2014.

24. I therefore conclude that the FTT  erred  in  considering  whether  the
    First Appellant's former spouse was a student as at 2nd July 2014,  and
    should have considered whether he was a student at 5th December 2013.

25. I also find that the FTT erred in law  in  considering  sufficiency  of
    resources at the time of  the  decree  absolute  instead  of  when  the
    divorce  proceedings  were  commenced.   The  FTT  based  its  decision
    (paragraph 30) on the fact that  "only  payslips  are  available  which
    cover the month of the divorce and it is not  clear  from  these  alone
    that the family had sufficient resources as at 2nd July 2014."

26. However I conclude that the above errors are not material  because  the
    FTT did not err in considering  the  issue  of  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance cover, and did not err in finding that regulation 4(1)(d)(ii)
    was not satisfied.

27. The FTT considered the evidence on this issue in  paragraph  19  noting
    the First Appellant's evidence that her former husband had a card which
    he used "when he was sick which looked like a credit card and  had  his
    name on it."  The FTT noted that the First  Appellant  had  not  really
    seen this card, and her former spouse had refused to give her the  card
    or a copy of it.

28. The FTT noted that the First  Appellant's  former  spouse  took  out  a
    separate health insurance policy from 9th July 2014, but this  did  not
    cover the required period.

29. The FTT found the  First  Appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness,  but
    notwithstanding that finding, concluded that there was no  evidence  of
    her former spouse having comprehensive health insurance at the date  of
    divorce.

30. According to Singh, the FTT erred in considering the  date  of  divorce
    and should have considered 5th December 2013 when  divorce  proceedings
    were instituted.  However this is not a material error, as the evidence
    considered by the FTT in relation to comprehensive sickness  insurance,
    covered December 2013 as well as July  2014.   There  was  insufficient
    evidence to prove that the First Appellant's  former  spouse  had  ever
    held comprehensive sickness insurance cover while he was a student.

31. The FTT noted that there was no evidence that the First  Appellant  had
    ever seen evidence of comprehensive sickness insurance  cover  held  by
    her former spouse, who was not registered with the NHS, and  there  was
    no evidence of the dates of validity of any European  health  insurance
    card.

32. I find that the conclusion of the FTT in paragraph 29 that it  had  not
    been proved on a balance of probabilities that  the  First  Appellant's
    former spouse had comprehensive sickness insurance, is a finding  based
    on the evidence produced before the FTT, and is a sustainable  finding,
    and that adequate reasons for that finding have been given.

33. Therefore these appeals cannot  succeed  with  reference  to  the  2006
    regulations.

34. There was no application to appeal the decision of  the  FTTto  'remit'
    the decision back to the  Respondent  for  consideration  of  the  best
    interests of the Second and Third Appellant.  So far  as  I  am  aware,
    there is no power in law  to  remit  back  to  the  Respondent.   If  a
    decision is not in accordance with  the  law,  the  FTT  could  make  a
    declaration to that effect, and the case would then remain  outstanding
    before the Respondent for a lawful decision to be made.

35. In this case the FTT was wrong in law to purport to remit the case back
    to the FTT for consideration of the  best  interests  of  the  children
    pursuant to Article 8 because no removal decision had been  made.   The
    position on this point was not clear when the FTT  made  its  decision,
    but has since been clarified in Amirteymour  [2015]  UKUT  00466  (IAC)
    which  confirms  that  where  no  notice  under  section  120  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 has been served and  where
    no EEA decision to remove has been made, an Appellant  cannot  bring  a
    human  rights  challenge  to  removal  in  an  appeal  under  the   EEA
    regulations.  The decision in Amirteymour  has  been  approved  by  the
    Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka) [2015] EWCA Civ 1233.

36. Miss Querton in fact confirmed that following  the  FTT  decision,  the
    Respondent had issued a new  reasons  for  refusal  letter  dated  11th
    December  2015  declining  to  consider  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 as no decision had been  taken  to
    remove the minor Appellants from the UK.

Notice of Decision

Although the FTT decision discloses errors of law, they  are  not  material,
and do not mean that the decision of the FTT must be set aside.

I do not set aside the FTT decision, and the appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  I make an  anonymity  order  of
my own volition pursuant  to  rule  14  of  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 because the Second and Third Appellants are minors.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 18th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals are dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 18th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
