
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45807/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 9th December 2015                     |                On 22nd December 2015|
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between


                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR ALEXANDER ANTWI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. This is a resumed hearing to consider a single issue, namely  whether
      or not Mr Antwi is in a durable relationship with  Ms  Lisa  Omorogbe
      ('the sponsor'), a citizen of Belgium.

The History of the appeal

   2. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal (Judge Fowell) allowing  the  appeal  of  Mr  Alexander
      Antwi ('the claimant') against a decision made  on  23  October  2014
      refusing  the  claimant's  application  for  a  residence   card   as
      confirmation of a right of residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
      European Community Law as a family member of a European Economic Area
      ('EEA') national exercising treaty rights.

   3. The application was rejected by the Secretary of State for  a  number
      of reasons.  The Secretary of State did not accept that the  marriage
      was a validly constituted marriage deciding that the claimant did not
      satisfy Regulation 7 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006 (as amended) (the 'EEA Regulations')  as  a  spouse.
      The Secretary of State also decided that the claimant and the sponsor
      were not in a durable relationship and therefore he did  not  qualify
      as an extended family member as defined in Regulation 8  of  the  EEA
      Regulations.

   4. The claimant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision
      of the Secretary of State.  In  a  determination  promulgated  on  25
      February 2015, the First-tier Tribunal allowed the claimant's  appeal
      on the basis that the proxy marriage was validly constituted in Ghana
      and  therefore  the  claimant  satisfied  Regulation  7  of  the  EEA
      Regulations.

   5. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  On  28  April  2015  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Brunnen granted permission to appeal.

   6. There was one principal ground of appeal. It  was  submitted  by  the
      Secretary of State that the Immigration Judge materially erred in law
      by failing to take into account the requirements set out in the  case
      of Kareem (proxy marriage - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC).

   7. A hearing of the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal was listed on 3 September 2015 before  me  in
      this Tribunal. The claimant  did  not  appear  at  that  hearing  and
      neither did his representative. An application for an adjournment had
      been made on the day  before  the  hearing  on  the  grounds  of  the
      claimant's ill health.  I decided at that hearing that it was in  the
      interests of justice to proceed in the absence of  the  claimant  and
      his representative to consider the error of law issue  regarding  the
      validity of the claimant's marriage and to re-make  the  decision  on
      that issue.  However, I decided that  it  was  in  the  interests  of
      justice to grant an adjournment but only with regard  to  whether  or
      not the claimant is in a durable relationship.  This  aspect  of  the
      appeal against the Secretary of State's decision was not  dealt  with
      by the First-tier Tribunal.



   8. I made my decision and provided my reasons in writing on the validity
      of the claimant's marriage on 11 September  2015.  The  parties  were
      provided with a copy of my decision which was that:


         'I have no evidence before me that according to the legal system in
         Belgium the claimant's marriage is a valid marriage.  The burden of
         proving that fact is on the claimant. The claimant  requested  that
         the First-tier Tribunal consider the  matters  on  the  papers.  No
         evidence was submitted,  in  relation  to  the  legal  position  in
         Belgium, to the First-tier Tribunal and none has been submitted  in
         relation to the appeal to this Tribunal  in  accordance  with  Rule
         15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.   No
         Rule 24 response was made to the Secretary of  State's  grounds  of
         appeal (which clearly set out this issue). As there is no  evidence
         of the validity of the marriage in Belgium I find that the claimant
         is not  to  be  treated  as  being  married  for  the  purposes  of
         Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations.


         However, that is not the end of the matter.  Regulation  8  of  the
         2006 Regulations regulates those persons who can be  considered  to
         be extended  family  members.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         consider this matter as the judge had  found  the  marriage  to  be
         valid. The Secretary of State, when making her  decision,  did  not
         consider that the claimant had  submitted  sufficient  evidence  to
         establish  that  the  sponsor  and  claimant  were  in  a   durable
         relationship.  In the interests of justice I do not consider that I
         can re-make the decision on this  matter  in  the  absence  of  the
         appellant and/or his representative.'


   9. Directions to the parties were also  given  including  the  following
      direction:



         'The appellant and sponsor should attend the next hearing - unless
         they attend it is very unlikely that in their absence there will be
         sufficient evidence to conclude that they are in a durable
         relationship'.



Attendance at the hearing on 9th December 2015

  10. The day before the hearing, at 18.55, the  claimant's  representative
      faxed a letter to the Upper Tribunal[1] which asked for the appeal to
      be decided on the documentary evidence which was  before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal. It was said in the  letter  that  'We  are  unable  to
      attend the hearing due to costs'. I proceeded to hear the  appeal  in
      the claimant and his representative's absence.

  11. The facts of the case are set out in my 11 September 2015 decision. I
      do not need to rehearse them.

  12. Regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations provides that: '

      'A person satisfies the condition in this paragraph if the person  is
      the partner of an EEA national (other than a civil partner)  and  can
      prove to the decision maker that he is in a durable relationship with
      the EEA national.'

Summary of the Submissions

  13. Mr Norton submitted that the claimant was in difficulties  given  the
      clear direction that in the absence of the attendance of the claimant
      and the sponsor it was very unlikely that there would be found to  be
      sufficient evidence that they were in a  durable  relationship.  They
      were on notice that the documentary evidence  was  insufficient.  The
      only limited  evidence  available  was  not  backed  up  by  anything
      further, e.g. no witness statements.

  14. I referred Mr Norton to the only two items of evidence in joint names
      that I had identified that may have  been  intended  to  support  the
      claim, namely a joint tenancy agreement for a double room in a shared
      house and a letter from Legal and General regarding  life  assurance.
      Mr Norton submitted that these were merely evidence of entering  into
      contractual agreements. More was needed to show that the parties were
      in a durable relationship. Mr Norton pointed  out  that  the  tenancy
      agreement was for a limited period of 12  months  expiring  in  March
      2015. No further evidence had been  submitted.  Mr  Norton  submitted
      that he had very little to respond to.

Decision and Reasons

  15.  There is scant evidence before me from which it  could  be  inferred
      that the claimant is in a durable relationship with the sponsor.  The
      claimant was advised that the evidence before the  Tribunal  was  not
      likely to be sufficient. The hearing  was  adjourned  to  enable  the
      claimant to attend and provide evidence of the relationship.  He  did
      not do so. The claimant has not discharged the burden of  proof  that
      is upon him to satisfy me that he is in a durable  relationship  with
      the sponsor.

Notice of Decision


  16. The claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to
      refuse to issue a residence permit is dismissed. The Secretary of
      State's decision stands.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 13 December 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw




-----------------------
[1] This letter was not brought to my attention until after I had proceeded
in the absence of the appellant to hear the appeal.

