
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45673/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 28 February 2014                           |On 18 December 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JAMES OKOH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss E Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Yerokun, Legal Representative from AA
Solicitors LLP

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The only immigration decision I have found in  this  case  is  dated  9
    November 2010 and is a decision to remove the respondent (herein  after
    "the claimant") as an illegal entrant.

 2. I have seen an "Appeals Processing Referral Sheet" signed by First-tier
    Tribunal Woolf dated 6 November 2013.  She has made a  manuscript  note
    in the following terms:

          "Appeal is not brought under  Reg  26  of  the  EEA  Regs  against
         removal.  FAX attach directions to reps and HO immediately."

    A manuscript line  is  drawn  under  that  phrase  and  then  the  note
continues:

         "After receiving faxed evidence and oral reps over the phone I find
         the appeal IN TIME.  With reference to Section 10 removal  decision
         - satisfied not received until 1/11/2013."

 3. On 28 February 2014 I gave directions requiring the parties to serve on
    the Tribunal the immigration decision  that  was  the  subject  of  the
    appeal.   By  facsimile  received  on  3  March  2014  the   claimant's
    solicitors sent a copy of the immigration  decision  dated  9  November
    2010 and notes of their dealings with First-tier Tribunal Judge  Woolf.
    They were able to satisfy her that neither they nor the  claimant  knew
    about the decision of 9 November 2010 until 31 October 2013 and so  the
    appeal against that decision was in fact made within the  allowed  time
    after the decision came to the attention of the claimant or treated  as
    if it were.

 4. The situation has been confused because after the removal decision  was
    made (but not notified to  the  claimant)  on  27  September  2011  the
    Secretary of State refused to issue the claimant a  residence  card  as
    the spouse of an EEA national.  That decision  clearly  was  appealable
    and was appealed and the appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mayall in a determination promulgated on 13 December 2011.   That
    appeal turned on whether the claimant had a reasonable explanation  for
    supporting his application with a passport  that  had  previously  been
    reported as lost or stolen and the judge resolved  that  issue  in  the
    Secretary of State's favour.  The  claimant  then  appealed  a  similar
    decision on 15 November 2012.  The appeal was dismissed by  Immigration
    Judge Omotosho in a determination  promulgated  on  15  February  2013.
    Judge Omotosho was not satisfied that the claimant's marriage was not a
    marriage of convenience and  therefore  was  not  satisfied  it  was  a
    qualifying marriage  for  the  purpose  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 5. It is against that background that the grounds of appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal in this appeal (IA/45673/2013)  have  to  be  understood.
    They refer to an EEA decision dated 30 October 2013 which decision  was
    certified.  They further refer to the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 and  then  raise  "specific  grounds  of  appeal
    against the EEA decision  dated  30/10/2013  and  immigration  decision
    dated 9/11/2010".  The grounds contend that it was wrong  to  say  that
    the claimant's marriage was not genuine and that  the  certificate  was
    unlawful "as lacking in the duty of fairness and adequate reasoning  as
    to the basis of the decision being made".

 6. The grounds also  raised  an  Article  8  claim  complaining  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  not  looked  at  the  evidence   about   the
    relationship between the claimant and his purported wife.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Baldwin was very  aware  of  the  history  of
    unsuccessful applications and the claimant's failure to prove that  his
    was not a marriage of convenience.   However, he had the benefit  of  a
    considerable raft of evidence before  him  including  medical  evidence
    about the claimant's wife's mental state, which  could  go  someway  to
    explaining unsatisfactory answers she gave to questions, and supporting
    evidence from two  ministers  of  religion  who  clearly  made  a  very
    favourable impression on Judge Baldwin.

 8. He said at paragraph 34:-

         "I find that the [claimant] has now proved his marriage is not  one
         of convenience and that they do  desperately  want  and  intend  to
         continue to live together and rebuild  their  lives  and  her  good
         health.  She has been here for fifteen years,  and  the  [claimant]
         for just over six years.  They have clearly  formed  a  significant
         life together and a close relationship with their Church  and  many
         friends here.  His wife does not know Nigeria  and  he,  I  accept,
         speaks little French.  The only country common to both of  them  is
         the  UK  and  there  is  no  suggestion  either  has  any  criminal
         convictions.  As a recovering alcoholic who has not relapsed she is
         clearly going to need all  the  support  she  can  get  from  close
         friends, those they know at their church and her husband.  This  is
         not going to be available to anything like the same extent if  they
         have to leave the UK and start all over again in a country  foreign
         to them. It would, I conclude, be disproportionate and unreasonable
         to expect either or both of them now  to  leave  the  UK  given  my
         Findings of Fact in relation to their marriage."

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then found that the claimant  had  proved
    his case, that the decision was "not in accordance with  the  law"  and
    the appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

10. The appellant, herein described as "the Secretary of State" was granted
    permission to appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish who said  in
    terms that there was "no merit in the assertion that Devaseelan was not
    applied" (see paragraphs 25 and 30) or that good reasons were not given
    for diverging from the previous determination (paragraph  30)  thereto.
    However, he gave the Secretary of State permission because the  judge's
    decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds paid no regard to the
    Immigration Rules.

11. Miss Everett, for the Secretary of State, struggled  to  criticise  the
    Judge Frankish's findings.  She did say that the judge made himself  an
    expert on matters relating to alcoholism but I do not find any merit in
    that criticism.  He was using his experience of life  (and  people  who
    sit in courts and practice law often develop considerable insights into
    other people's problems) when making his decision. There really can  be
    no objection to the lawfulness of  the  decision  that  the  claimant's
    marriage is not a marriage of convenience.

12. Were it not for the fact  that  the  claimant  is  married  to  an  EEA
    national I would see some merit in the criticism that the judge did not
    address his mind to the Immigration Rules before allowing the appeal on
    human rights grounds.  The fact that a marriage  is  genuine  does  not
    excuse a person from the requirements of immigration control and it  is
    normally right to consider whether that person  can  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and apply to return.   Given the support that the  judge  found
    that the claimant was giving to his wife, this may  have  been  a  case
    that should have been allowed as an exception under the Rules but it is
    not what the judge did.

13. This is an EEA case.  The claimant cannot be removed if he has a  right
    to be here as the wife of an EEA national.  The judge  has  found  that
    the reason for refusing him a residence permit is wrong,  at  least  at
    the time when the judge made the decision that he did.   This  claimant
    cannot be removed because, on the judge's finding, he is entitled to be
    in the United Kingdom.  It may have  been  helpful  if  the  judge  had
    followed through the consequences of his finding that the  decision  is
    not in accordance with the law but it seems to me quite clear that  the
    judge required the Secretary of State to look again at the decision  to
    remove given the findings  he  had  made  about  the  marriage  of  the
    claimant and his wife.

14. The consequence of Judge Frankish's decision is that the  Secretary  of
    State should decide what sort of leave, if  any,  should  be  given  in
    accordance with the judge's  findings.   Unless  there  is   a  massive
    change of circumstance since the case was decided last  year  it  would
    seem to me that the proper thing to do is recognise  his  right  to  be
    here as the husband of an EEA but I cannot make that decision.   It  is
    not mine to make and in any event all the information is not before  me
    and it cannot be expected to be before me.

15. I see no error in the finding that the decision of  the  respondent  is
    contrary to the law and I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 17 December 2014               |







