
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45698/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 16 December 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


                                   Between

                                   G.E.S.
              (Anonymity direction made by First-tier Tribunal)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms D. Revill of counsel, instructed by Peer & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

      1. The appellant, who is a citizen of Jamaica born on 31 October 1970,
         has been granted permission to appeal against the decision of First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Pedro who, by a decision promulgated on 2  June
         2015, dismissed his appeal against the respondent's decision,  made
         on 3 November 2014, to remove him from the United Kingdom, pursuant
         to s 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 having  refused  his
         human rights application founded upon rights protected by Article 8
         of the ECHR.

      2. The grounds upon which permission was sought and granted raise,  in
         particular, two  interesting  questions  of  law.  First,  where  a
         concession is made  by  the  appellant's  representative  that  the
         appellant cannot  succeed  under  the  immigration  rules,  and  so
         pursues no such argument before the  judge,  if  despite  that  the
         circumstances  do  disclose  a  clearly  arguable  case  that   the
         appellant meets the requirements of Appendix FM, is it an error  of
         law for the judge not to  address  that,  on  the  basis  of  being
         "Robinson Obvious" in accordance with the principles set out  in  R
         (Robinson) v SSHD [1997] EWCA Civ 3090? Secondly,  is  s117B(6)  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 a  self-contained,
         freestanding provision such that, if its requirements are met,  the
         appellant must succeed in his claim under Article 8, regardless  of
         any other public interest argument that may count against  him?  In
         this particular appeal the grounds assert also that the judge  fell
         into legal error by not having regard  to  s117B(6)  at  all,  even
         though it was plainly relevant.

      3. There is a further issue to be considered, it being said  that  the
         judge erred in failing to make specific findings  of  fact  as  to,
         first, whether the best interests of the children affected  by  the
         proposed removal of their father from the United  Kingdom  demanded
         continuing face to face contact with him, and  second,  his  actual
         future intentions in respect of  the  relationships  he  wished  to
         maintain with those children.

      4. It is helpful first to set out a summary  of  the  immigration  and
         litigation history concerning this appellant.

      5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 9 October  1999  and
         was admitted as a visitor for six months. He overstayed that  leave
         and has been present unlawfully ever since. He next came to  notice
         of immigration officers in July 2004 when he  was  sentenced  to  6
         weeks' imprisonment for an offence of driving whilst  disqualified.
         It is not apparent from the papers before me what was  the  earlier
         offence for which he  was  disqualified.  His  appeal  against  the
         removal decision that was served upon him was  dismissed  in  April
         2005.

      6. Despite that, the appellant remained in the United Kingdom  and  in
         October 2009 an application for leave to remain  as  the  unmarried
         partner of a person settled in the United Kingdom was refused. This
         was followed, in 2011, with further submissions being  advanced  on
         the appellant's behalf in support of his Article 8 claim and, those
         being refused, a threat of judicial review followed which  was  not
         in fact followed up. An  application  for  permission  to  bring  a
         judicial review of a further refusal  of  submissions  in  February
         2014 was withdrawn when agreement was secured  for  yet  a  further
         reconsideration which resulted in the refusal of the  human  rights
         claim that is under challenge in these proceedings.

      7. Thus, the appellant's Article  8  claim  has  been  considered  and
         refused on a number of occasions although, as Judge  Pedro  pointed
         out, the claim had changed as time went on  because  the  appellant
         has shown a propensity to move on from one relationship to another.
         The judge said:

             "I have also have  to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
             appellant's  personal   history   as   regards   relationships
             indicates a serial and persistent lack of  commitment  to  any
             relationship, whether it be with former partners  or  children
             ..."

         The judge set out  a  summary  of  the  various  relationships  the
         appellant had entered into with several women, including those that
         have produced children, and observed:

             "... past relationships have overlapped and that he has had no
             respect or commitment towards any of his relationships ..."

      8. As for the present state  of  the  appellant's  relationships,  for
         present purposes the following  brief  summary  will  suffice.  The
         judge accepted that the appellant enjoyed private and  family  life
         in the United Kingdom and that the decision under  challenge  would
         engage rights protected by Article 8. The appellant lived with  his
         present partner [JA] in circumstance such as to  amount  to  family
         life. She, however, would move with him to  Jamaica  should  he  be
         removed. He maintained contact with two  of  his  children  in  the
         United Kingdom, both of whom lived with their mothers with whom the
         appellant's relationships had ended. These two children were aged 7
         and 4 years old. The 7 year old lived some distance away so that he
         saw her less frequently, during school holidays only. The  findings
         made by the judge of this relationship are clear:

             "I find that the appellant's relationship with (the 7 year old
             child) amounts to no  more  than  sporadic  contact  and  that
             should the appellant  return  to  Jamaica  he  could  maintain
             contact with (the 7 year old child) through modern methods  of
             communication ... there is no evidence before me  to  indicate
             that the welfare of (the 7 year old child) would be harmed  by
             the appellant's removal from the United Kingdom ..."

         It is implicit in that finding that the judge accepted  that  there
         was a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship  but  that  its
         nature was such that it could be maintained without  face  to  face
         contact after the appellant had left the United Kingdom

      9. The appellant had more frequent contact  with  the  four  year  old
         daughter. The judge said that:

             "... she  recognises  the  appellant  as  her  father  and  he
             frequently takes her to  school  and  collects  her  from  the
             school ..."

         The judge noted that this was because the child's mother,  to  whom
         the appellant was unable to provide any financial  support,  worked
         during the week. The 4 year old child lived with her mother and her
         three half-sisters, aged 14, 16 and 21 and the father of those half-
         sisters also assisted  with  child  care  arrangements.  The  judge
         concluded:

             "I accept that (the 4 year old child) has  a  current  ongoing
             relationship of a  close  nature  with  the  appellant  during
             weekdays because of the current child care  arrangements  made
             between (the child's mother) and the appellant,  and  that  it
             may well upset (the 4 year old child) should the appellant  no
             longer be present in the United Kingdom."

         The judge noted that in February 2015 this  child  accompanied  her
         mother on a 3 week long visit to  Jamaica  when  they  stayed  with
         other relatives and so there was a possibility  of  future  visits.
         The judge had regard to the fact that the younger  child  would  be
         "upset" should the appellant be removed; the nature of his  present
         involvement with her, her  domestic  living  arrangements  and  the
         question of what was in her best interests, bearing  in  mind  what
         the judge referred to as the appellant's history of a  "serial  and
         persistent lack of commitment to any relationship, whether that  be
         with former partners or children" and concluded:

             "... (the 4 year old daughter) would continue to  reside  with
             her mother in the United Kingdom, as well as her  three  half-
             sisters, one of whom is an adult. Her living  and  educational
             arrangements would continue, and there is no  reason  why  the
             appellant would be unable to maintain contact with (her)  from
             Jamaica through modern methods of communication.  There  would
             also be the possibility of visits ...

             ...

             I recognise that I need to balance the public interest against
             the individual interests of the appellant, [JA]  (his  present
             partner) and the appellant's children.  I  take  into  account
             that the appellant does not meet the family, private  life  or
             any other provision of the Immigration Rules for leave  to  be
             granted to remain in the United Kingdom ..."

         Having addressed the best interests of the children in  the  United
         Kingdom and having recognised also  that  the  appellant's  private
         life was established while he was unlawfully present; that  he  has
         close family relatives, including adult children,  in  Jamaica  and
         that, having spent the first 29 years of his live in Jamaica  there
         would be no obstacle to re-integration, especially as  his  present
         partner said she would travel with him and, as a musician, he could
         seek employment, the judge concluded that the  appellant's  removal
         would  give  rise  to  no  impermissible  infringement  of   rights
         protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.

Was the claim under Appendix FM "Robinson obvious"?

     10. At the hearing before Judge Pedro the appellant was represented  by
         his solicitor, Mr Peer of Peer & Co, solicitors. The judge recorded
         that at the beginning of the hearing a concession was made that the
         appellant could not succeed  in  his  Article  8  claim  under  the
         immigration rules:

             "Mr Peer accepted that the appellant does not meet any of  the
             family or private life provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules
             under Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE. He confirmed  that  the
             appellant is seeking  to  rely  on  human  rights  grounds  in
             relation to Article 8 of the European Convention  outside  the
             Immigration Rules ..."

         That concession, made in clear and unambiguous terms, was  recorded
         by the judge in his  record  of  proceedings  and  Ms  Revill,  who
         appears as counsel for the appellant  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
         accepts that the concession in those terms  was  indeed  made.  She
         submits that, despite  that,  it  was  Robinson  obvious  that  the
         evidence disclosed a clear case under the immigration rules so that
         it was an error for the judge to fail to engage  with  that  issue.
         That was because, she submitted, the judge should have  appreciated
         that the appellant fell within EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  and  so  was
         entitled to the grant of leave to remain. For  the  respondent,  Mr
         Jarvis submits that the judge was plainly entitled to rely upon the
         concession made, and so not carry  out  any  assessment  under  the
         rules and he disputes also that there was, in any event, a  clearly
         arguable case under the rules.

     11. I have no doubt at all that Mr Jarvis is correct.

     12. As a matter of legal principle, the submission that, as  a  general
         proposition, a claim to meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules  in
         respect of a private or family life claim comes within the Robinson
         principle is not established where the judge goes  on  to  consider
         that claim outside the rules. Secondly, and in any event,  in  this
         particular case the appellant did not have access to  EX.1  and  so
         there was no evident possibility that his application  should  have
         succeeded under the rules.

     13. The rationale underpinning the Robinson principle is that  a  judge
         must have regard to an obvious Convention argument  not  raised  in
         the grounds of  appeal  because  to  ignore  it  and  so  deny  the
         appellant the relief sought and to which, as a matter  of  law,  he
         was entitled, might result in the United Kingdom being in breach of
         its  obligations  under  the  Convention.  Although  Robinson   was
         concerned with an asylum claim,  it  is  uncontroversial  that  the
         principle  now  extends  to  Convention  rights  under  the   ECHR.
         However, in this case the judge was asked to, and did, carry out  a
         full assessment of the claim under the ECHR outside the  rules  and
         so there was no question of the judge ignoring the  possibility  of
         an infringement of any Convention right.

     14. Quite apart from that, in the absence of a clear and obvious  error
         in making the concession, a judge will be entitled to rely  upon  a
         clear and unambiguous assertion by a legal representative  that  no
         argument was being pursued on any particular basis. Lord  Woolf  MR
         (as he then was) in Robinson said that the judge is:

             "... not required to engage in a search for new points ..."

         and

             "... he should feel under no obligation to prolong the hearing
             by asking the parties for submissions on points which they had
             not taken but which could properly be  categorised  as  merely
             "arguable" as opposed to "obvious".

         Here, we are concerned not with any point that had been  overlooked
         but with a line of argument  that  the  appellant's  solicitor  had
         specifically confirmed he would not be pursuing because,  he  said,
         the appellant did not meet the requirements of the rules. The judge
         was, in those circumstances, under no obligation to carry  out  any
         enquiry or investigation as to whether the appellant might  succeed
         under the rules, especially  as  he  was  to  embark  upon  a  full
         examination of the Article 8 claim outside the rules.

     15. In any event, this was not a case where it was evident,  let  alone
         obvious,  that  the  appellant  might  have  succeeded  under   the
         immigration rules. It is Ms Revill's submission that the  appellant
         should have succeeded under EX.1 of Appendix FM. EX.1 provides,  so
         far as is relevant, that it applies if the applicant has a  genuine
         and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child  in
         respect of whom it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to
         leave the United  Kingdom.   This  appellant  plainly  did  have  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and the
         judge accepted that there was "no question" that the  child  should
         be expected to leave the United Kingdom.  However,  the  difficulty
         for the appellant is that EX.1 was not open to him.

     16. The tortuous route to be  navigated  on  a  journey  through  these
         provisions of the immigration rules has attracted a  good  deal  of
         judicial comment. In order to secure leave to remain as  a  parent,
         the appellant must inter alia meet the requirements of R-LTRPT.1.1.
         which  includes  that  the  applicant  meets  the  requirements  of
         paragraphs E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4 and ELTRPT.3.1. E-LTRPT.2.3  provides as
         follows:

             'E-LTRP.2.3. Either -

               a) The applicant must have sole parental  responsibility  for
                  the child or the child normally lives with  the  applicant
                  and not their other parent (who is a  British  citizen  or
                  settled in the UK); or

               b) The applicant or carer with whom the child normally  lives
                  must be -

                   i) A British citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;

                  ii) Not the partner of the applicant  (which  includes  a
                      person who  has  been  in  a  relationship  with  the
                      applicant for less than two years prior to  the  date
                      of the application); and

                 iii) The applicant must not be eligible to apply for leave
                      to remain as a partner under this Appendix.'

         As the judge found as a fact that the appellant was currently in  a
         relationship with an individual  who  apparently  was  someone  who
         might be thought to  be  such  a  partner  as  contemplated  by  E-
         LTRP.2.3(b)(iii), it is hard to see how it was  arguable  that  the
         appellant could qualify for consideration  under  EX.1.  Ms  Revill
         tentatively advanced a submission that the partner referred to in E-
         LTRP.2.3.(b)(iii) had to be the same partner referred  to  in  (ii)
         but the indefinite article deployed  in  (iii)  compared  with  the
         definite article in (ii) makes that argument untenable.

     17. For these reasons this ground fails.

S117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     18. Before embarking upon a discussion of this statutory provision,  it
         is necessary to set out the whole of s117A and s117B:

             '117A Application of this Part

                  (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is
                  required to determine whether a decision made under the
                  Immigration Acts-

                      (a)   breaches a person's right to respect for
                      private and family life under Article 8, and

                      (b)   as a result would be unlawful under section 6
                      of the Human Rights Act 1998.

                  (2)  In considering the public interest question, the
                  court or tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                      (a)   in all cases, to the considerations listed in
                      section 117B, and

                      (b)   in cases concerning the deportation of foreign
                      criminals, to the considerations listed in section
                      117C.

                  (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question"
                  means the question of whether an interference with a
                  person's right to respect for private and family life is
                  justified under Article 8(2).

             117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in
             all cases

                  (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is
                  in the public interest.

                  (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in
                  the interests of the economic well-being of the United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom are able to speak English, because persons
                  who can speak English-

                      (a)   are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

                      (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

                  (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in
                  the interests of the economic well-being of the United
                  Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the
                  United Kingdom are financially independent, because such
                  persons- ?

                      (a)   are not a burden on taxpayers, and ?

                      (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

                  (4)  Little weight should be given to-

                      (a)   a private life, or ?

                      (b)   a relationship formed with a qualifying
                      partner, ? that is established by a person at a time
                      when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

                  (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life
                  established by a person at a time when the person's
                  immigration status is precarious.

                  (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to
                  deportation, the public interest does not require the
                  person's removal where-

                      (a)   the person has a genuine and subsisting
                      parental relationship with a qualifying child, and

                      (b)   it would not be reasonable to expect the child
                      to leave the United Kingdom.'

     19. In Treebhawon & ors (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) which
         was a Presidential panel decision, the question to be addressed was
         formulated as follows:

             "In a case where a Court or Tribunal decides that a person who
             is not liable to deportation  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             parental relationship with a qualifying child, as  defined  in
             Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,
             as amended, and it would not  be  reasonable  to  expect  such
             child to leave the United Kingdom, with the  result  that  the
             two conditions enshrined in section 117B(6) are satisfied,  is
             this determinative of the "public interest  question",  namely
             the issue of proportionality under Article 8(2) ECHR?"

         The Tribunal found that this question returned a  positive  answer.
         That was because s117B(6) unlike the other subsections of s117, was
         formulated in unqualified terms so that where its  conditions  were
         satisfied the public interest  does  not  require  removal  of  the
         person concerned; the legislation distinguished between  those  who
         were and  were  not  liable  to  deportation,  providing  differing
         requirements for each category when the effect upon a child was  in
         play, and because:

             "... there is a freestanding public interest in children being
             reared within a stable family unit."

         Pausing there, in the present case the circumstances are such  that
         the various family units to which  the  appellant  has  contributed
         cannot be considered stable because he has withdrawn from  each  of
         the family units in which he has produced children,  leaving  their
         composition to change after his departure.

     20. The conclusion of the Tribunal Treebhawon  is  found  at  paragraph
         20:

             "In  section  117B(6),   Parliament   has   prescribed   three
             conditions, namely:

                  (a)  the person concerned is not liable to deportation;

                  (b)  such person has a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, namely a person  who
                  is under the age of 18 and is a  British  citizen  or  has
                  lived in the United Kingdom for  a  continuous  period  of
                  seven years or more; and

                  (c)  it would not be reasonable to expect  the  qualifying
                  child to leave the United Kingdom.

             Within   this   discrete   regime,   the   statute   proclaims
             unequivocally that where these three conditions are  satisfied
             the public interest does not require the removal of the parent
             from the United Kingdom. Ambiguity there is none."

     21. For the appellant, Ms Revill submits that the approach set  out  in
         Treebhawon is the correct one and should be followed. As the  judge
         accepted both that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental  relationship  with,  certainly,  the  younger  child  and
         probably the elder as well and it was accepted that it would not be
         reasonable for either child to leave the United  Kingdom  that  was
         the end of the matter. S117B(6) is, she submitted, a self-contained
         stand-alone provision that was determinative not just of the public
         interest question but of the question to be addressed in respect of
         the Article 8 question as a whole so that, even if there are  other
         matters relied upon by the respondent in  articulating  the  public
         interest in removal, those cannot be considered because s117B(6) is
         determinative.

     22. Mr Jarvis submits that there is  room  for  a  different  view.  He
         submits, respectfully, that  the  conclusion  of  the  Tribunal  in
         Treebhawon, that s117B(6) comprised "a discrete  regime"  to  which
         all other public interests arguments  must  yield  is  not  correct
         because the requirement of s117A(2) was to the contrary effect.

Discussion:

     23. As we have seen, S117B(6) provides as follows:

             "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-

                  (a)  the person  has  a  genuine  and  subsiding  parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

                  (b)  it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                  leave the United Kingdom.

     24. It can be observed that just two questions are posed  by  s117B(6).
         Does the person have a genuine and subsisting relationship  with  a
         qualifying child and if so, would it be unreasonable to expect  the
         child to leave the United Kingdom? In the present appeal,  positive
         answers are returned to both questions, certainly in  the  case  of
         the 4 year old child. If the enquiry ended at that point  then  one
         would be left with the conclusion that the  public  interest  would
         not require the appellant's removal and so the appeal would fall to
         be allowed.

     25. However, the enquiry does not end at that point. That is made clear
         by s117A(2) which provides:

             "In considering the public interest  question,  the  court  of
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, and

                  (b)  ..."

         It is plain from that provision that the considerations set out  in
         s117B to which regard must be had do not comprise an exclusive list
         of considerations. If it were otherwise the words  "in  particular"
         would be otiose. It  is  also  clear  that  an  assessment  of  the
         considerations set out in s117B does not complete the assessment of
         the public interest question. That is because s117A(2) contemplates
         that the assessment of the public interest  question  will  include
         factors other than those set out in s117 and when having regard  to
         those, the assessment being carried out is still that of the public
         interest question.

     26. Put another way, s117B(6) is not a stand-alone provision so that  a
         person meeting its requirements establishes without more  that  the
         public  interest  does  not   require   removal.   That   is   made
         unambiguously clear by s117A(2). After all, if s117B(6) is taken to
         be determinative then there would be no room for regard to  be  had
         to the other considerations in s117B, as is mandated by s117A(2).

     27. It has to be remembered that the assessment being carried out  when
         applying s117A-D is that of a claim under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
         That demands an assessment of all  relevant  considerations.  S117B
         points to some of those considerations and, in so doing, reinforces
         the approach that has always been  required.  It  is  important  to
         recognise that an appeal does not succeed on the basis  of  meeting
         the requirements of s117B(6) but on the basis that there  has  been
         an infringement of the ECHR. The application of s117 does  no  more
         than illuminate the assessment of the Article 8  claim  during  the
         balancing exercise that is carried  out  when  making  findings  of
         proportionality.

     28. Put another way, a person who meets the  requirements  of  s117B(6)
         will have established that Article 8(1) rights are engaged and that
         some justification is required  for  the  interference  with  those
         rights arising from the decision under challenge, if that  decision
         is to be a lawful  one.  It  is  then  necessary  to  complete  the
         assessment of proportionality required by  Article  8(2).  In  this
         case, the judge did so after directing himself in terms  of  the  5
         step approach taken from R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.

     29. It may be that there is no more  to  be  said  about  an  appellant
         present without leave to remain than that  he  has  a  genuine  and
         subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying  child  whom  it
         would not be reasonable to expect to leave the United  Kingdom  and
         that continuing face to face contact was required to maintain  that
         relationship. If  that  were  the  case  then  it  will  have  been
         established that the public interest did not require  his  removal.
         However where  there  is  more  to  be  said  then  the  fact  that
         application  of  s117B(6)  delivers  an  answer  that  assists  the
         appellant is no more than a step along the path of  the  assessment
         and not it's final destination.

     30. So what does one take from the assessment under s117B(6) when it is
         accepted  that  its  requirements  are  met?  First,  it  must   be
         remembered that a person looking to s117B(6)  to  assist  with  his
         claim that  his  removal  will  bring  about  a  breach  of  rights
         protected by Article 8 will be a person present  without  leave  to
         remain.  Generally, it is  in  the  public  interest  that  persons
         present without leave to remain are not allowed  to  stay  and  are
         removed if they do not depart voluntarily. This is given effect  by
         s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. However, the effect  of
         s117B(6) is to recognise that in respect of  a  person  who  has  a
         genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  a  qualifying
         child which relationship could  not  be  maintained  by  the  child
         leaving the United Kingdom with the parent, the absence of leave to
         remain will not in itself mean that the  public  interest  requires
         the removal of the parent.

     31. That outcome is taken from s117B(6) to the final assessment of  the
         public interest question contemplated as being required by s117A(2)
         after the Tribunal has had regard to  each  of  the  considerations
         listed in s117B. At that stage, all the considerations relevant  to
         an assessment of the public interest in any particular case need to
         be factored in before the public interest question can be answered.
         In particular, an assessment will have to be made of  whether,  now
         that it has been established that it would be unreasonable for  the
         child to leave the United Kingdom, it would be  a  disproportionate
         interference, and so an infringement of rights of both  (or  either
         of) the parent and the child protected by Article 8 of the ECHR, if
         the child were to remain in the United Kingdom without  the  parent
         facing removal, that being, plainly, a relevant  consideration  not
         addressed within s117B(6).

     32. It is not implicit within s117B(6) itself that it is concerned only
         with those cases where, because the genuine and subsisting parental
         relationship can be maintained in the face of the parent's  removal
         only by the child accompanying him, so that if that  would  not  be
         reasonable, the public interest in removing the parent  must  yield
         to the best interests of the child. However, that  is  the  overall
         outcome when s117 is considered as a whole.  That  is  because  the
         fact that, because of  the  particular  circumstances,  it  is  not
         necessary for the child to leave the United  Kingdom  in  order  to
         maintain the parental relationship will be one of the factors to be
         taken into account in considering  the  public  interest  question,
         after having had regard, in particular, to the  considerations  set
         out in s117B.

     33. Section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
         is not determinative of a claim that a person's  removal  from  the
         United Kingdom will bring about an  impermissible  infringement  of
         rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR. It is  no  more  than  a
         statement of principle, if an important one, concerning the  public
         interest  question  that  is  to  be  addressed  as  part  of   the
         proportionality balance to be struck. That statement  of  principle
         is just one of the considerations set out in s117B to each of which
         regard must be had, before  completing  the  task  contemplated  by
         s117A.

     34. An example may help to illustrate the point: P, who is a person who
         requires leave to remain in the United Kingdom but does not have it
         and so faces removal, is the father of a child who lives  with  her
         mother in Dorset, but P is a fisherman working in the  seas  around
         the Hebrides, as he has for the last 5 years. Given the demands  of
         his work and the modest remuneration it produces P has been  unable
         to visit his  daughter  during  the  last  5  years  but  maintains
         frequent contact by Skype, telephone  calls  and  email  and  other
         social media messages.  Plainly, he has a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship but that would be maintained in precisely the
         same way should P be removed from the United Kingdom. It cannot  be
         the effect of s117B(6) that he is entitled to leave to remain  even
         though that is not necessary to  achieve  the  maintenance  of  the
         relationship with his daughter as that  would  be  an  outcome  not
         demanded by ECHR rights.

     35. The fact that such a question, concerning the effect upon the child
         should she remain in the United Kingdom without the  appellant,  is
         not  posed  specifically  in  respect  of  a  person   not   facing
         deportation, unlike those who do face deportation (as a consequence
         of s117C(5) ) does not mean that it is to be disregarded other than
         in respect of foreign criminals. Plainly, this is  a  consideration
         that will often lie at  the  very  heart  of  the  public  interest
         question that has to be addressed after commencing the  process  of
         doing so by addressing those considerations in s117B to  which,  in
         particular, regard must be had.

     36. As Mr Jarvis submitted, if it were otherwise the  result  would  be
         remarkable for reasons other than those disclosed  by  the  example
         given above which, if the approach  advocated  by  Ms  Revill  were
         correct, would demand that  leave  to  remain  be  granted  to  the
         Hebredian fisherman even though that were entirely  unnecessary  to
         achieve the objective sought. An application for leave to remain is
         decided by the respondent by reference to  the  immigration  rules.
         S117A-D  is  directed  at  courts  and  tribunals   and   not   the
         respondent's decision makers. If  the  interpretation  of  s117B(6)
         urged on behalf of the appellant were correct it would mean that an
         application that would be bound to succeed on appeal could properly
         be refused under the immigration rules. The immigration rules  were
         amended at the same time as  the  provisions  of  Part  5A  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  were  brought  into
         effect in order to  ensure  alignment.  If  the  intention  of  the
         legislature was to create in  s117B(6)  a  self-contained  discrete
         route to establishing rights under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  that
         excluded all other contrary considerations that would otherwise  be
         taken into account in striking  a  balance  between  the  competing
         interest in play, this would be an astonishing  oversight.  In  the
         explanatory notes published with the Immigration Act 2014, which of
         course amended the 2002 Act by inserting s117, we find this:

             "New Immigration Rules came into force on 9 July 2012. The Act
             gives the force  of  primary  legislation  to  the  principles
             reflected in those rules by requiring  a  court  or  tribunal,
             when determining whether a decisions is in breach of Article 8
             ECHR, to have regard to the public interest considerations  as
             set out in the Act."

     37. Further, if the approach urged on  behalf  of  the  appellant  were
         correct this would mean that the best interests of the  child  will
         have  become  the  primary  consideration  rather  than  a  primary
         consideration  such  as  to  displace  all  other  public  interest
         arguments, however cogent, in the case of a parent not  subject  to
         deportation. Primary legislation is certainly capable of  achieving
         such an outcome, if that is the legislative intention.  But  it  is
         not apparent that such was the legislative intention giving rise to
         s117B(6). It would be quite extraordinary if that  were  the  case,
         given that the effect would have been to set aside the  established
         and powerful line of authority, culminating in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD
         [2011]  UKSC  4  in  which  Lady  Hale  made  this  now    familiar
         observation at para 25:

             "Further, it is clear from the recent jurisprudence  that  the
             Strasbourg Court will expect  national  authorities  to  apply
             Article 3(1) of UNCRC and treat the best interests of a  child
             as "a primary consideration". Of course, despite the looseness
             with  which  these  terms  are  sometimes  used,  "a   primary
             consideration" is not the same as "the primary consideration",
             still less as "the paramount consideration"."

         Which was explained and reinforced by Lord Kerr at para 46:

             "It is a universal theme  of  the  various  international  and
             domestic instruments to which Lady Hale has referred that,  in
             reaching decisions that will affect  a  child,  a  primacy  of
             importance must be accorded to his or her best interests. This
             is not, it is agreed, a factor of limitless importance in  the
             sense that it will prevail over all other  considerations.  It
             is a factor, however, that must rank higher than any other. It
             is not merely one consideration that  weighs  in  the  balance
             alongside other competing factors. Where the best interests of
             the child clearly favour a certain course, that course  should
             be followed  unless  countervailing  reasons  of  considerable
             force displace them. It is not necessary to  express  this  in
             terms of a presumption but the primacy of  this  consideration
             needs to be made clear in emphatic terms. What  is  determined
             to be in a child's best interests should  customarily  dictate
             the outcome of cases such as the present,  therefore,  and  it
             will require considerations of substantial moment to permit  a
             different result."

     38. None of these  arguments  were  advanced  before  the  Tribunal  in
         Treebhawon and so we cannot know what would have been made of  them
         had they been considered. However, in my judgement  Mr  Jarvis  has
         presented an unanswerable argument which  requires  me  to  take  a
         different approach than did the Tribunal in Treebhawon.  Therefore,
         s117B  is  not  a  self-contained,  discrete  provision   that   is
         determinative of  the  public  interest  question,  let  alone  the
         broader question of whether there has been a  disproportionate  and
         so unlawful interference with rights protected by Article  8(1)  of
         the ECHR.  It is one of the considerations to which regard must  be
         had  in  making  that  assessment.  Certainly,  it  is  a  powerful
         consideration but not one that excludes consideration of any matter
         that  indicates  that  the  public  interest   does   require   the
         appellant's removal, despite that  not  being  required  simply  on
         account of the absence of leave to remain.

Error of law:

     39. For the reasons given above, it is clear that  the  judge  made  no
         error of law in failing to  carry  out  an  assessment  within  the
         immigration rules.

     40. Nor did the judge fail to have regard to the best interest  of  the
         children. He addressed that question specifically, as he made clear
         in the opening words of paragraph 12 of his decision. The impact of
         the appellant's deportation upon the children is a thread  that  is
         woven throughout the decision of the judge.

     41. The decision must be read as a whole and when it is it is  entirely
         clear what the judge found in respect  of  the  appellant's  future
         intentions in respect of the role he would play in the lives of his
         children. He had  a  clearly  established  history  of  withdrawing
         entirely  from  relationships  with  former  partners  as  well  as
         children and the judge was satisfied that the  involvement  of  the
         appellant in the lives of the two children with whom he  maintained
         contact was not particularly significant. In respect of the 7  year
         old child  the  level  of  contact  was  "sporadic"  and  could  be
         maintained by other means from Jamaica. There was more contact with
         the 4 year old but the judge  made  clear  that  was  more  in  the
         context of "child care arrangements" being a pragmatic  arrangement
         facilitating the working life of the child's mother. The judge made
         clear that the contact in place was because of  the  need  to  make
         those child care arrangements rather than any long term ambition on
         the appellant's part to play an active part in his daughter's life.

     42. I am satisfied also  that  although  the  judge  made  no  specific
         reference in his decision to s117B(6) he did not, on that  account,
         make an error of law.  It is plain from his decision  that  he  has
         carried out a careful assessment of the evidence and has identified
         all  that  spoke  in  the  appellant's  favour.  He  made  repeated
         reference to the need to have regard to the best  interest  of  the
         children and carried out a detailed  analysis  in  respect  of  the
         position of  both  of  the  children.  He  addressed  each  of  the
         component parts of s117B(6) even if he did not say he was doing  so
         with reference to that provision. He then took  those  findings  to
         his overall assessment of the Article 8  claim.  He  accepted  that
         there  was,  presently,   a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
         relationship with both children, although  that  was  a  relatively
         superficial one so far as the elder child  was  concerned  and  one
         driven by the pragmatism of child care arrangements in  respect  of
         the younger child.  The judge plainly did recognise that the public
         interest in removal of a person present  without  leave  to  remain
         could and should yield in the face of the  best  interests  of  the
         children should that be appropriate.  However, when  considered  in
         the round with the evidence as a whole, he reached for the  legally
         sufficient reasons provided a conclusion that was plainly  open  to
         him.

     43. Essentially, this was a fact based assessment for the judge to make
         and, having heard oral evidence, he was best placed to  do  so.  In
         Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ333 Carnwath LJ  (as  he  then  was)
         said this, at para 40:

             "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they
             are not made easier or better by excessive legal or linguistic
             analysis. It is of the nature of such judgments that different
             tribunals, without  illegality  or  irrationality,  may  reach
             different  conclusions  on  the  same  case  (as   is   indeed
             illustrated  by  Mr  Fountain's  decision  after  the   second
             hearing). The mere fact that one tribunal has reached what may
             seem an unusually generous view of the facts of  a  particular
             case does not mean that it has made an error of law, so as  to
             justify an appeal under  the  old  system,  or  an  order  for
             reconsideration  under  the  new.  Nor  does  it  create   any
             precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of  State's  right  to
             argue for a more restrictive approach on a similar case in the
             future. However, on the facts  of  the  particular  case,  the
             decision of the specialist tribunal should be respected."

         Here, it is not the case that the judge has  taken  what  might  be
         characterised as an unusually generous view of the facts,  but  the
         principle in play is the same one. The fact that this may not  have
         been the only outcome possible on the facts does not disclose  that
         the judge made an error of law and it has not been established that
         he did so for any other reason.

Summary of decision:

    First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro made no material error of law  and  his
    decision shall stand. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                               Signed   [pic]
                               Date:    18 December 2015


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Southern


