
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45189/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26th August 2014                           |On 28th August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                Faslat Salami
                        (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Reinhold, instructed by Ronik Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana, born on 7th July 1983 and she made
    an  application  on  21st  November  2012  for  a  residence  card   as
    confirmation of a right to reside in the UK on the basis of a  marriage
    or durable relationship with an Austrian  (EEA)  national  Hajj  Larry.
    This application was refused on 10th October 2013.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application  with  reference  to
    Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations.  The respondent alleged  that  the
    appellant had also failed to provide satisfactory evidence she  was  is
    in a durable relationship with  an  EEA  national  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 8.

 3. At the hearing Ms Rheinhold confirmed that the appellant was making  no
    appeal further to Article 8.

 4. The detailed refusal letter stated that the appellant had not  provided
    evidence to demonstrate she had registered her  customary  marriage  in
    accordance with the Customary Marriage and Divorce  (Registration)  Law
    1985.  Accordingly it was not legally recognised as valid in Ghana  and
    thus could not be accepted as valid in the UK.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sangha determined the matter on the papers on
    31st January 2014 and issued a determination  on  27th  February  2014
    allowing the appeal.   The  judge  accepted  that  there  was  a  valid
    customary marriage and the certificate of registration of marriage  was
    genuine.  However, following Kareem (Proxy marriages  EU  law)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 24 an error of law was found in that determination and  the
    matter was set down for a fresh hearing in the Upper Tribunal  allowing
    the appellant to submit further evidence in relation  to  Austrian  law
    and any further documentation.

The Hearing

 6. Ms Reinhold pointed to the email dated 17th July 2014  from an official
    in the Austrian Embassy in Ghana.  She submitted that  the  requirement
    was that the marriage was registered legally  and  the  marriage  which
    took place  on  11th  February  2012  was  indeed  registered  and  the
    subsequent letter from the Consular Section of the High  Commission  in
    London dated 17th December 2013 confirmed that the document provided by
    the appellant was signed by Bernard K B Quantson and that the competent
    authorities in Ghana had  confirmed  that  the  marriage  was  properly
    registered in accordance  with  the  Customary  Marriages  and  Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985.  The marriage was thus valid.

 7. In the alternative the documentation showed that the appellant and  her
    EEA sponsor Mr Hajj lived at the same address and that the Sky  utility
    bill indicated that they had lived at  the  same  address  since  2012.
    They were in a durable relationship.

 8. The appellant and Mr Hajj attended the hearing but there was no witness
    statement.  She confirmed that she had entered the  UK  in  2004  on  a
    visit visa which expired after six months.  Since  that  time  she  had
    stayed in the country illegally.

 9. Mr Avery submitted that there was  no  information  from  the  Austrian
    Embassy regarding proxy marriages.

Conclusions

10. It is clear from paragraph 22 of Kareem that the question to  be  asked
    is whether the appellant is the spouse of a qualified  person  for  the
    purposes of EU law and in  that  light  it  is  important  to  seek  to
    determine the legal system in which it is to be established whether the
    appellant was in a marital  relationship.   The  question  is  whether,
    according to Austrian law, as the sponsor in this case is Austrian, the
    marriage would be regarded as having been celebrated in Ghana or in the
    UK and thus whether a proxy or customary marriage will be recognised in
    Austria.

11. Kareem confirms that there must be proof of the  private  international
    law of the relevant  country,  in  this  case  Austria  as  to  whether
    marriages in the form of proxy marriages are valid  and  such  evidence
    will not only have to identify relevant legal provisions in that  other
    country (Austria) but identify how they operate in practice. The  legal
    system of the nationality  of  the  Union  citizen  governs  whether  a
    marriage has been contracted Kareem [18].

12. TA  and  Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316  (IAC)
    confirms that Following the decision in Kareem (proxy  marriages  -  EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 24, the determination of whether there  is  a  marital
    relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
    must always be examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State
    from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.

13. In this instance there was  no  evidence  of  the  relevant  (Austrian)
    foreign law. There was no examination of the law of  the  member  state
    with regards proxy marriages, Kareem [17].  The  appellant  produced  a
    fresh bundle of evidence under cover of a letter dated 18th August 2014
    but the email dated 17th July  2014  from  Hartmut  Branstatter  merely
    stated

           "customary marriage in Ghana is legal and valid"

           "...Christian marriages as well as Islamic marriages have to  be
           'legalised' by the registration office as customary marriage

           And the appendix from 14 July:

           "this kind of marriage has to be 'legalised'  with  an  official
           marriage at the AMA (Accra Metropolitan Assembly)

14. This did not identify the status or title or expertise of the author of
    the email,  the provisions of Austrian law and the relevant section  or
    whether marriages in the form of proxy marriages are valid.  In fact it
    appeared to indicate that there needed to be 'an official marriage'.  I
    am not persuaded that the requirements as  identified  in  Kareem  have
    been complied with. I do not accept that an email from  someone  merely
    stated to be an official person (albeit I accept he does appear to work
    for the Austrian Embassy) can satisfy the requirements for setting  out
    the provisions of Austrian law  in  respect  of  valid  marriages.   No
    mention of proxy marriages was made at all.

15. As this is a fundamental point and in line with  I find that the appeal
    must fail in respect of the validity of marriage  further  to  the  EEA
    Regulations.

16. I was asked to consider the matter with respect to  durability  of  the
    relationship. This issue was raised in the reasons for  refusal  letter
    from the respondent dated 10th October 2013.  Regulations 8(5)  of  the
    EEA Regulations 2006 establishes that extended family members encompass
    those who can show that they are in a durable relationship with an  EEA
    national.   The respondent stated that it would expect the appellant to
    demonstrate that she had been living here with her EEA national for  at
    least 2 years although I find that there is no bright line.

17. As  evidence  of  the  relationship  the  appellant  submitted  to  the
    respondent bank statements, 2 Sky  documents  and  3  photographs.   No
    further evidence was submitted to the Tribunal.  I can see  that  there
    was a Sky bill dated June 2012 but that is only one  document  to  date
    the appellant at Mr Hajj's property in 2012.  I can see that there  are
    bank statements from May 2013 but these do not  persuade  me  that  the
    appellant is in a durable relationship with  the  sponsor  merely  that
    they live at the same address.

18. Despite having given the appellant the opportunity of an adjournment no
    witness  statement  from  either  the  appellant  or  the  sponsor  was
    tendered.  I appreciate that they were at court together but in view of
    the sparsity of the evidence provided and the  time  available  to  the
    appellant to obtain such evidence I am not persuaded that they are in a
    relationship akin to marriage or one which fulfils the requirements.

19. Ms Rheinhold quoted  from  the  Secretary  of  State's  Guidance  notes
    regarding evidence to be provided and although I can accept  that  bank
    statements were provided which  located  both  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor at the same address in Prospect Hill in Walthamstow  there  was
    no evidence of them having any  joint  accounts  for  example  for  any
    utility.

20. I can accept that the appellant have purported to produce documentation
    of a marriage in Ghana but this merely reflects  a  series  of  letters
    from officials.  There  was  a  statutory  declaration  from  the  said
    parents of the appellant and sponsor but no further witness statements.
    Although the statutory declaration stated the address of the  appellant
    and sponsor as being Walthamstow without further supporting evidence  I
    am not persuaded that much weight can be  attached  to  that  document.
    There was no other independent information about the deponents  of  the
    statutory declarations made on 18th May 2013 and   25th  November  2013
    save that they were the claimed parents of the appellant  and  sponsor.
    A documentary trail of confirmation of signatures of officials in Ghana
    does not shed further light on  who  made  those  declarations  or  the
    process of identifying those deponents.





21. The dearth of evidence and the nature of evidence produced overall does
    not persuade me that there is a durable relationship for  the  purposes
    of the EEA Regulations.

Order

The appeal of Ms Salami is dismissed

Signed                                             Date 26th August  2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington





