
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/45075/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 22 June 2016                       |On 11 August 2016                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                          oluseyi ayodeji daropale
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Walsh, instructed by OA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke and Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting
                    Officers


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national  of  Nigeria  born  on  4  July  1976.  She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  respondent's  decision
    of 3 November 2014 refusing to  vary  her  leave  to  remain  -  having
    applied for an extension of leave as a spouse of a person  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom. On the same date the respondent  made  a
    decision to  remove  the  appellant  pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("2002 Act"),  a  decision
    which is also the subject of appeal.




 2. By way of an amended notice of appeal dated 8  June  2015,  (this  also
    being a statement of additional grounds made in response  to  a  notice
    given  by  the  SSHD  pursuant  to  section  120  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002), the appellant raised  for  the  first
    time a  claim  to  indefinite  leave  to  remain  based  on  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence in the United Kingdom - the 10 year  period
    not having (even potentially) been accrued until after the  instigation
    of the appeal.




 3. It is this claim that became the main focus of the  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. The FtT (Designated Judge Manuell)  dismissed  the
    appellant's  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  5  August  2015.
    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Designated
    Judge Zucker and, in a decision issued on 1 April 2016, I set aside the
    decision of the FtT and directed that the decision on the appeal  would
    be re-made by the Upper Tribunal. This could not be  completed  on  the
    same date because I acceded to a request for an adjournment  to  enable
    both parties to gather further evidence.




Underlying factual matrix




 4. The appellant lawfully entered the United Kingdom as a  student  on  21
    September 2004,  with  leave  conferred  until  31  October  2005.  She
    thereafter applied for leave, in time, on successive occasions  -  each
    application being granted. Of importance to this decision is that leave
    was, on one occasion, conferred on the appellant until 27 July 2009.




 5. On that same date the appellant applied for a further extension of  her
    leave - as a dependent of her husband, who had at the same time made an
    application for leave as a Tier  1  Migrant.  However,  both  of  these
    applications were refused by way of decisions made on 26  August  2009.
    The appellant and her husband brought appeals against  these  decisions
    to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal. The appeals were  dismissed  by
    Judge Braybrook in a composite determination promulgated on 5  November
    2009. The papers before me also disclose that a subsequent  application
    for reconsideration of Judge Braybrook's decision was refused by Senior
    Immigration Judge Latter on 25 November 2009.




 6. What then happened forms the centrepiece of  the  dispute  between  the
    parties. It is the Secretary of State's case, at least according to the
    chronology that appears in her bundle, that the  appellant's  (and  her
    husband's) appeal  rights  were  exhausted  on  8  December  2009.  The
    appellant, however, asserts that she  and  her  husband  made  in  time
    applications  to  "review"  Judge  Latter's  decision,  which   further
    extended their leave at  that  time  pursuant  to  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.




 7. The above factual dispute is of significance because on 30  March  2010
    (at a time when on the appellant's case her  'review  application'  had
    yet to be determined) the appellant made an application  for  leave  as
    the spouse of a Tier 1Migrant. This application was granted, with leave
    being conferred until 15 April 2013. On 11  April  2013  the  appellant
    made a further application for leave, this time  as  the  spouse  of  a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom. This was refused on 4
    June 2013. The appellant  appealed  this  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, her appeal again being joined to an  appeal  brought  by  her
    husband.




 8. Both appeals were heard on  the  same  occasion  by  Immigration  Judge
    Shamash. It is of significance  that:  (i)  the  appellant's  husband's
    claim before Judge Shamash was  that  he  had  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom lawfully for 10 continuous years; and, (ii) the  foundation  of
    the SSHD's case was that the appellant's husband had been without leave
    to remain between 9 December 2009 and 14 April  2010;  a  period  which
    mirrors exactly the period in dispute in the instant appeal.




 9. For reasons which will become apparent I now  set  out  at  length  the
    conclusions and findings of Judge Shamash:




         "[8] The substantive issue relates to the  appellant's  application
         under paragraph 276B of the immigration rules for leave  to  remain
         in United Kingdom on the  ground  of  10  years  continuous  lawful
         residence in the United Kingdom.




         [9] The respondent contends that the first  appellant  was  without
         leave to remain in the United Kingdom between 9 December  2009  and
         14 April 2010 when he was granted further leave to remain as a Tier
         1 (General) Migrant.




         [10] At the beginning of the hearing, Mr Dutton telephoned a senior
         caseworker (Ms Selina Jones), who stated  that  she  believes  that
         there was valid 3C leave between 9 December 2009 and 14 April 2010.
         She stated that according to the case note made  when  the  further
         leave grant of leave to remain in United Kingdom was granted on  15
         April 2010 the note indicates that the  caseworker  took  the  view
         that the first appellant met the requirements as a Tier 1 (General)
         Migrant because there was valid leave at the date of application on
         30 March 2010.




         [11] Mr Dutton accepted that on the face of the papers the decision
         was not in accordance with the law and would need  to  be  properly
         reviewed by a senior caseworker on the single issue of  whether  or
         not there was existing leave at the point of application.




         [12] It was accepted by the respondent that if there was  leave  in
         this period,  the  first  appellant  would  be  able  to  meet  the
         requirements of 10 years lawful residence. In the circumstances, it
         was agreed between the parties that it  would  be  quite  wrong  to
         consider the article 8 ECHtR issues.




         Decision




         [13] I therefore remit this case back to the respondent as  not  in
         accordance with the law at the joint request of  those  acting  for
         the respondent and the appellants.




         [14] Appeal allowed as not in accordance with the law."




10. Bringing  the  chronology  full  circle,  the  SSHD  made  the  further
    decisions on 3 November 2014  identified  in  paragraph  1  above.  The
    appellant appealed these decisions to the First-tier Tribunal  and,  as
    identified above, the appeal was dismissed on all grounds by Designated
    Judge Manuell in a decision promulgated on 5 August 2015.




Reasons for setting aside FtT's decision




11. For the sake of convenience, I  repeat  verbatim  herein  the  material
    paragraphs from my decision of 1 April 2016.




         "11. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  take
         issue both with  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  conclusions  made  in
         relation to paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules and those  made
         in relation to article 8 ECHR. Permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal was granted by Designated Judge Zucker in a decision of 10
         December 2015,  the  most  pertinent  paragraph  of  that  decision
         reading as follows:




            "Judge Manuell dealt with the matter [section 3C] at  paragraph
            19 of his Decision and Reasons but it is at least arguable that
            the determination of judge Shamash evidences a concession  made
            by the respondent and that it was because  of  that  concession
            (arguably accepted by judge  Shamash  as  a  fact)  that  judge
            Shamash allowed the appeal on the basis that was done."




         Discussion




     12.  Paragraph 276B of the Rules, inter alia, requires an applicant  to
         demonstrate that "he has had at least 10  years  continuous  lawful
         residence in the United Kingdom" (paragraph 276B(i)(a)).




     13.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded as follows in  relation  to  the
         appellant's claim that she had lived lawfully  in  the  UK  for  at
         least 10 years continuously:




            "[19] First-tier Tribunal judge Shamash reached no  finding  on
            the  continuous  lawful  leave  issue  in   his   determination
            promulgated on 27 May 2014. He was dealing with  the  issue  of
            whether or not there was a right of appeal to the  tribunal  at
            all. He applied Basnet (validity of application  -  respondent)
            [2012]  UKUT  00113  (IAC)  and  found  that  there  was.   The
            substantive long lawful continuous residence issues remained to
            be determined, as it was accepted  by  both  parties  that  the
            decision under appeal before judge Shamash was not  reached  in
            accordance  with  the  law:  see   [10]   and   [11]   of   his
            determination.




            [20] The tribunal finds that the appellants  3C  leave  expired
            (at latest) on 11 December 2009, that being the date  on  which
            the time limit expired for appealing to  the  Court  of  Appeal
            from  the  Asylum  Immigration  Tribunal,  i.e.,  from   Senior
            Immigration Judge Latter's refusal on 25 November 2009 to order
            reconsideration of the  dismissal  of  Mr  Daropale's  and  the
            appellant's appeals  by  Immigration  Judge  Braybrook  in  her
            determination promulgated on  5  November  2009.  The  tribunal
            refers to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
            2005, rules 34, 35(1)(b) and 57(1)(b). Rather than appealing to
            the Court of Appeal, however, Mr  Daropale  and  the  appellant
            sought judicial review of  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Latter's
            decision, an application which was  later  withdrawn.  Although
            that procedural  option  was  available,  it  was  outside  the
            statutory appeal framework. That meant that the judicial review
            application was not a pending appeal (or an  appeal  which  had
            not been  "finally  determined")  within  section  104  of  the
            Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002.   A   fresh
            application was not lodged until 30  March  2010.  The  gap  in
            lawful leave was from 11 December 2009 until 15 April 2010, far
            in excess of the 28 day  grace  period  set  out  in  paragraph
            276B(v)."




     14.  The grounds of challenge in relation to this aspect of  the  FtT's
         decision can be summarised thus:




         i) The issue of whether the appellant had lawful leave  between  9
            December 2009 and 14 April 2010 had already been determined  by
            the Tribunal, in the decision of Judge Shamash of 27 May  2014.
            The doctrine of res judicata applies and it  was  not  open  to
            Judge Manuell to reopen this issue;

        ii) In the alternative, Judge Manuell erred in its conclusion  that
            the  appellant  did  not  have  section  3C  leave  during  the
            aforementioned  period,   mis-characterising   the   appellants
            application  for  reconsideration  to  the  High  Court  as  an
            application for judicial review;

       iii) In the further alternative, Judge Manuell  failed  to  consider
            all relevant evidence when determining the issue of whether the
            appellant had section 3C leave between 9 December 2009  and  14
            April 2014.




     15.  The first ground can be swiftly disposed of.  The doctrine of  res
         judicata does not apply in the instant scenario. This is so for the
         same reasons I identified in the  reported  decision  of  Mubu  and
         others (immigration appeals  -  res  judicata)  [2012]  UKUT  00398
         (IAC); the headnote to which reads:




            "The principle of res judicata does not operate in  immigration
         appeals.




            The guidelines set out in Devaseelan  [2002]  UKAIT  00702  are
            always to be applied to the determination of a  factual  issue,
            the dispute as  to  which  has  already  been  the  subject  of
            judicial  determination  in  an  appeal  against   an   earlier
            immigration decision involving the same  parties.  This  is  so
            whether the finding in the early determination was  in  favour,
            or against, the Secretary of State."




     16.  In any event, I agree with Mr Clarke that Judge  Shamash  did  not
         make a finding of fact that the  appellant,  or  her  husband,  had
         leave between 9 December 2009 and 14 April 2010. Nor  do  I  accept
         that the SSHD made a concession to this effect.




     17.  A careful analysis of paragraphs 10  and  11  of  Judge  Shamash's
         decision  discloses  that  although  the  Presenting  Officer   had
         received information from a senior caseworker to  the  effect  that
         she believed the appellant to have had  section  3C  leave  at  the
         relevant time, it was the Presenting Officer's  position  that  the
         respondent wanted a further  opportunity  to  review  the  file  in
         relation to this issue.




     18.  That this was Judge Shamash's understanding of the position is re-
         enforced by two further features of the decision. First, the use of
         the word 'if' in paragraph 12 thereof countenances the  possibility
         of the Secretary of State not  accepting  that  the  appellant  had
         leave to remain at the relevant time. Second, if the judge accepted
         that the appellant had section 3C leave between 9 December 2009 and
         14 April 2010 then there is no obvious reason disclosed on the face
         of his decision as to why  he  remitted  the  matter  back  to  the
         Secretary of State, rather  than  simply  determining  for  himself
         whether  the  appellant's  appeal  should  be  allowed  under   the
         Immigration Rules on the basis put forward.




     19.  Turning to the second and third grounds, it is appropriate to deal
         with these together.




     20.  I start by observing that in paragraph 20 of  his  decision  Judge
         Manuell plainly misdirected himself as to the  relevant  procedural
         regime that was in place in the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  in
         2009. The postulation therein that the appellant could have brought
         an appeal to the Court of Appeal against Senior  Immigration  Judge
         Latter's decision of 25 November 2009 refusing  reconsideration  is
         incorrect. There was no appeal right to the Court of Appeal against
         Judge Latter's decision, but rather the appellant and  her  husband
         had available to them the opportunity, within 5 days of receipt  of
         Judge   latter's   decision,   to   renew   the   application   for
         reconsideration to the High Court pursuant to s.103A  of  the  2002
         Act and paragraph 30 of  Sch.  2  to  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
         (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.




     21.  If the appellant had availed herself of this opportunity then  her
         appeal before  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  would  have
         remained 'pending'  until  such  application  had  been  determined
         (s.104(1) and 104(2)(a) of the 2002 Act), and her '3C leave'  would
         also have been extended for the  same  period  (s.3C(2)(c)  of  the
         Immigration Act 1971).  Judge  Manuell's  misdirection  as  to  the
         procedural regime in place at the time of Judge  Latter's  decision
         led  to  him  failing  to  countenance  the  possibility  that  the
         subsequent application  to  the  High  Court  referred  to  by  the
         appellant in her evidence was in fact  an  application  capable  of
         extending her s3C leave.




     22.  It cannot be excluded that this  failure  materially  impacted  on
         Judge Manuell's conclusion that the appellant lodged an application
         for judicial review of Judge Latter's  decision  (which  would  not
         have led to the continuation of the appellant's s.3C leave), rather
         than renewing the application  for  an  order  for  reconsideration
         (which would have led to the continuing of S3C leave  if  made  'in
         time'). In this regard it is also significant that whilst there was
         evidence from before the  Tribunal  from  the  legally  unqualified
         appellant that a judicial  review  application  was  made  at  this
         stage, there was also a witness statement from a Mr Akinwande,  who
         purports to have been the appellant's legal representative  at  the
         relevant   time,   specifically    using    the    term    'another
         reconsideration' in relation to  the  events  that  occurred  after
         judge  Latter's  refusal  to   order   reconsideration   of   Judge
         Braybrook's decision. Judge Manuell made no finding in relation  to
         Mr Akinwande's evidence.




     23.  I find that the decision of the FtT on the issue  of  whether  the
         appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B   of   the
         Immigration Rules is flawed by legal error capable of affecting the
         outcome of the appeal.  This  inevitably  also  infects  the  FtT's
         conclusions on article 8 ECHR. For these reasons I  set  aside  the
         decision of the FtT."




Re-making of Decision




Immigration Rules - Para 276B




12. As already identified above, the core issue of fact that I must resolve
    is whether within 5 days of receipt of Judge Latter's  decision  of  26
    November 2009  refusing  reconsideration,  the  appellant  renewed  the
    application for reconsideration to the High Court pursuant to s.103A of
    the 2002 Act and paragraph 30 of Sch. 2 to the Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.




13. The SSHD indicates that her records  do  not  now  show  that  such  an
    application was made, and an incomplete copy of the  SSHD's  CID  notes
    has been produced in support of this statement. These incomplete  notes
    do not contain any entry indicating that the SSHD  was  aware  that  an
    application of the type referred to above was made by the appellant.  I
    also observe that there is an entry indicating that as far as the  Home
    Office are concerned the appellant became appeal rights exhausted on  8
    December 2009.




14. Of course, the fact that the SSHD's incomplete notes do not  show  that
    the appellant made an application for reconsideration to the High Court
    in November 2009 does not mean she did not in fact make one and  it  is
    of some significance when assessing the weight to be attached  to  them
    that there is nothing before me identifying the process by  which  such
    notes are made or how the SSHD would expect, in the  normal  course  of
    events, to receive the information about the  making  of  the  type  of
    application the appellant purports to have made.




15. Consideration of the weight to be attached to the CID notes also has to
    be set  in  the  context  of  the  exchange  between  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer (Mr Dutton) and Judge Shamash, recorded in paragraph
    10 of Judge Shamash's decision, to the effect that Mr Dutton  had  been
    informed by a senior  caseworker  that  she  believed  the  appellant's
    husband, and by  implication  the  appellant,  had  leave  extended  by
    section 3C as of April 2010.




16. There is nothing in the incomplete copy of  the  Home  Office  evidence
    before me that would obviously explain the information provided by  the
    senior caseworker and I am left to speculate as to what triggered  such
    advice to be given. In his submissions Mr Jarvis submitted, in reliance
    on a note from 15 September 2014, that the senior  caseworker  who  had
    advised Mr Dutton most likely misinterpreted an older note on the  Home
    Office system. There was, however, no evidence that this was so, and in
    reality this submission is based on nothing more than speculation.




17. Turning to the positive case put forward by the appellant in support of
    her assertion that a renewed reconsideration application  was  made  to
    the High Court within the required timeframe, the  centrepiece  of  the
    appellant's case in this regard is a copy of Form  PF244/103A/ACO,  the
    appropriate form on which to renew an application  for  reconsideration
    to the High Court.




18. This form is endorsed  with  the  appellant's  name  and  address,  and
    identifies her legal representative as being a Mr  James  Akinwande  of
    Christchurch  solicitors.   The  form  is  further  endorsed  with  the
    appellant's Home Office reference number. Next to the  question:  "Date
    of the  Tribunal  decision  on  application  for  reconsideration",  is
    written the answer "25.11.2009".




19. It is clear from the  information  contained  thereon  that  this  form
    relates to a renewed application to the High Court in  the  appellant's
    name for reconsideration of Judge Braybrook's  decision.  The  question
    that must be answered, however, is whether, and if so when,  this  form
    was appropriately filed with the High Court.




20. The form itself is signed by Mr Akinwande and dated  2  December  2009;
    however, it does not contain  a  seal  from  the  High  Court.  Either,
    therefore, it was not lodged, or the form produced was copied prior  to
    sealing. Mr Akinwande does not explicitly address the lack of a seal in
    his evidence, although I bear in mind that on the appellant's  case  Mr
    Akinwande did not have a copy of this form before him when he  produced
    his statement.




21. It is prudent to also observe at this stage that it is not  in  dispute
    that Christchurch solicitors have now closed down, so the appellant has
    not been able to contact this firm and request a copy of  her  file  in
    order to prove her case. The evidence that has  been  produced  by  the
    appellant was in her personal possession.




22. The appellant has, though, contacted Mr Akinwande and,  as  alluded  to
    above, he has produced a witness statement. This statement is  undated.
    The  statement  initially  identifies  Mr  Akinwande   as   being   the
    appellant's legal adviser at the relevant  times  and  then  materially
    states as follows:




         "...to the best of my knowledge, an appeal was  heard  in  October,
         2009 and dismissed in November, 2009.




         We made  an  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  immediately  in
         November 2009 but we were refused permission to Appeal to the Upper
         Tribunal. Another reconsideration was filled  (sic)  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal using form IAUT-1.




         To the best of my knowledge, I believe we were advised to  withdraw
         the reconsideration because he (Mr Daropale)  has  lodged  a  fresh
         application to the home office."




23. The statement contains a  number  of  obvious  inaccuracies  and  other
    deficiencies  which  diminish  considerably  the  weight  that  can  be
    attached to it, as does the fact that Mr Akinwande did  not  appear  to
    give evidence in person - thus depriving the Respondent the opportunity
    to cross examine upon such evidence.




24. The statement refers to the application for reconsideration being filed
    with the Upper Tribunal not the High Court, and on form  IAUT-1  -  not
    form PF244/103A/ACO. I take judicial notice of the fact that the  Upper
    Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber was not in existence  in  2009.
    It is equally plain that Form IAUT-1 was not the form to  be  used  for
    renewed applications  for  reconsiderations  to  the  High  Court  (see
    paragraph 17 above).




25. In addition, the Mr Akinwande's statement fails to disclose  the  basis
    upon which he recalls the information provided  therein.  Assuming  the
    statement to have been made for the purposes of the appeal to the  FtT,
    it would seem remarkable  that  without  having  the  appellant's  file
    before him he could have recalled, after such a lengthy period of time,
    the lodging of an application for renewed reconsideration  in  relation
    to this particular appellant. Furthermore, even taken at its highest Mr
    Akinwande's statement  does  not  identify  the  date  upon  which  any
    application for reconsideration to the High Court (or Upper Tribunal as
    Mr Akinwande refers) was made, or assert that it was made in -time.




26. Apart from the appellant's, and  her  husband's,  own  recollection  of
    events - neither being able to state definitively that  an  application
    for reconsideration to the High Court was made let alone whether it was
    made in-time, Mr Walsh also relies upon a letter dated 23 March 2010 to
    the Home Office, drafted by the appellant's husband.




27. This letter is headed "Application for Extension of Leave under Tier  1
    (General)" and materially states:




         "I wish to state that I made a  previous  application  during  July
         2009 but the application was refused on the grounds that I did  not
         submit sufficient evidence. The  matter  went  on  appeal  and  was
         refused because the judge asked for more evidence which I  did  not
         have with me.




         An application has been made for judicial review  but  I  am  still
         waiting for a reply from them. I have however  decided  to  proceed
         with a fresh application to the  home  office  submitting  all  the
         necessary evidence...




         My dependents and I have  been  residing  lawfully  in  the  United
         Kingdom since 2001 when I arrived in this country...




         I therefore employ the Home Secretary to  grant  my  family  and  I
         continuous stay in the United Kingdom under Tier 1 (General). I  am
         willing to withdraw my application for judicial review  should  the
         home office  wish  to  consider  my  application  and  that  of  my
         dependents to avoid unnecessary waste of funds."




28. At the time this letter was written the appellant's husband  could  not
    have appreciated the possible later significance of the information  he
    provided therein in relation to his belief that he had  an  outstanding
    review application.  I accept, for this reason, that  as  of  23  March
    2010 the appellant's husband believed  that  such  an  application  was
    outstanding. I am also content that, not being legally qualified, it is
    possible,  even  likely,  that  he  would  not  have  appreciated   the
    difference between an application for judicial  review  and  a  renewed
    application made  to  the  High  Court  for  reconsideration  of  Judge
    Braybrook's decision. This letter,  of  course,  says  nothing  of  the
    appellant's husband's knowledge as to the timing of  such  application.
    There  are,  of  course,  a  wide  range  of  scenarios  in  which  the
    appellant's husband could have come to believe that such an application
    had been lodged.  It could be, for example, that the he was  personally
    present when the application was lodged, or that their lawyer  informed
    the appellant and her husband that the application had been lodged,  or
    that they had assumed that it had been lodged because  they  instructed
    their lawyer to make such an application.  Absent  direct  evidence  on
    this point I can draw no more from this letter than  the  existence  of
    the appellant's husband's belief that the application was lodged.




29. Drawing all of this together and having carefully considered all of the
    evidence in the round, and reminded myself that the burden  is  on  the
    appellant to prove her  case,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  either  the
    appellant  or   her   husband   made   an   in-time   application   for
    reconsideration to the High Court and, consequently, that the appellant
    had section 3C leave at the time of her application of 14  April  2010.
    In coming to this conclusion I have taken full account  of  that  which
    was said by the Presenting  Officer  to  Judge  Shamash  and  also  the
    frailties of the SSHD's evidence but, as I observe  above,  it  is  the
    appellant's  burden  and  her  evidence   also   contains   significant
    frailties.




30. On the basis of  all  the  evidence  before  me  I  conclude  that  the
    appellant does not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules.




Article 8 ECHR




31. The appellant also relies upon Article 8 ECHR  grounds.  Subsequent  to
    the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the Court of Appeal  handed  down
    its decision in MA (Pakistan) & Ors [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705.  Given  the
    potential significance  of  this  decision  I  gave  both  parties  the
    opportunity to address in writing the learning therein and  to  further
    set out their respective positions regarding the appellant's Article  8
    claim.




32. Turning to the relevant facts. The evidence of private and family  life
    in the UK is for the most  part  set  forth  in  the  numerous  witness
    statements, now of  some  vintage,  found  within  pages  1  to  19  of
    appellant's bundle before the  FtT.  I  have  taken  into  account  the
    entirety of this evidence.




33. In summary, it is said that the appellant left Nigeria with her parents
    when she was 20 years old, moving first  to  Ethiopia,  then  to  South
    Africa before finally coming to the United Kingdom with them  in  2004.
    She was granted leave as a student and  obtained  a  'Master  of  Laws'
    (LLM). She met her husband in the UK and  married  in  June  2007.  The
    appellant and her husband have two Nigerian national children  born  in
    the United Kingdom on 18 April 2008 and 21 June 2011 respectively.  The
    children have no leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  it  appears
    this has at all times been the case.




34. The appellant has at all times lived in the UK lawfully, save for the 4
    month period identified  earlier  in  this  decision.  The  appellant's
    husband has recently been granted leave to remain until 26 August  2018
    as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant.




35. The appellant's parents, and her siblings, are British citizens  living
    in the United Kingdom, as is also the case with 2  of  the  appellant's
    husband's siblings, and their children. The  appellant  lives  a  short
    distance from her parents. At the time when the appellant  was  working
    her parents took care of the children twice a week, they also took care
    of the children when they 'were on holiday'. The children are close  to
    their grandparents. They are also very close to their  cousins,  seeing
    them almost every other day.




36. The appellant takes her parents shopping and to  hospital  appointments
    at least 3 times per  month.   The  appellant's  father  had  a  cancer
    diagnoses in 2009 and subsequently had  chemotherapy  and  radiotherapy
    treatment, as well as surgery.  During  this  time  the  appellant  her
    eldest child took the appellant's father home after his treatments.  As
    of July 2015 the appellant's father signed a statement indicating  that
    he was still receiving, unspecified, treatment. There is no evidence as
    to the current position in this regard.




37. The appellant and her family also have connections to the church in the
    UK.




38. I can find no reason to proceed on  any  other  basis  other  that  the
    evidence, as summarised above, is truthful. The circumstances described
    therein form, in significant part,  the  constituent  elements  of  the
    appellant's family and private life in the UK




39. Moving on to consider the Immigration Rules. In addition  to  paragraph
    276B thereof, which I have considered above, it asserted in the written
    submissions that the appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) of the Rules, although no reference is made as to  how  this
    can be when one of the core features of this Rule is that the applicant
    must be under the age of 18. The appellant is  not  of  this  age  and,
    consequently, despite the assertions to the  contrary  in  the  written
    submission she  plainly  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  Paragraph
    276ADE(iv).  Furthermore, on the basis of the information, evidence and
    submissions before me I find no other aspect of the paragraph 276ADE to
    be met by the appellant.




40. I also conclude that the appellant fails to satisfy any  of  the  Rules
    found in Appendix FM. The appellant does not meet the  requirements  of
    the Partner Route in R-LTRP of Appendix FM,  inter  alia,  because  her
    husband does not have the  required  status  here  (E-LTRP  1.2).   The
    requirements of the Parent Route set out in R-LTRTP of Appendix FM  are
    also not met because, inter alia, neither of the  appellant's  children
    had resided in the United Kingdom for 7 years immediately preceding the
    date of the application for leave to remain.




41. I find no other aspect of the Rules to be  met  on  the  basis  of  the
    submissions and evidence before me.




42. I must now turn to give consideration of Article  8  ECHR  outwith  the
    Rules. Part 5A of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    relevantly provides in this regards as follows:

           "PART 5A
           ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS
           117A Application of this Part
           (1) This Part applies where a court or tribunal is  required  to
           determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
                 (a) breaches a person's right to respect  for  private  and
                 family life under Article 8, and
                 (b) as a result would be unlawful under section  6  of  the
                 Human Rights Act 1998.
           (2) In considering the public interest question,  the  court  or
           tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
                 (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section
                 117B, and
                 (b)  in  cases  concerning  the  deportation   of   foreign
                 criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.
           (3) In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means  the
           question of whether an interference with  a  person's  right  to
           respect for private and family life is justified  under  Article
           8(2).
           117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
           cases
           (1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is  in  the
           public interest.
           (2) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
                 (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (3) It is in the public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-
                 (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
                 (b) are better able to integrate into society.
           (4) Little weight should be given to-
                 (a) a private life, or
                 (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
           that is established by a person at a time when the person is  in
           the United Kingdom unlawfully.
           (5) Little weight should be given to a private life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.
           (6) In the case of a person who is not  liable  to  deportation,
           the public interest does not require the person's removal where-
                 (a) the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and
                 (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
                 the United Kingdom.



43. Turning to the question of whether, given the family and  private  life
    accumulated by the appellant in the United Kingdom, her  removal  would
    be  proportionate  to  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance   of
    immigration control, in this regard it is the application of  s.117B(6)
    of the 2002 Act that has been the focus of the parties submissions. For
    the reasons given below, I find that in all the circumstances  of  this
    case the appellant fulfils the requirements therein.




44. It is not in dispute that the appellant has a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with a qualifying child (the  appellant's  eldest
    child).




45. The remaining issue therefore is whether it is unreasonable  to  expect
    this  child  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.  When  undertaking   this
    assessment, I have applied the guidance given  on  this  issue  by  the
    Court of Appeal in MA, in particular observing that s.117B(6) is a self-
    contained provision (para 17), and that a consideration of the issue of
    reasonableness  brings  into  play  all  potentially  relevant   public
    interest considerations - including the matters identified elsewhere in
    s.117B. As I have already indicated above,  having  undertaken  such  a
    consideration I conclude that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant's eldest child to leave the UK.




46. It is firmly established that the  best  interests  of  the  child  are
    highly relevant to an assessment of whether it is reasonable to  expect
    a child to leave the United Kingdom and that such interests are  to  be
    treated as a primary consideration.




47. The appellant's eldest child is  now  8  years  old,  has  never  lived
    anywhere other than in the UK and has never travelled to Nigeria (as is
    also the case with the youngest child). The relevance of, and weight to
    be  attached  to,  such  matter  is,  however,  reduced  by  the  FtT's
    conclusion that both of the appellant's children have been  brought  up
    in the UK 'within the Nigerian culture'.




48. The appellant's children's familial links to the UK are in my  view  of
    some significance, the  children  being  particularly  close  to  their
    cousins, uncles and aunts and also having been cared for on  a  regular
    basis in the past by their grandparents. Whilst the  FtT  rejected  the
    appellant's assertion to have  no  relatives  in  Nigeria,  it  is  not
    contended that such relatives  could  be  considered  to  be  close  in
    familial terms,  and  I  observe  that  in  her  application  form  the
    appellant indicated that she had only 'extended family' in Nigeria. For
    the most part the children's immediate (close)  family  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom, although one of  the  appellant's  brother's  lives  in
    South Africa.




49. Both children are at  school,  with  the  eldest  child  clearly  being
    further embedded into the education  system  here  than  the  youngest.
    Again, however, the weight to be attached to such a feature is lessened
    by the undisputable fact  that  there  are  also  adequate  educational
    facilities available in Nigeria - this being the conclusion of the FtT.




50. Having considered all  of  the  evidence  as  a  whole  and  given  the
    significance to be attached the length of time  the  eldest  child  has
    been in the UK, his close familial connection to persons in the UK  and
    his lack of any meaningful ties to Nigeria - save for his  nationality,
    cultural ties derived from his family members whilst living in  the  UK
    and familial connections to extended relatives in Nigeria whom  he  has
    never met - I conclude that it is in  the  appellant's  eldest  child's
    best interests to remain in the United Kingdom. I have undertaken  such
    consideration in the context of the  appellant's,  and  her  husband's,
    current status here.




51. Although the child's best interests are to  be  treated  as  a  primary
    consideration in the assessment of whether it is reasonable to  require
    him to leave the UK, it is not determinative.  As  earlier  identified,
    the  question  of  reasonableness  in  s117B(6)  must   incorporate   a
    consideration of the conduct of the appellant  and  any  other  matters
    relevant to the public interest, including those set out in  s.117B(2)-
    (5) of the 2002 Act.  In  addition,  the  question  of  whether  it  is
    reasonable to require the appellant's eldest child to leave the UK must
    also be considered in the context of the appellant having no  leave  to
    remain the UK, and her husband having such a right, at this time,  only
    until 2018.




52. Although the fact that the appellant's husband has leave to remain  was
    highlighted  as  being  an  important  feature  in  this  case  by  the
    appellant's representatives, I do not agree that significant weight can
    be attached to this feature. Nothing has been  identified  which  could
    reasonably prevent the appellant's husband from returning to Nigeria if
    the appellant and the children move there.




53. As identified above, for the majority of the time  the  appellant  (and
    her husband) have been in  the  UK  they  have  had  leave  to  do  so.
    Nevertheless, their presence here has at all times been precarious (see
    Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803). Section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act requires
    that I should give consideration to the fact that little weight  should
    be accorded to the private life the appellant has accumulated in the UK
    whilst her stay was precarious. I remind myself, however, that this  is
    only 'generalised normative guidance' (Rhuppiah at [53]) and that  this
    may be  overridden  in  an  exceptional  case  by  particularly  strong
    features of the private life in question. In the instant  case  I  find
    that the nature of appellant's relationship with her  parents,  and  in
    particular her father, to be such a 'particularly strong feature' so as
    to make this an exceptional case where it would not be  appropriate  to
    attach little weight to private life built up by the  appellant  whilst
    she was lawfully here, albeit her stay was precarious.




54. Moving on, the fact that the appellant is proficient  in  English  does
    not operate as a  positive  factor  in  my  consideration,  but  it  is
    relevant in so far as the matters identified by s117B(2) do not operate
    adversely to her case.




55. In his submissions  Mr  Jarvis  asserted  that  the  appellant  is  not
    financially independent and that, pursuant to section 117B(3), this  is
    a matter to be weighed against her. I agree with Mr Jarvis  that  there
    is no up-to-date evidence on this issue before the Tribunal. I observe,
    however, that in her application the appellant stated that her  husband
    earned �1450 per month. The SSHD did not take issue with this assertion
    in the  decision  letter.  The  appellant's  husband  was  subsequently
    granted leave by the SSHD as a Tier 1  Migrant  so  is  still  lawfully
    here. There is no evidence that his employment has ceased  and  in  his
    statement of July 2015 he asserted that he was working, and paying tax.
    The FtT did not make an adverse finding on this aspect of the evidence.






56. In all the circumstances I accept that the appellant's husband is still
    employed.  There  is  nothing  before  me  to  indicate,   given   this
    employment, that the appellant's family unit  (the  appellant,  husband
    and children) are not financially independent and I conclude that  they
    are. I therefore do not treat as being adverse the appellant  the  fact
    that she is not financially independent. When coming to this conclusion
    I have had full regard to the consideration of the meaning of financial
    independence in the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Rhuppiah  and
    having done so I do not accept that the Court intended to conclude that
    an applicant cannot rely upon the lawful income of a  spouse  to  prove
    financial independence.




57. Drawing all of this together, having treated the best interests of  the
    appellant's eldest child as being a primary consideration and noted the
    significant weight that must be attached to the fact that he  has  been
    here for 8 years, and considering all other  matters  relevant  to  the
    public interest in the and in particular those  matters  identified  in
    s117B of the 2002 Act, I conclude that it would not  be  reasonable  to
    require the appellant's eldest child to leave the UK.




58. That conclusion is determinative of the public interest in removing the
    appellant and I accordingly allow the appellant's appeal on  the  basis
    that it would breach her Article 8 ECHR rights to remove her.




Decision



For reasons previously given, the decision of the FtT is set aside.



I remake the decision under appeal,  allowing  it  on  the  basis  that  the
proposed removal of the appellant would breach Article 8 ECHR.

Signed:

[pic]

 Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor




