
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45781/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th April 2014                            |On 22nd April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MUHAMMAD SHAKRUKH
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, senior home office presenting officer
For the Respondent:    no legal representation and no appearance by the
respondent or anyone on his behalf.
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. Permission to appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing an
      appeal against a decision to refuse a residence card  was  granted  on
      the  grounds  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a   material
      misdirection of law by failing to consider the case of  Kareem  (Proxy
      marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) which was  promulgated  on
      16th January 2014. The First-tier Tribunal had  heard  the  appeal  on
      30th January 2014 and promulgated the decision on 26th February 2014.


   2. The respondent had not filed a  Rule  24  response  to  the  grant  of
      permission and nor had he given any reason or explanation  for  either
      his or his claimed wife's absence from the hearing before me today. It
      appears from the file that the appellant was served with notice of the
      grant of permission and the date time and place of the hearing at  his
      last notified address.

   3. The First-tier Tribunal judge held that the proxy marriage between the
      respondent and his EEA National wife was valid. He did not  go  on  to
      make any findings as to the durability  of  the  relationship  on  the
      basis that such issues did not arise because of  his  decision  as  to
      validity. In reaching his decision the judge relied upon the  extracts
      of Ghanaian law produced to him and to a  Statutory  Declaration  that
      the proper customs had been complied with. He appears to  have  missed
      consideration of some of the documents in the file  of  papers  before
      him; in particular that there  are  two  statutory  declarations:  one
      dated 31st October 2013 (which post dates the decision the subject  of
      the appeal) which gives the residential addresses of the couple at the
      time of the marriage and one dated 15th November 2012, which  was  the
      one submitted with the application for a residence  card,  which  does
      not. Although I am obviously not a handwriting expert  it  is  obvious
      that the signatures of both purported fathers on the two  declarations
      are markedly different. The earlier declaration does  not  state  that
      the marriage has been registered although the latter one does.

   4. Had the judge seen both declarations it is undoubtedly the  case  that
      he would not have been satisfied that the marriage had been registered
      according to proper procedures; the declarations on their face are not
      reliable.  It  is  inconceivable  that  he  would  have  reached   the
      conclusion that the Ghanaian 'marriage' was valid and thus allowed the
      appeal.

   5. I am accordingly satisfied that there was an error of law  and  I  set
      aside the decision to be remade.

    Remaking the decision


   6.  The  documentation  produced  raise,  on  their  face,  serious   and
      significant doubts as  to  the  validity  of  the  Ghanaian  customary
      marriage. I am not  satisfied  to  the  requisite  standard  that  the
      marriage is valid. There is no evidence before me  that  the  marriage
      would be recognised in the country of nationality of the  respondent's
      purported wife, as required by Kareem. I find that the couple are  not
      married as claimed.

   7. I note that the couple also asserted  that  they  were  in  a  durable
      relationship and had submitted a few limited documents  purporting  to
      support that contention. I also note  that  despite  the  reasons  for
      refusal of the  residence  card  challenging  the  durability  of  the
      relationship, the respondent chose to have his appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal determined on the papers and has not appeared before me.
      I am satisfied that this casts doubt upon the nature, genuineness  and
      viability of the relationship which, combined with the paucity of  the
      documentation, leads inevitably to the conclusion that the couple  are
      not in a durable relationship.

   8. I am not satisfied that the respondent is entitled to the issue  of  a
      residence card.


          Conclusions:
    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.
     I set aside the decision
     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it
                                    Date 17th April 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
