
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/45809/2014
     IA/45811/2014
     IA/45817/2014
     IA/45829/2014
     IA/45843/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2015                          |On 20 January 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                                     DTA
                                     dMa
                                     tTa
                                     tka
                                     ea
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Clive Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Manning, instructed by Pickup Scott, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer in this decision to the respondents as the appellants and
    to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent  (as  they  appeared
    respectively before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   The  appellants  are
    citizens of Ghana.  The first and fifth appellants are the  parents  of
    the second, third and fourth appellants who are children under the  age
    of 18 years.

 2. The appellant TKA is physically healthy but has been diagnosed as being
    on  the  autistic  spectrum  and  has  delayed  speech   and   language
    development.  The younger child TTA is also physically healthy  and  he
    has also been diagnosed as being on the autistic spectrum  and  suffers
    from similar problems.  The child DTA (the youngest  of  the  children)
    was about 3 years old at the date of the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    and has speech  and  language  difficulties.   The  appellant  appealed
    against the decisions of the  respondent  dated  30  October  2014  for
    removal from the United Kingdom by way of directions under  Section  10
    of the Immigration Act 1999.  Their appeals were heard  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Carlin) which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  26
    February 2015 allowed the appeals on human rights  grounds  (Article  8
    ECHR).  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 3. A number of issues arose at the hearing of the Upper  Tribunal.   Judge
    Gibb granted permission on 22 April 2015 but did not give permission on
    grounds 1 and 2(a) of the Secretary of State's application but did find
    that ground 2(b) was arguable.  Mr Jarvis, for the Secretary of  State,
    sought to argue that permission should have been granted on all grounds
    (Ferrer (limited  appeal  grounds;  Alvi)  [2012]  UKUT  00304  (IAC)).
    Secondly, the decision of Judge Carlin makes no reference to an earlier
    determination in the First-tier Tribunal by Judge Blandy involving  the
    same appellants  (other  than  the  second  appellant  in  the  present
    proceedings who had not been born at that time) which  was  promulgated
    on 12 January 2012.  That determination arose  from  decisions  of  the
    Secretary of State to serve on the appellants  (on  25  November  2011)
    forms IS151A notifying them that a decision would  be  made  to  remove
    them under Section 10 of the 1999 Act.  The  appeals  to  Judge  Blandy
    proceeded, inter alia, on Article 8 grounds but were dismissed in their
    entirety.   Judge  Blandy  considered  at  length  the  autism  of  the
    appellants TKA and TTA and found their removal  with  their  parent  to
    Ghana would not  be  disproportionate.   It  is  not  clear  why  Judge
    Blandy's determination was not brought to the attention of Judge Carlin
    who appears to have been completely unaware of it.

 4. The ground upon which Judge Gibb  granted  permission  consisted  of  a
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal decision  on  the  basis  that  no
    consideration was given to Sections 117A and 117B of the 2002  Act  (as
    amended). The Secretary of State argues that the judge failed  to  have
    proper regard to the public interest concerning  the  removal  of  this
    family to Ghana.

 5. I find that Judge Carlin has erred in law such that his decision  falls
    to be set aside.  I have reached  that  conclusion  for  the  following
    reasons.  At [36 - 38] of the decision, Judge Carlin wrote:

         36.  I then went on  to  consider  Article  8(2)  and  whether  the
             interference and family life is necessary in the interests set
             out in Article 8(2).  This involves consideration  of  whether
             the interference in family life in removing the  rest  of  the
             family  from  the  United  Kingdom  is  proportionate  to  the
             legitimate public end, namely the economic wellbeing.   In  do
             so it was clear from the case law generally (for  example  see
             AG (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801) that it is not necessary  to
             find exceptional circumstances when deciding  there  has  been
             violation of the rights set out in Article 8.

         37.  Whilst there is authority which  indicates  that  in  all  the
             circumstances,  interference  with  family   life   would   be
             justified by the  requirements  of  immigration  control  (for
             example  see  Mukarkar  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045)  a  different
             approach may be justified in a small minority  of  exceptional
             cases identifiable on a case by case basis.

         38.  In considering proportionality I was of  the  view  there  was
             strong evidence that  the  eldest  two  boys  had  significant
             difficulties having been diagnosed as on the autistic spectrum
             and that it is likely that the youngest child,  D,  will  have
             similar problems albeit that the evidence before  me  suggests
             the he may not be as significantly affected as his  two  elder
             brothers (sic).  On those facts and  on  the  basis  that  the
             evidence  before  me  suggests  the   three   boys   will   be
             disadvantaged by living in Ghana, I was of the  view  that  it
             was not proportionate to remove the parents  of  TKA  and  his
             brothers from the United Kingdom.

 6. The paragraphs which I have quoted are problematic.  The judge has made
    no effort to particularise the public interest in the  instant  appeal.
    At [36], he begins to deal with  the  public  interest  but  then  only
    observes that it was not necessary to find exceptional circumstances in
    order for there to be a violation of Article 8.  Paragraph  [37]  is  a
    bland statement of the  general  law,  an  observation  that  "a  small
    minority of exceptional cases" may succeed under Article 8.   Paragraph
    [38] focuses entirely upon the problems of the  minor  appellants.   Mr
    Jarvis submitted that the paragraphs [36 - 38] appear  to  read  as  if
    taken from a determination written some ten  years  ago  and  certainly
    prior to the amendments to the 2002 Act.  I agree.  The failure of  the
    judge to refer to Section 117 may not in itself constitute an error  of
    law but the focus which those sections bring  to  the  public  interest
    should have compelled the First-tier Tribunal to address that  interest
    with a far greater degree of particularity than the judge has  done  in
    the instant appeal.

 7. I find that the judge's is, for the reasons given above, flawed and his
    decision is set aside accordingly.  I also  observe  that  the  judge's
    treatment of the evidence concerning medical facilities in  Ghana  [22]
    is, in my view, inadequate.  The judge had before him  the  country  of
    information COI response together with  a  medical  report  from  a  Dr
    Lamptey.  The judge preferred the evidence of Dr Lamptey but his stated
    reasons for doing so are sketchy, to say the least.  The evidence  will
    need to be addressed in much greater detail by the next Tribunal.  That
    Tribunal will also need to consider relevance of the  determination  of
    Judge Blandy dated 12 January 2012, a copy of which has now been  added
    to the Tribunal papers.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  26
February 2015 is set aside.  The appeals  are  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge Carlin) for that Tribunal to remake the decisions.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 1 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


