
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45095/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th September 2014                           |On 26th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                            mrs Umme Shabnaz Adam
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Subramanian, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Mauritius born on 30th January 1988.  Her
    immigration history is set out  in  considerable  detail  in  the  Home
    Office letter of 8th October 2013.  By a Notice of  Refusal  dated  8th
    October 2013 the client's reconsidered application under Article  8  of
    the European Convention of Human Rights outside the  Immigration  Rules
    and under the Immigration Rules put in  place  on  9th  July  2012  was
    refused.  The Appellant lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oakley
    sitting at  Hatton  Cross  on  23rd  June  2014.   In  a  determination
    promulgated on 27th June 2014  the  Appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules but was allowed pursuant to  Article  8  of
    the 1950 Convention.

 2. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 4th July 2014.  Those grounds contended:

      i) that the judge had failed to place any, or  adequate,  weight  upon
         the  Appellant's   precarious   immigration   status   during   her
         relationship to her husband; and

     ii) that the judge had erred in law by failing to accord  any,  or  any
         adequate, weight to the Appellant's significant period of  overstay
         in  the  UK  as  a  factor  relating  to  the  public  interest  in
         immigration control.

 3. On 16th July  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Reid  granted
    permission to appeal.  In granting  permission  Judge  Reid  considered
    that it was arguable that the judge's assessment  lacked  reasoning  on
    proportionality and public interest with reference  to  the  length  of
    time which the Appellant  had  already  overstayed  when  she  met  her
    husband and the Appellant's immigration status during the  entirety  of
    the family life built with her husband.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Ms Everett.  The  Appellant  appears  by  her
    instructed legal representative Mr Subramanian.  The appeal is  by  the
    Secretary of State and for  the  purpose  of  continuity  within  legal
    proceedings the Secretary of State continues to be referred  to  herein
    as the Respondent and Mrs Adam as the Appellant.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. Ms Everett indicates that she relies on the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   She
    acknowledges that Judge Oakley has at paragraph 33 of his determination
    considered the fact that the Appellant is  an  overstayer  but  submits
    that he has placed undue weight on the  failure  of  the  Secretary  of
    State  to  remove  the  Appellant.   She  accepts  that  there  is   no
    misapprehension created  of  the  Appellant's  immigration  status  but
    submits that it is not clear how much weight the  judge  has  given  to
    this and the judge should have given more weight to the fact  that  the
    Appellant did not have leave.

 6. In response to the Appellant's  solicitor's  skeleton  argument  it  is
    submitted that the Appellant could not in any event  have  relied  upon
    the old Rules as she could not switch to an in-country appeal  from  an
    out-of-country appeal and that nothing further is particularly advanced
    by the skeleton.  She asked me to find that there is a  material  error
    of law in Judge Oakley's determination, to set it aside and  to  remake
    the decision dismissing the appeal.

 7. Mr Subramanian relies on the skeleton argument and submits  that  Judge
    Oakley has considered all the circumstances and the effect  of  removal
    and has found that the Appellant's spouse was  born  here  and  has  no
    connection with Mauritius.  He reminds me of  the  dicta  in  Chikwamba
    [2008] UKHL 40 whereby the likelihood of a return  by  entry  clearance
    should  not  be  ordinarily  treated  as  a  factor  rendering  removal
    proportionate; "if anything, the reverse is the case".  He  points  out
    that the delay from the Secretary of State was back in 2011 and that it
    is only now that the case has been litigated.  He submits that it would
    be unduly harsh to  require  the  Appellant  to  return  and  that  the
    Appellant's spouse has no contact nor connection with Mauritius and  he
    relies on the authority of Beoku-Betts v the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2008] UKHL 39.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

10. I start by reminding myself that I am  required  to  determine  whether
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I address it that way because some of the submissions of  Mr
    Subramanian particularly with regard to his  analysis  under  Chikwamba
    and Beoku-Betts are effectively asking  me  to  re-adjudicate  matters.
    The contention of the Secretary of State is that the judge has erred in
    the amount of weight given to the Appellant's immigration status during
    the relationship with her husband and her period of  overstaying  as  a
    factor relating to the public interest  in  immigration  control.   The
    fact remains that the judge has given weight to these factors.  In  his
    determination he  has  drawn  conclusions  at  paragraph  27  that  the
    Appellant's family life has been established in the full  knowledge  of
    her unsettled immigration  status.   He  has  taken  due  note  of  the
    position regarding the Appellant's family at paragraph 28  and  of  her
    husband's status as a British citizen with no knowledge of Mauritius at
    paragraph 29.  He has given due consideration to the authority of Nagre
    v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 and has applied the law as set out at paragraphs
    31 and 32.  Thereafter he has drawn conclusions which  he  is  entitled
    to.  He has decided that this is one of  those  rare  cases  where  the
    Appellant meets the criteria for  succeeding  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He has given weight to the factor that no steps have been taken
    to remove the Appellant by the Respondent from the United  Kingdom  and
    the submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State herein on that
    factor amount to little more than disagreement.  Whether another  judge
    would have given as much weight is a matter of conjecture.  It  is  not
    however the role of this Tribunal when weight has been  given  and  the
    decision is not perverse to overturn it.

11. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

12. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

13. In this instant case the relevant decision maker namely the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that the Appellant could  demonstrate  that  there
    was an arguable case outside the Rules and went on to properly consider
    it.  He provided full and detailed reasons therein at paragraphs 33  to
    37 of his  determination.   They  were  findings  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to  make  and  the  determination  consequently  discloses  no
    material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of
    law and the appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal is upheld.

15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
