




Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/45035/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 July 2014                            |On 21 August 2014          |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            MISS AYOBAMI KOMOLAFE
                                                                  Respondent

                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE

   Representation:
   For the Appellant:  Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer
   For the Respondent: Mr A Otchie  of  Counsel  instructed  by  A  Vincent,
   solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1.   The Secretary of State has brought this appeal against the  decision
      of Judge J J Maxwell, a First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  who  allowed  the
      appeal of Miss Komolafe, a citizen of Nigeria for grant  of  Residence
      Card as confirmation of a right of residence in  the  United  Kingdom.
      Her application for Residence Permit  had  been  refused  because  the
      Secretary of State (the appellant in this appeal)  averred  that  Miss
      Komolafe had failed to prove her proxy traditional  marriage  complied
      with registration requirements set out in the Nigerian statute. Having
      refused to accept that the marriage is valid under  English  Law,  the
      appellant went on to find that the respondent had failed to prove  she
      is a party to an enduring relationship with an  EEA  partner.  It  has
      been the case of the respondent that she  entered  a  tradition-backed
      marriage by proxy in Nigeria and that she is a party  to  an  enduring
      relationship with her husband who is  exercising  his  Treaty  rights.
      Judge J J Maxwell after hearing and seeing evidence concluded that the
      respondent (appellant before him) did satisfy the requirements for the
      issuance of a Residence Card as  according  to  the  Judge  the  proxy
      marriage that parties had entered into in Nigeria was  valid.  In  the
      circumstances the Judge said, "in the light of my findings...I do  not
      need to consider the alternative of the appellant being  party  to  an
      enduring relationship outside marriage."

   2.   The Secretary of State sought and obtained permission to appeal  the
      decision of Judge J J Maxwell. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
      Judge Cheales, a Judge of the First  Tier  Tribunal.  The  grounds  in
      support of the application for permission were found to b arguable  in
      establishing that the Judge had erred in not having had regard to  the
      decision in Kareem [2014]UKUT 24.

   3.    At the hearing before me, I head  arguments  from  Ms  Pal  and  Mr
      Otchie.  Ms  Pal  asked  me  to  find  that   the   determination   is
      fundamentally flawed in law as the  Judge  should  have  but  did  not
      address his  mind  to  the  issue  of  validity  of  the  marriage  in
      Netherland. She drew attention to Paragraph  14  of  the  decision  in
      Kareem and Paragraphs 11, 19 and 20  of  the  decision  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in TA (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014]UKUT 00316.

   4.   Mr Otchie pointed out that the Secretary of  State  had  not  raised
      this issue at the First tier Tribunal. According to him the respondent
      has lived in the United Kingdom since 2008 and has  acquired  domicile
      of choice here. Her husband had come to the United Kingdom in 2012 and
      their marriage by proxy had taken place in Nigeria in accordance  with
      the laws and traditions in Nigeria. He argued that  the  Judge  should
      have allowed the appeal on grounds of permanent  relationship  between
      the parties. His failure to consider the alternative  route  had  left
      the respondent in this difficult situation.

   5.    In her response Ms Pal accepted that the Judge should have but  had
      made no findings on whether the  respondent's  relationship  with  her
      Dutch spouse was a lasting and durable relationship.  She  asked  that
      either I should make such a finding myself or remit the matter to  the
      First tier Tribunal who can after consideration of previous and  fresh
      evidence make a finding on durability  of  the  relationship  and  the
      domicile of the appellant at the time of her  proxy  marriage  to  her
      Dutch national.

   6.    I concluded that the decision of Judge J J Maxwell was in  material
      error of law for the reasons advanced by the appellant in her  grounds
      of appeal as well as oral submissions. In the circumstances I directed
      that the appeal be  remitted  to  First  tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
      decision on issues of durability of relationship and if  necessary  on
      the domicile of the appellant at the time of her proxy marriage.



   7. The appeal is allowed to limited extent of a re-hearing  before  First
      tier Tribunal.


ANONYMITY DIRECTION
None has been sought and circumstances of the case do not warrant such
direction.




Judge Drabu
Judge of the First Tier Tribunal sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper
Tribunal.
18 August 2014



































