
IAC-AH-CO-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/45561/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 February 2015                           |On 6 March 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                mr Ahmad Raza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Saeed, Legal Solutions Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the respondent as the appellant as he was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant is a citizen of  Pakistan  and  his
    date of birth is 11 February 1990.

2.   The appellant made an application  to  vary  his  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on 30 July 2013.  His application was refused by  the
    Secretary of State in a decision of 30 September 2013.  The reasons for
    the refusal are as follows:

    (i)  All study that forms part of the course must  take  place  on  the
         premises of the Tier 4 Sponsor  who  is  supporting  the  student's
         application and this does not appear to be the case as far  as  the
         appellant is concerned.

    (ii) The appellant has previously been granted leave to  study  courses
         at degree level or above for four years  and  two  months  and  his
         current application is to study level 6 diploma in  leadership  and
         management until 20 January 2015.  A grant of leave to  study  this
         course would result in the appellant having spent  more  than  five
         years in the UK as a student.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was allowed by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Flynn,
    having determined the appeal on  the  papers  at  the  request  of  the
    appellant, in a decision that was promulgated on 24 September 2014.

4.   The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal by Judge P J  M
    Hollingworth in a decision of 9 January 2015.   Thus  the  matter  came
    before me.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   Before the judge there was the appellant's statement of evidence.   The
    judge made the following findings:

         "11.  The  respondent  refused  the  application  because  she  was
             satisfied  that  the  sponsor  did  not  have   the   required
             educational  oversight  for  the  training  site   where   the
             appellant would be studying.

         12.  The appellant disputed the respondent's statement and  neither
             party has submitted any evidence in relation  to  this  issue.
             However, I note that, before the respondent made her  decision
             on 2 October 2013, the sponsor's licence  was  revoked  on  16
             September 2013.  It does not appear that the  respondent  took
             account of her policy for students of suspended  sponsors  and
             therefore I find her decision was not in accordance  with  the
             law.

         13.  I have noted the respondent's statement that the appellant was
             not entitled to study in the UK because the  total  period  of
             study would exceed five years.   The  appellant  has  provided
             calculations which  indicate  that  his  studies  are  not  as
             lengthy as the respondent considered.

         14.  I agree with the appellant that it  is  not  correct  for  the
             respondent to include in her  calculations  periods  of  study
             which had to be repeated because  the  sponsor's  licence  was
             suspended.  I do not therefore agree with the respondent  that
             she was entitled to refuse the application for this reason.

         15.  I am satisfied that the appellant's college  was  not  on  the
             Tier 4 Sponsor Register  at  the  date  of  the  decision.   I
             therefore find that the appellant is  entitled  to  a  60  day
             grant of leave in order to find a new sponsor.  I allowed  the
             appeal so that the respondent can issue  leave  in  accordance
             with her policy for suspended sponsors."

The Grounds of Appeal and Oral Submissions

6.   The first ground maintains that the judge erred when she found that  it
    was not correct for the respondent to include in  the  calculation  for
    the purposes of 245ZX(ha) study which has to be  repeated  because  the
    sponsor's licence was suspended.  There is no basis  in  law  for  this
    finding.  The second ground for appeal maintains that the judge did not
    identify period she found relevant for the purposes of paragraph  245ZX
    (ha).  It is not clear on what evidential basis the  periods  of  study
    are calculated.  The  judge  relied  on  the  bare  assertions  of  the
    appellant who was not present to give oral evidence. Both parties  made
    oral submissions.  Mr Walker said it  seemed  to  him  considering  the
    revocation of the licence that the decision by Judge Flynn was  correct
    and that the grounds  of  appeal  are  misconceived  when  taking  into
    account all of the evidence.

The Relevant Immigration Rules

7.   Paragraph 245ZX contains the requirements for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and 245ZH(ha) reads as follows:

         "If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of  leave  to
         remain the applicant is seeking must  not  lead  to  the  applicant
         having spent more than five years in the UK as a Tier  4  (General)
         Migrant, or as a student, studying courses at degree level or above
         unless:

         ...

         Paragraph 245ZY assists with calculating the  relevant  period  and
         245ZY(b) reads as follows:

         In addition to the period of leave to remain granted in  accordance
         with paragraph (a), leave to remain will also be  granted  for  the
         periods set out in the following table.   Notes  to  accompany  the
         table appear below the table.



         |Type of Course   |Period of Entry         |Period of Entry         |
|                 |Clearance to be Granted |Clearance to be Granted |
|                 |Before the Course Starts|After the Course Ends   |
|                 |                        |                        |
|Twelve months or |One month.              |Four months             |
|more.            |                        |                        |
|                 |                        |                        |
|Six months or    |One month.              |Two months.             |
|more but less    |                        |                        |
|than twelve      |                        |                        |
|months.          |                        |                        |
|                 |                        |                        |
|Pre-sessional    |One month.              |One month.              |
|course of less   |                        |                        |
|than six months. |                        |                        |
|                 |                        |                        |
|Course of less   |Seven days.             |Seven days.             |
|than six months. |                        |                        |
|This is not a    |                        |                        |
|pre-sessional    |                        |                        |
|course.          |                        |                        |
|                 |                        |                        |
|Postgraduate     |One month.              |One month.              |
|doctor or        |                        |                        |
|dentist.         |                        |                        |

         Notes


         (i)  ...


         (ii) ...


         (iii)    The additional periods of leave to remain granted  further
             to the table above will be disregarded  for  the  purposes  of
             calculating  whether  a  migrant  has  exceeded   the   limits
             specified at 245ZX(h) to 245ZX(hb)."

8.   Both parties agreed that these were the relevant Rules in place at  the
    date of the decision.

The Evidence of the Appellant Before the First-tier Tribunal

9.   The appellant gave an account of the history of his studies here.  This
    was not challenged. He studied at Kaplan Financial  College  between  1
    July 2008 and 17 August 2009.   He  studied  at  the  same  institution
    between 1 September 2009 and 31 August  2009.   He  studied  at  London
    School of Business and Finance between 31  January  2011  and  15  June
    2012.  He started a course at Edwards College Ltd which commenced on 19
    November 2012.  This course was due to conclude  on  21  October  2014;
    however, the licence of the college was revoked on 2 March  2013.   The
    appellant applied to study a course at Burnley Training  College  which
    commenced on 20 August 2013 and would  have  concluded  on  20  January
    2015; however, the licence of the college was revoked on  16  September
    2013 shortly before the refusal of his application.

10.  According to the appellant  he  has  spent  46  months  and  nine  days
    studying at undergraduate level.

11.  The appellant submitted documentary evidence to  establish  the  places
    where he studied and the duration of the courses.  His evidence was not
    challenged by the Secretary of State.

Conclusions

12.  Mr Walker was able to confirm to me the periods  of  leave  granted  to
    the appellant as a student as follows:


         28 June 2008 to 30 November 2009;
         2 February 2010 to 16 December 2010;
         20 January 2011 to 15 October 2012;
         19 December 2012 to 21  February  2015  (However,  the  appellant's
         leave was curtailed on 31 May 2013 because of the revocation of the
         sponsor's licence).

13.   The  respondent  did  not  provide  any  information  about  how   the
    appellant's leave for the purposes of Rule 245ZX  (ha)  was  calculated
    with regard to  paragraph  245ZY(b)(iii).   The  respondent's  case  is
    unsatisfactory.  The refusal letter was not sufficiently  detailed  and
    Mr Walker was not able to fill in the gaps.  In the Reasons for Refusal
    Letter it is asserted that the appellant has spent four years  and  two
    months in the UK as a student.  It is not  clear  whether  this  figure
    takes into account the additional  periods  of  leave  that  should  be
    disregarded.  I have calculated that the appellant's leave to remain to
    date amounts to four years and eleven months.   This  figure  does  not
    take into account the additional periods that  should  be  disregarded.
    The appellant's evidence is that including the period of  study,  which
    is the subject of the latest application, the  relevant  period  is  46
    months and nine days.  However, it is clear that  his  calculation  are
    not correct because in his witness statement he refers  to  periods  of
    study only and not leave and periods of leave post  the  revocation  of
    the sponsor's licence have been disregarded.   There  was  insufficient
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  establish  the  relevant
    period. It seems to me that the period up until the curtailment of  the
    appellant's leave on  31  May  2013  in  addition  to  grant  of  leave
    contemplated in his application would  be  in  excess  of  five  years.
    However, in  my  view  the  evidence  presented  by  both  parties  was
    inadequate.

14.  The judge gave  inadequate  reasons  for  finding  in  the  appellant's
    favour in this case in relation to the immigration  rules.  It  is  not
    clear how she calculated the period.  What  concerns  me  is  that  the
    appellant was originally granted leave to remain from  20  August  2013
    until 20 January 2015 (This was subsequently curtailed as a  result  of
    the  college's  licence  having  been  revoked),  but  surely  on   the
    respondent's calculations, the appellant would not have  been  entitled
    to this grant of leave. It also concerns me  that  in  the  appellant's
    witness statement he refers to undergraduate studies whereas 245ZX (ha)
    refers to courses at degree level or above.

15.  The licence for Burnley Training College  was  revoked  shortly  before
    the decision of the Secretary of State and the appellant was not  given
    the opportunity to find an alternative  college  and  if  necessary  an
    alternative course of study.  In the light of this and  the  inadequate
    decision letter, in my view, it was open to  the  judge  to  allow  the
    appeal on the basis that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    law.  It is clear to me that the appellant only  became  aware  of  the
    revocation of the licence on 16 September 2013 which was shortly before
    the decision and he should have been afforded a reasonable  opportunity
    to vary  the  application:  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor  licence  -
    fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211 (IAC).

16.  For the above reasons I find that the judge made an  error  of  law  in
    finding that the appellant was able to meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules. Her ultimate decision however was to allow it on the
    basis that the decision was not in accordance with the law. This was  a
    decision that was open to the judge and it is maintained.

17.  The appeal was allowed to the limited extent that the decision  is  not
    in  accordance  with  the  law  and  it  ceases  to  have  effect.  The
    application remains outstanding.  I remind the Secretary of State  that
    what is required to give effect to the principle of  fairness  in  this
    case is for a fresh decision not to be made for a  period  of  60  days
    from the date of the reason decision being transmitted to  the  parties
    to enable the appellant to obtain a fresh sponsorship  letter  that  is
    current and enable his existing application to be varied should he meet
    the requirements of the rules.

18.  It may be that when the appellant submits  an  application  it  becomes
    clear that his application should be refused under 245ZX(ha);  however,
    if this is the case it is  incumbent  on  the  respondent  to  properly
    explain how the leave to remain has been calculated in accordance  with
    245ZY(b)(iii).



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 5.3.15

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

