

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/45670/2014
                                                               IA/48887/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2016                      |On 12 August 2016                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                                   RK (1)
                                   NUH (2)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, Syeds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) I make an Anonymity Order.  Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are mother and daughter. Both are citizens of  Pakistan.
    They originally had rights to reside in the UK as the family members of
    a qualified person under the provisions of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The  first  appellant's  marriage  to
    that qualified person was terminated on 20 June 2014 and the  issue  at
    large is whether the appellants  retained  rights  of  residence  under
    regulation 10(5).


 2. Despite the rule 24 response and the reasons for refusal letter,  after
    discussing the  issues  with  Mr  Mills  he  conceded  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Juss had erred  in  law  in  his  decision  and  reasons
    statement promulgated on 19 August 2015.  Judge Juss concluded at  [23]
    that the appellants had been unable to show that the ex-husband of  the
    first appellant had been a qualified person at the  date  the  marriage
    was terminated.


 3. Mr Mills conceded this issue on two bases.  First, he  recognised  that
    the ex-husband must have acquired a permanent right of residence  under
    reg 15(1)(c) because on his retirement in 2010  he  was  a  worker  who
    ceased activity.  This meant there was no need for  the  appellants  to
    prove he was a qualified person at the date of divorce.   This  led  to
    the second part of the concession, that it would be pure speculation to
    think that the ex-husband may have left the UK  at  some  time  between
    2010 and 2014 and thereby lost his permanent right of  residence.   The
    evidence of his residence during that period was patchy but  there  was
    nothing to suggest that he had left the UK permanently.


 4. Mr Hussain accepted the concession and requested  that  the  appeal  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  findings  to  be  made  as  to
    whether  the  appellants  satisfied  the  requirements  of   regulation
    10(5)(c), which of course alludes to reg 10(6).   After  discussion,  I
    agreed to this request for the following reasons.


 5. I was satisfied that it was for the appellants to show  that  they  met
    the requirements of reg 10(6) at the date of hearing  and  not  at  the
    date of termination of the marriage.  Mr Mills and Mr Hussain  referred
    me back to article 13 of the Citizens Directions  (2004/38/EC)  and  it
    was clear to us all that there was no requirement that  the  provisions
    of reg 10(6) had to be met at the date of termination of the  marriage.
    To impose  such  a  condition  would  be  to  introduce  an  additional
    criterion, which of course would be contrary to EEA free movement law.


 6. Mr Hussain also requested time to obtain  further  evidence  since  the
    original appeal had been heard just over a year ago.  Mr Mills did  not
    object to such a course of  action,  particularly  given  that  it  was
    difficult to preserve the findings made by Judge  Juss  as  he  started
    from the wrong premise.


 7. The appeal is therefore remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   None  of
    the findings are preserved.  However, the judge hearing the appeal will
    take note of the concession given by Mr Mills as recorded above.


 8. Before concluding, I mention why an anonymity order is necessary.   The
    second appellant is a child  and  it  is  appropriate  to  protect  her
    integrity.








Decision


The decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss is set aside.


The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing
before a judge other than Judge Juss.


It will be for the First-tier Tribunal to decide on any directions.



                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
