

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/45715/2013
      IA/45720/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 19th December 2014                        |On 10th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Sebrina Sylvana Visser
                           Olubunmi Afolarin Omole
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Edwards, London Investgation


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondents are an EEA national and her Nigerian partner. On  the
       12th March 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mensah) allowed  their
       linked appeals against a  decision  to  refuse  to  issue  them  with
       confirmation of their right of residence in the UK in accordance with
       the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  The Secretary of  State  now
       has permission to appeal against that decision[1].


    2. The Secretary of State had refused to issue residence permits because
       she was not satisfied that Ms Visser was exercising treaty rights, or
       that the couple  were  properly  married,  or  indeed  in  a  durable
       relationship.


    3. Judge Mensah heard live evidence about the nature of the relationship
       and having regard to the documentary evidence before her, accepted on
       a  balance  of  probabilities  that  Ms  Visser  and  Mr  Omole  were
       cohabiting and were in a durable  relationship.  She  found  that  Mr
       Omole was an extended family member within the meaning of  Regulation
       8 and allowed the appeals.


    4. The Secretary of State appealed on the grounds  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had failed to make any  findings  on  the  first  matter  in
       issue, namely whether Ms Visser was exercising  treaty rights.


    5. On the 7th July 2014 I heard submissions on  this  matter.  I  agreed
       that the First-tier Tribunal appeared to have overlooked the issue as
       to whether Ms Visser was working and found there to be  an  error  of
       law in that omission.  Before me  Ms  Visser  provided  a  bundle  of
       original documentary evidence about her work in the UK.  It  included
       correspondence with HMRC, a P45, a  P60,  payslips  and  confirmation
       that she had been paying Class 2  National  Insurance  contributions.
       The Secretary of State was that day represented by  a  Ms  Johnstone,
       who applied for an adjournment on the grounds that the  Secretary  of
       State had not seen any of this material before and that she  wish  to
       conduct verification checks with the HMRC.


    6. I agreed to adjourn the re-making of  the  appeal  and  on  the  19th
       December 2014 the matter came back before me.  Mr  Harrison  informed
       the Tribunal, with apologies, that nothing  had  in  fact  been  done
       since July and that the verification checks considered  so  important
       by Ms Johnstone had not been conducted.


    7. I have seen the original material supplied by Ms  Visser.  I  see  no
       reason to reject it as not genuine. I note that it  remains  open  to
       the Secretary of State  to conduct verification checks if she  should
       wish to, and she may well  do  that  in  the  course  of  considering
       whether to issue a residence card to  Mr  Omole  in  accordance  with
       regulation 17(4)(b).


       Decisions


    8. I was not asked to make any direction for  anonymity  and  I  see  no
       reason to  make one.


    9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside save for the findings on Mr Omole and Ms Visser's
       relationship which are unchallenged and preserved.


   10. I re-make the decisions as follows:


        i) I am satisfied that Ms Visser is exercising treaty rights in the
           UK as a worker and her appeal is allowed


       ii) The First-tier Tribunal has found as fact that Mr  Omole  is  an
           extended family member under Regulation 8.  The  matter  is  now
           remitted to the Secretary of State to  exercise  her  discretion
           under Regulation 17(4)(b).






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          16th February 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
McClure on the 16th April 2014

