
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Notice sent                          |
|On: 26 October 2015                  |On:28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Robert Onwazubudike Isichei
                                                                  Respondent


                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The Secretary of State is the appellant before the Upper Tribunal.  She
    obtained permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated  on  9  June  2015  allowing  Mr
    Isichei's appeal against a decision refusing to vary his leave.

 2. By way of a letter dated  26  October  2015  the  Respondent  seeks  to
    withdraw her case before the Upper Tribunal. Mr Isechei  has  expressed
    no objection to such a course being taken.

 3. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a  whole,
    and observing the terms of the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  the
    agreement between the parties as to the appropriate course, I give such
    consent to the Secretary of State to withdraw.

 4. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the  parties  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's case is withdrawn.

 5. The effect of this is that the proceedings before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    are at an end. There is no appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 26 October 2015
