
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46717/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 19 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Aitken, counsel.
For the respondent:    Mr Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Mauritius who applied in August 2014  for
    a residence card as confirmation of a right  of  residence  in  the  UK
    under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the  Regulations").  The
    application was refused in October 2014.  The appellant appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Obhi ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on 16 June 2015.

 2. Given my references to the appellant's personal circumstances and those
    of  his  brother  and  sister-in-law,   an   anonymity   direction   is
    appropriate.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  This was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M L Dineen on  9  October  2015  in  the  following
    terms:
         "1.      ...
         2. The notice of appeal complains in ground 1 that the judge made a
         perverse finding that the appellant  had  attempted  to  abuse  the
         provisions of the regulations, because that finding  was  based  on
         the fact that the appellant had  gone  to  painstaking  lengths  to
         demonstrate dependency on an EEA National.
         3. I find that this constitutes an arguable error of  law,  on  the
         basis that taking pains to prove a case is unlikely to  damage  the
         credibility of a party.
         4. The findings of fact generally may be contaminated as a  result,
         so that the remaining grounds are arguable."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me.

 5. Mr Aitken, for the appellant, relied  on  the  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal which I summarise as follows:
          i)  The  finding  of  an  abuse  of  the   EEA   Regulations   is
             perverse/irrational, made as it  is  on  the  basis  that  the
             appellant and his family had gone to great lengths to show the
             appellant was financially dependent on the EEA  national,  his
             sister-in-law. This  is  particularly  the  case  because  the
             respondent had challenged the lack of evidence to support  the
             application.  The  appellant  was  entitled  to  address  that
             challenge.
         ii) The FTTJ had materially erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
             dependency began in December 2013, when the evidence was  that
             it had begun the previous month. Thus a  negative  credibility
             finding had been based on a mistake of fact.
        iii) The  FTTJ  had  misdirected  herself  on  the  nature  of  the
             dependency required. There was no need to determine the reason
             for the financial support provided by the EEA national (Moneke
             (EEA - OFMs) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00341 (IAC)).  The  case  law
             allowed for dependency of choice.
         iv) The FTTJ erred in her assessment  of  the  evidence  regarding
             dependency. Her findings were perverse and unsustainable given
             the  documentary  evidence.  There  was  no  requirement   for
             complete dependency.
          v)  The  appellant  had   discharged   the   burden   of   proof,
             notwithstanding he had entered the UK as  a  visitor  (Ihemedu
             (OFMS - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 340 (IAC)).
         vi) The finding that the EEA national's income was insufficient to
             provide financial support to the appellant was not sustainable
             given  that  the  EEA  national's  husband,  the   appellant's
             brother, also contributed to the family income.
        vii) The FTTJ had given weight to immaterial matters.
       viii) There were factual errors within the decision.

 6. Mr Walker, for the secretary  of  state,  conceded  that  the  decision
    contained material errors of law in that the FTTJ's findings were based
    on irrelevant evidence and, furthermore,  irrelevant  issues  had  been
    taken into account.

 7. I agree with the parties' representatives that  the  decision  contains
    errors of law: the FTTJ  erred  (paragraph  31)  in  finding  that  the
    appellant's having "gone to painstaking lengths to try and  demonstrate
    that the appellant is dependent on  [his  sister-in-law]  has  all  the
    hallmarks ... of  an  attempt  to  abuse  the  provisions  in  the  EEA
    Regulations". Plainly the appellant was entitled to seek to address the
    respondent's challenges in the reasons for refusal. To make  a  finding
    against  the  appellant  on  such  a  ground  is  wholly   unfair   and
    unreasonable and constitutes an error in law. Furthermore, I agree with
    the parties that there was no requirement on the FTTJ to determine  the
    reason for the provision of financial support (Moneke). It is an  error
    of law to make an adverse finding on the ground that the appellant  had
    provided "no evidence of [his]  adult  history  of  work  and  loss  of
    employment, of his parents; business employing him and then failing..."
    (Moneke).

 8. Having indicated to the parties' representatives that I  would  make  a
    finding of material errors of law, they  agreed  that  the  appropriate
    approach was for the findings of fact (insofar as they were relevant to
    the issues in the appeal) to be preserved and that I should remake  the
    decision.  I agree with this approach and proceed on that basis.

 9.  The  appellant  provided  consistent,   detailed   and   comprehensive
    documentary evidence of money transfers from the appellant's sister-in-
    law's bank account in the UK to the appellant in Mauritius. It  is  the
    appellant's case  that  he  had  not  needed  financial  support  until
    November 2013 when his parents' business failed and his parents were no
    longer able to provide him with financial  support.   The  evidence  is
    consistent with that case.

10. It is of no relevance that the appellant had  been  making  efforts  to
    find alternative employment. The sole issue for me to decide is whether
    he was dependent on his sister-in-law, the EEA national, as he  claims.
    The appellant's brother married the EEA national in  December  2013  in
    Mauritius when they were both visiting that country.  The  evidence  of
    the witnesses is that, due to the ill  health  of  the  appellant,  his
    brother and his wife extended their stay in Mauritius to  support  him.
    I am in no doubt that the appellant has demonstrated, on the balance of
    probabilities that he was provided with financial support by his Polish
    sister-in-law from November 2013, prior to the date of her marriage  to
    the appellant's brother. That support continued after the marriage  and
    whilst the appellant's brother and sister-in-law were in Mauritius. The
    appellant's evidence is that he was living with his  parents  but  that
    they could not afford to maintain him because they  were  committed  to
    funding his sister's, their daughter's, university studies.  Whilst the
    appellant was given accommodation by his parents,  I  accept  that  his
    sister-in-law  provided  funds  for  his  essential  needs;   this   is
    consistent  with  his  having  exhausted  his  savings  following   his
    redundancy, the failure of the family business  and  because  also  his
    parents were funding his sister's education.

11. The evidence of the appellant, his brother and his Polish sister-in-law
    is wholly consistent  both  as  between  the  witnesses  and  with  the
    documentary evidence which has been provided in support of the  appeal.
    It is to the credit of the appellant that he has provided comprehensive
    documentary evidence to address  the  principal  issue  raised  by  the
    respondent in her reasons for refusal, namely  his  dependency  on  his
    sister-in-law.

12. I am wholly satisfied, given that  evidence,  that  the  appellant  was
    dependent on the EEA national, his sister-in-law, prior  to  coming  to
    the UK, albeit that period of dependency was  relatively  short,  being
    from December 2013 (the date of the appellant's brother's  marriage  to
    the EEA national) to May 2014 when he entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor.
    That dependency has continued: he has lived with his brother and sister-
    in-law in the UK since his arrival here and continues to be  maintained
    by the EEA national.

13. For these reasons I find that the decision of the respondent was not in
    accordance with the law.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision.

16. I remake the decision in the appeal  by  allowing  it  to  the  limited
    extent that the respondent's decision is not  in  accordance  with  the
    law.


Signed      A M Black  Date: 18 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      A M Black  Date: 18 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

