
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46203/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 December 2015                  |On 6 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           WINIFRED BETSY FREEMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K McCarthy (counsel) instructed by Visa Legal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Metzer, promulgated on  16  June  2015
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 6 December 1955 and is a national of  Sierra
Leone. The appellant was granted entry clearance as a  visitor  10  February
2013 until 21 December 2017. That visa allows the appellant to enter the  UK
as many times as she wants to throughout its  validity,  but  prohibits  the
appellant from remaining in the UK for more than 180 days in any one visit.

4.    The appellant last entered the UK on 12 April 2014. She  has  remained
in the UK  since  then.  On  7  October  2014  the  appellant  submitted  an
application for leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  visitor.  The  respondent
refused that application on  18  November  2014.  The  respondent  correctly
calculated that by that time the appellant had been in the UK for more  than
180 days,  so  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
paragraph 44 (ii) of the immigration rules.

5.    The respondent considered whether or not  the  appellant  had  created
article 8 ECHR private life by considering paragraph 276 ADE of  the  rules.
The respondent found that, because of the appellant's age and the length  of
time  she  had  been  in  the  UK,  the  appellant  could  not  fulfil   the
requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the rules.

The Judge's Decision

6.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Metzer  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against   the
Respondent's decision finding that  the  appellant  had  established  Family
life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR in the UK.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 23 September  2015  Judge  Parkes
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "3.    The grounds argue that the Judge  had  omitted  the  appellant's
    immigration history from the decision which would have  been  relevant.
    The appeal was put on a different basis from her application, the Judge
    failed to have regard to the public interest and the appellant did  not
    have regard to the first three questions in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27,  or
    to section 117 the 2002 Act.

    4.     The grounds are self-explanatory and correctly  identify  issues
    within the decision where the judge  appears  to  have  overlooked  the
    matters that had to be addressed."

The Hearing

8.    Ms Fijiwala, for the respondent moved the grounds of appeal. She  took
me to the appellant's immigration history and emphasised the fact  that  the
appellant's application proceeded on an entirely  different  basis  to  that
argued before the Judge. She  argued  that  there  was  inadequate  reliable
evidence before the Judge to enable him to make a finding that  family  life
within the meaning of article 8 ECHR existed for the appellant  in  the  UK.
She reminded me that the appellant's argument is  that  family  life  exists
with her adult children, and between the appellant and her grandchildren.

(b)   Ms  Fijiwala  argued  that  the  Judge  had  paid  no  regard  to  the
provisions of section 117 of the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
2002, and argued that the appellant's immigration status is precarious.  She
urged me to find that the decision is tainted by  material  errors  of  law,
and to set the decision aside.

9.    (a) Ms McCarthy, for the appellant, took me through the detailed  rule
24 response. She told me that the decision does  not  contain  any  material
errors of law, but that the decision is a carefully  worded,  well-reasoned,
decision containing adequate findings of fact & correct  directions  in  law
leading the judge to unassailable conclusions. She argued that at  [18]  the
Judge clearly takes account of the  appellant's  good  immigration  history,
and told me that  it  is  clear  from  the  decision  that  the  appellant's
circumstances changed because of a combination  of  the  Ebola  outbreak  in
Sierra Leone, and the loss of her business there.

(b)   Ms McCarthy told me that whilst the appellant has been prevented  from
returning to Sierra Leone  the  intensity  of  her  relationships  with  her
daughters and her grandchildren increased so that  family  life  within  the
meaning of article 8 ECHR was created. In addition the  appellant's  elderly
father is in the UK. He suffers from cancer; the appellant visits him  every
day and is fearful that he may not have long to live.

(c)    She  argued  that  the  Judge  carried  out   a   full   &   flawless
proportionality assessment, taking account of the five stage  test  set  out
in  Razgar.  Ms  McCarthy  told  me  that  although  the  Judge   does   not
specifically referred to section 117 of the 2002 Act,  an  holistic  reading
of the decision makes it abundantly clear that the  judge's  proportionality
assessment is beyond criticism.

Analysis

10.   The respondent's first criticism is  that  the  Judge  does  not  take
account of the appellant's immigration history. There is no  merit  in  that
criticism. Between [2] and [9] of  the  decision  the  Judge  sets  out  the
appellant's immigration history as part of  a  summary  of  the  appellant's
evidence. It is true that details of  the  appellant's  immigration  history
and not set out in  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact,  but  in  reality  the
appellant's immigration history has not been ignored and is narrated in  the
decision.

11.   The thrust of the respondent's challenge is that the Judge should  not
have found that family life exists on the evidence placed  before  him;  and
even if he could find that family life exists (the  respondent  argues)  the
proportionality balancing exercise is defective.

12.   Between [2] & [15] the Judge summarises the evidence. His findings  of
fact are restricted to paragraphs, [17] and [18].  Those  two  paragraph  do
not contain adequate findings in fact. [17] starts with the bald statement

    "I had no difficulty in finding that the appellant had established that
    she had a right to family life under article 8(1) of the ECHR"

The problem is that (in a case which  involves  family  life  between  adult
children and the  appellant,  then  the  appellant  and  her  grandchildren)
inadequate  reasoning  is  given  to  explain  why  the  Judge  reaches  the
conclusion that article 8 is engaged.

13.   In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

14.   At [18] the Judge appears to embark  on  a  proportionality  exercise.
Whilst the Judges lists the factors which he finds weigh in the  appellant's
favour he does not take adequate account of section 117  of  the  2002  Act.
Nowhere  in  the  decision  does  the  Judge  acknowledge   that   effective
immigration control is in the public interest.

15.   Put simply, the decision contains conclusions but does not contain  an
analysis of the evidence nor does it contain adequate findings of fact.  The
result is that when the respondent reads the decision  she  knows  that  she
has lost, but she does not know why. I  therefore  have  to  find  that  the
decision is tainted by  material  errors  of  law  because  it  races  to  a
conclusion  without  sufficient  explanation.   As  the  decision   contains
material errors of law, I set it aside. There is sufficient evidence  before
me to enable me to remake the decision.

Findings of Fact

16.   The appellant is a national of Sierra Leone, born on 6 December  1955.
The appellant is divorced. Her daughters and her father live in the UK.  The
appellant is a business woman who has run a bar in  Sierra  Leone  for  many
years. She still owns heritable property in Sierra Leone.

17.   The appellant has visited the UK on a number  of  occasions  over  the
last 20 years. The respondent granted  the  appellant  a  multi-entry  visit
visa valid from 10 February 2013 until 21 December 2017.  That  visa  allows
the appellant to enter the UK as many times as she wants to  throughout  its
validity, but prohibits the appellant from remaining  in  the  UK  for  more
than 180 days in any one visit. The appellant last  entered  the  UK  on  12
April 2014. She has remained in the UK since then.

18.   In Spring 2014 Sierra Leone was afflicted by an Ebola epidemic.  On  7
November 2015, the World Health Organization declared  Sierra  Leone  Ebola-
free. The appellant had been due to fly back to Sierra Leone in  June  2014,
but postponed her return because of the Ebola epidemic. He  flight  was  re-
scheduled for August 2014, but that flight  was  cancelled  because  of  the
Ebola outbreak. Her flight was again re-scheduled for October 2014.

19.   The appellant's father is 89 years old.  He  suffers  from  metastatic
prostate cancer. The appellant now visits her father  each  day  and  brings
African food (which she has prepared) to him.

20.   The appellant's two daughters and four granddaughters all live in  the
UK. The appellant's daughters and granddaughters are all  British  citizens.
The appellant lives with her daughter Dolly. Dolly has two children, one  of
them  has  special  needs.  The  appellant  shares  a   bedroom   with   her
granddaughter  with  special  needs.  There  is  a  bond  of  affection  and
understanding between the appellant and her grandchildren.

21.   The appellant's daughter, Dolly, works  part-time.  She  suffers  from
anaemia and an under active thyroid. Her husband works 35  hours  per  week.
The appellant helps her daughter with child care.

The Immigration Rules

22.   The appellant's application was for leave to remain as a  visitor.  It
is beyond dispute that between 12 April 2014 and 18 November 2014 (when  the
respondent's decision was made) more than 180  days  passed.  The  appellant
cannot fulfil the  requirements  of  paragraph  44(ii)  of  the  immigration
rules. The real focus in this case is on article 8 ECHR.

23.   The respondent considered the appellant's case against  paragraph  276
ADE of the rules.  The  respondent  correctly  found  that  because  of  the
combination of the appellant's age and the length of time she  has  been  UK
the appellant cannot fulfil the requirements  of  paragraph  276  ADE.  Even
though the  appellant  appealed  against  the  respondent's  decision  dated
November 5 the appellant has never the challenged the respondent's  decision
in relation to the immigration rules.

24.   No  consideration  has  been  given  to  appendix  FM  by  either  the
respondent or the Judge at first instance. The appellant cannot  fulfil  the
requirements for the leave to remain as an  adult  dependent  relative,  and
this case has not been plead on that basis. The appellant  has  not  applied
for indefinite leave to remain as an adult dependent relative. Even  if  the
appellant had made such an application there is  a  dearth  of  evidence  to
indicate that the financial requirements are met.

25.   The  appellant  cannot  meet  the  relationship  requirements  for  an
application as the parent of a child in the UK (E-ECPT.2.2).  The  appellant
does not fall within any of the six categories of persons to  whom  appendix
FM applies. The appellant's claim cannot succeed under appendix  FM  of  the
immigration rules nor under any other part of the immigration rules.

Article 8 out-with the Immigration Rules.

26.   In SS(Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387   Lord  Justice  Richards
said at paragraph 33 "In our judgment, even though a test of  exceptionality
does not apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of  special
contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances  would  need  to
be identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new  Rules  in
Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which is not as strict as  a
test of exceptionality or a requirement of  "very  compelling  reasons"  (as
referred to in MF (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to
foreign criminals), but  which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
consideration  of  public  interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  It  also
reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which has been  tested  and
has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g.,  Haleemudeen  at  [44],  per
Beatson LJ".

27.   In Kugathas v SSHD (2003) INLR 170 the Court of Appeal said  that,  in
order to establish family life, it is necessary to  show  that  there  is  a
real committed or effective  support  or  relationship  between  the  family
members and the normal emotional ties between a  mother  and  an  adult  son
would not, without more, be enough. In Etti-Adegbola v SSHD (2009) EWCA  Civ
1319 the Court of Appeal concentrated on the last  part  of  that  test  and
confirmed that the Tribunal had applied the right test  in  finding  that  a
family's behaviour  was  "no  way  exceptional  or  beyond  the  norm".   In
JB(India) and Others v ECO, Bombay (2009) EWCA Civ 234 the Court  of  Appeal
reiterated that the approach in Kugathas must be applied to the question  of
whether family life for the purposes of Article 8 subsists  between  parents
and adult children.

28.   The appellant's daughters are independent adults. Much is made of  the
relationship between the appellant and her  14-year-old  granddaughter  with
special needs, but the harsh truth is that the appellant is not the  primary
carer of any  of  her  grandchildren.  The  appellant's  14-year-old  grand-
daughter lives with  both  of  her  parents  and  her  younger  sister.  The
arrangements for the appellant's 14-year-old granddaughter's  special  needs
were established long before the appellant entered their household.

29.   The appellant's father may be approaching the end  of  his  life.  The
appellant visits him daily. No reliable evidence of  dependency  was  before
the first-tier nor is it before me. There is no  reliable  evidence  of  any
form of dependence in any of the appellant's  family  relationships  in  the
UK. The appellant has the normal emotional ties to her relatives in the  UK.
Family life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR does  not  exist  for  this
appellant in the UK.

30.   No reliable evidence of  the  component  parts  of  private  life  are
placed before me. The undisputed facts  are  that  the  appellant  lived  59
years of her life in Sierra Leone, and has  only  been  in  the  UK  for  20
months. For many of those months it was the appellant's intention to  return
to Sierra Leone. The appellant still owns her own business premises and  her
own home in Sierra Leone. Private life within the meaning of article 8  ECHR
does not exist for this appellant in the UK.

31.   Against  those  findings  I  balance  the  respondent's  interest  in
preserving fair and effective immigration control to protect this country's
fragile economy. In Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  25  (IAC)  it
was held that the judgments of the Supreme Court  in  Patel  and  Others  v
Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve to re-focus
attention on the nature and purpose of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and,  in
particular, to recognise that Article's limited  utility  in  private  life
cases that are far removed from the protection of an individual's moral and
physical integrity.

Conclusion

32.   I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  it
contains a material error of law. I substitute the following decision.

Decision

I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

I dismiss the Appeal on Articles 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed      Date 23 December 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
