
[pic]


Upper Tribunal                                                   Appeal
Numbers: Ia467462014; IA467532014;
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
  IA467622014; IA467682014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 17 March 2016                             |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ARCHER

                                   Between

                          mrs adeolu tolulope morah
                                    [m1]
                                    [m2]
                                    [m3]
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SecretARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr James Collins, Counsel, instructed by Springfield
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal is not subject to an  anonymity  order  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
    Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.  Neither  party
    has invited me to make an anonymity order pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/2698)  and  I
    have not done so.

 2. The appellants appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the  appellants'  appeal  against  a  decision  taken  on  4
    November 2014 to refuse leave to remain.

Introduction

 3. The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria (except the fourth appellant
    who is a citizen of the USA)  comprising  a  family  unit.  The  second
    appellant was born in 2006 in London, the third appellant was  born  in
    2008 in London and the fourth appellant was born in  2004  in  Chicago,
    entering the UK when he was two months old. The first appellant arrived
    in the UK on 29 December 2005 with entry clearance as  a  visitor.  She
    overstayed in the UK and on 27 September 2012 the  appellants  made  an
    application for leave to remain under Article 8. That  application  was
    refused on 20 May 2013. After representations were made and a  previous
    appeal lodged with the First-tier Tribunal, the decision was maintained
    on 22 January 2014 and 4 November 2014.

 4. The first appellant married MM in Nigeria in 2002.  She  resigned  from
    her job with ADC Airlines in 2003  when  she  fell  pregnant.  She  had
    previously visited the UK and returned in September 2003. However,  she
    travelled to the USA in December 2003 to visit a family member and  the
    fourth appellant was born there. She returned to the UK with the fourth
    appellant in March 2004. MM joined  her  with  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student in June 2004 and the first appellant successfully applied for a
    second five year visit visa in 2005. The first  and  fourth  appellants
    and MM returned to the UK in May 2005 and lived as a family. The second
    and third appellants were born in the UK. The marriage broke up in 2007
    and MM returned to Nigeria.

 5. The Secretary of State concluded that the requirements of  Appendix  FM
    of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules") were not met and that there were
    no grounds to grant leave to remain outside the Rules.  Nigeria  has  a
    functional educational system and it was in the best interests  of  the
    child appellants to remain with their  mother.  Any  interference  with
    private life was proportionate. The applications were refused.

The Appeal

 6. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and attended an oral
    hearing at Taylor House on 4 August 2015. The First-tier Tribunal found
    that the appellants did not meet the requirements of Appendix  FM.  The
    children had all lived in the  UK  for  more  than  7  years  and  were
    qualifying children under section  117D  of  the  2002  Act.  The  only
    question was whether it was reasonable to expect them to leave  the  UK
    under section 117B(6). The judge found that  the  first  appellant  was
    deliberately lying when she said that the second and  third  appellants
    had never visited Nigeria - they had probably  done  so  in  2009.  The
    judge considered  that  the  only  significant  private  lives  of  the
    children were after they were four years old. The third  appellant  was
    autistic and had considerable support in the UK but removal  was  still
    reasonable. Similar reasoning was applied to the other child appellants
    who would suffer some disruption to their education but could adapt  to
    life in Nigeria. They could re-establish contact with MM and would have
    more money in Nigeria. The first appellant  relied  upon  charity  from
    friends and did not  have  enough  money  to  buy  birthday  cakes  and
    presents in the UK.

 7. The judge found that the interference with the private and family  life
    of the appellants would not have consequences of such  severity  as  to
    outweigh the compelling public interest considerations in the case. The
    first appellant had the private life that one would expect of a  single
    mother of three children. She did not work and relied upon the  charity
    of friends and the church. She had two  children  on  the  NHS  without
    entitlement and educated the children at public expense.  MM  had  paid
    the rent for the previous eight months.  The  first  four  years  of  a
    child's life have little importance for their private life. It  was  in
    the best interests of the children to remain  with  their  mother.  The
    appeals were dismissed.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 8. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law by failing to  give
    proper consideration to the reasonableness test and failed to  consider
    the relevant case law. The finding that the first  appellant  took  all
    three children back to Nigeria in 2009 was  unsustainable  because  the
    visa application was made in a different date of birth from the  second
    appellant. In Azimi-Moayed, Blake J only stated that seven  years  from
    age 4 was likely to be more significant than the  years  between  three
    and seven. The judge was wrong to in effect write off  the  first  four
    years of each of the children's lives in the UK. The third appellant is
    autistic and there was copious evidence as to how serious his condition
    was and the judge failed to address how the disruption to  his  routine
    caused by removal would  impact  on  him.  In  respect  of  the  fourth
    appellant, the judge failed to properly consider the  impact  of  being
    uprooted from the only life he knows and the analogy with transfer from
    junior school to a senior school was  irrational.  The  report  of  the
    independent social worker received only the barest mention  and  little
    analysis.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  on
    4 February 2016. It was arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    consider the case law and the other grounds were all arguable.

10. In a rule 24 response dated 15 February 2015 the  respondent  submitted
    that the judge had carried  out  a  very  careful  assessment  of  each
    child's particular needs and reached a reasoned conclusion.  Thereafter
    the judge considered the private lives of the appellants and took  into
    account the appalling abuse of the  immigration  system  by  the  first
    appellant. The grounds amounted only to disagreement.

11. Thus, the appeal came before me



Discussion

12. Mr Collins submitted that all three children  are  qualifying  children
    and the second appellant was born in the UK on [ ] 2006. It seemed  odd
    that there was a bare reference to a different  child  in  the  refusal
    letter in relation to the holiday in Nigeria. The  judge  misunderstood
    Azimi-Moayed at paragraphs 35, 37 and 38 of the decision.  That  was  a
    clear error of law. The judge did not consider the impact of disruption
    on the fourth appellant and there  was  very  little  analysis  of  the
    social worker report. The reference  to  "manifestly  unreasonable"  at
    paragraph 36 was the wrong test.  There  were  repeated  references  to
    discounting the first four years of residence  in  the  UK.  There  was
    nothing about the negative points of integration in Nigeria.

13. Mr Kotas submitted that the decision was  sustainable  and  defendable.
    The judge did not attach a great deal of weight to  the  finding  about
    the holiday in Nigeria at paragraph 28 of  the  decision.  The  correct
    test was applied at paragraph 27. Paragraph 36 was not referred  to  in
    the grounds. The only real issue was about deducting the first 4 years.
    What the judge was doing in effect was indicating that he had the Azimi-
    Moayed approach in mind. The judge referred to no  significant  private
    life rather than no private life. There is no extended private life for
    very young children and the judge correctly rounded the matter  off  at
    paragraph 44 of the decision. The judge  did  not  treat  the  children
    homogenously and found that they would go with the first appellant  and
    would benefit from the support mechanism available from MM in  Nigeria.
    This was a considered decision and the  first  appellant's  immigration
    history was relevant to the claim.



14.  The  key  legal  issues  in  relation  to  these   appeals   are   not
    straightforward. The provisions of paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules  that
    was in force at the relevant time are as follows;



         "Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life

         276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
         application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
             Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM;
             and

             (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
             grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20
             years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously
             in the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
             imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
             applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v)  is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has
             spent at least half of his life living continuously in the UK
             (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the
             UK for less than 20 years (discounting any period of
             imprisonment) but has no ties (including social, cultural or
             family) with the country to which he would have to go if
             required to leave the UK."
    The relevant provisions of section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 are as follows;


         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).




         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.




         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)   In this Part-

         "Article 8" means Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights;

         "qualifying child" means a person who is under the age  of  18  and
         who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  has lived in the United Kingdom for a  continuous  period
             of seven years or more;

         "qualifying partner" means a partner who-

             (a)  is a British citizen, or

             (b)  who is settled in the United Kingdom (within the  meaning
             of the Immigration Act 1971 - see section 33(2A) of that Act).
             "


15. The issue of proportionality involves striking a fair  balance  between
    the rights of the appellants and  the  public  interest.  In  assessing
    proportionality, the "best interests" of any children must be a primary
    consideration (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD (2011) UKSC 4 and section 55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009).  Whilst  the  best
    interests of the child are not  necessarily  determinative,  a  child's
    best interests are a weighty consideration,  albeit  one  that  can  be
    outweighed by sufficient weight of public  interest  concerns  (see  ZH
    (Tanzania) per Lady Hale at [33]).


16. A significant issue in this appeal is the fact that the third appellant
    is a qualifying child, as defined in section 117D and  therefore  falls
    within section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.  The  judge  had  to  consider
    whether it was reasonable to expect her to leave  the  United  Kingdom.
    The recent case law remains relevant, whilst taking into  account  that
    the case law effectively pre-dates the commencement of sections 117A  -
    D (28 July 2014).

17. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197(IAC),  Mr  Justice  Blake  held  that  as  a
    starting point, it is in the best interests of children to be with both
    their parents and if both parents are being removed from  the  UK  then
    the starting point suggests that so should dependent children who  form
    part of their household unless there are reasons to the contrary. It is
    generally in the interests of  children  to  have  both  stability  and
    continuity of social and  educational  provision  and  the  benefit  of
    growing up in the cultural norms of the society to which  they  belong.
    Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of origin can  lead
    to development of social, cultural and educational ties that  it  would
    be inappropriate to disrupt in the absence of compelling reasons to the
    contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence is not clear cut  but  past
    and present policies have identified seven years as a relevant  period.
    Seven years from age four is likely to be more significant to  a  child
    than the first seven years of life. Very young children are focussed on
    their parents rather than their peers and are adaptable.


18. In EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874, Lord Justice
    Clarke held that  in  determining  whether  the  need  for  immigration
    control outweighs the best interests of the children, it  is  necessary
    to determine the relative strength of the  factors  which  make  it  in
    their best interests to remain here and also to  take  account  of  any
    factors that point the other way. A decision will depend on a number of
    factors such as the children's age, the length of time  in  the  United
    Kingdom, how long  they  have  been  in  education,  what  stage  their
    education has reached, the extent to which they have  become  distanced
    from the country  to  which  it  is  proposed  that  they  return,  how
    renewable their connection may  be,  to  what  extent  they  will  have
    linguistic, medical or other difficulties in adapting to life  in  that
    country and the extent to which the course proposed will interfere with
    their family life or  their  rights  (if  they  have  any)  as  British
    citizens.


19. I find that the judge made material errors of law  in  considering  the
    best interests of the children and in the assessment of  reasonableness
    under section 117B of the 2002 Act. The judge deducted the  first  four
    years of the children's lives when considering the  strength  of  their
    private lives in the UK at paragraphs 35, 37 and 38  of  the  decision.
    There is nothing in the case law or statute to justify such an approach
    which  is  a  clear  error  of  law.  The  reference   to   "manifestly
    unreasonable" at paragraph 36 of the decision suggests that  the  judge
    had the wrong  test  in  mind  when  considering  reasonableness  under
    section  117B.  The  consideration  of  the  social  worker  report  at
    paragraphs 35 and 39 of the decision is not  adequate  -  there  is  no
    analysis of  the  report  as  a  whole  and  no  findings  on  the  key
    conclusions of the report.


20. There is a further error of law in that the judge has  only  considered
    unreasonableness under  section  117B  and  has  made  no  findings  in
    relation to Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE of the Rules, both of which
    were considered in the refusal  letter.  Oddly,  the  judge  considered
    Article 8 after making findings  in  relation  to  section  117B  which
    suggests a degree of confusion. Section 117A of  the  2002  Act  states
    that Part VA of the 2002 Act applies when the tribunal is  required  to
    determine whether a decision breaches a person's right to  respect  for
    private and family life under Article  8  and  as  a  result  would  be
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998. Consideration of
    section 117B therefore correctly forms part of the Article 8 assessment
    rather than a free standing exercise. The judge also failed to consider
    section 117B (1) - (5) in relation to any of the appellants -  contrary
    to Miah (section 117B NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT 00131 (IAC).


21. I accept that the finding at paragraph 28  of  the  decision  that  the
    first appellant deliberately lied to the tribunal and probably took the
    children to Nigeria in 2009 effectively ignores the  material  evidence
    that the  entry  clearance  application  said  to  be  for  the  second
    appellant was actually made in a different date of  birth.  Failing  to
    consider material evidence is a further  material  error  of  law.  The
    finding clearly  influenced  the  judge  in  relation  to  the  general
    credibility of the first appellant and a finding that an appellant  has
    deliberately lied to the tribunal is always a serious matter.

22. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals under the Rules and Article 8 involved the making of errors  of
    law and its decision cannot stand.

Decision

23. Mr Collins invited me to order a rehearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    if I set aside the judge's decision. Bearing in mind paragraph  7.2  of
    the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  I  consider   that   an
    appropriate course of action. I find that the errors of law infect  the
    decision as a whole and therefore the re-hearing will be de  novo  with
    all issues to be considered again by the First-tier Tribunal.

24. Consequently, I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I
    order the appeal to be heard again in the  First-Tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo by a judge other than the previous First-tier judge.



Signed   [pic]                      Date 21 May 2016

Judge Archer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

