
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46471/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 18 November 2015                   |                   On 11 December 2015|
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     Zb
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Moksud, Agent Solicitor for Lincolns, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, ZB, born in November 1990 and is a citizen of  Pakistan.
    She had applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as the spouse
    of MMR, who has indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  this  country.   Her
    application was refused by the  respondent  on  6  June  2014  and  the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Nichol) which,  in
    a decision and reasons dated 15 February 2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did err  in  law  such
    that his decision falls to be set aside.  I have reached that  decision
    for the following reasons.  First, I am not satisfied  that  the  judge
    properly applied the law as to the burden of proof in the appeal before
    the Tribunal.  In this appeal, the respondent  has  asserted  that  the
    appellant had taken an ETS TOEIC English language test in speaking  and
    writing that the results of her test have been deemed  invalid  by  the
    respondent.  The judge found [12] that none of the evidence provided to
    him in the First-tier Tribunal appeal for this appellant contained  any
    evidence which was particular to her.  Rather, the statements  provided
    to the judge were "generic" and sought to "explain  problems  that  had
    arisen in connection with the English language test conducted by or  on
    behalf of ETS and the action that has been  taken  as  a  result."   At
    [37], the judge wrote:

         I consider that the  starting  point  to  decide  whether,  without
         considering the respondent's evidence, I am satisfied the  claimant
         did take the correct tests in question.  It is  only  then  that  I
         need to consider whether the respondent's evidence  outweighs  that
         of the appellant.

 3. That paragraph is problematic.  It is difficult  to  see  how,  if  the
    burden of proving that the appellant had not taken the tests  and  that
    her test results were not genuine rested on the respondent, that burden
    might be discharged "without considering  the  respondent's  evidence."
    The judge proceeded to consider the oral evidence  which  he  had  been
    given by the appellant and her husband which led him to  find  that  he
    was "not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that  the  appellant
    did take the test personally."   [38].   Only  at  that  point  in  the
    analysis did the judge consider the respondent's evidence finding  that
    this  evidence  "strengthens  this  finding."  In  effect,  the   judge
    proceeded on the basis that the central issue of  the  appeal  (whether
    the appellant or a proxy had taken the test) was for the appellant, not
    the  respondent,  to  prove.   The  judge  noted  that,  "[the  generic
    evidence] outlines well-established procedure for checking results  and
    requires evidence to rebut it.  In  this  case  I  do  not  accept  the
    appellant took  the  test  and  the  respondent's  evidence  serves  to
    reinforce that conclusion."

 4. I appreciate the difficulty in which the judge found himself  and  that
    he may have considered that the "generic" evidence from the  respondent
    somehow required  special  treatment.   Whatever  the  difficulties  he
    encountered, I am satisfied the judge erred in  law  in  proceeding  to
    determine the appeal in the manner which he describes at [37].

 5. Secondly, I note that MMR (the appellant's spouse) has indefinite leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom and that their child (LR) was  born  to
    the couple in July 2014 in the United Kingdom.   Correctly,  the  judge
    assumed [44] that the child is a British citizen  in  consequence.   At
    [44] and also when discussing the application of Article 8 ECHR outside
    the Immigration Rules, the judge concluded that there "would  not  seem
    to be any reason why [LR] could not move with her mother to Pakistan or
    remain in the United Kingdom with her father.  She is still very  young
    and would therefore be more adaptable to a new way of life".  The judge
    went on to note that the "appellant and her  husband  could  return  to
    Pakistan together and continue their family and private life  [there]."
    In that scenario, it is not clear where LR  would  live.   It  is  also
    unclear how a very young child might  reasonably  live  in  the  United
    Kingdom separated from her mother.  Issues such  as  those  arising  in
    Sanade (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT  00048  (IAC)
    (concerning the reasonableness of requiring a British citizen child  to
    live outside the European Union) had not been addressed by  the  judge.
    Viewed as a whole, I consider that the Article 8 ECHR analysis has been
    inadequate.

 6. In the circumstances, I  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  Because there  is
    an extensive fact-finding analysis required  in  order  to  remake  the
    decision, it is appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal (not Judge  Nichol)  for  that  Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 15 February  2015  is
set aside.  None of the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Nichol) for that Tribunal  to
remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 November 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





