
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46373/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th June 2014                               |On 25th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                             KASHIF HUSSAIN SHAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain, of Counsel instructed by One Stop
                    Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On  9th  April  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lloyd  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Heynes who found  that  the  appellant  had  no
    valid appeal against refusal of leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).  That
    was because he concluded that the appellant made  his  application  for
    leave on 4th June 2013 when his leave had expired on 19th May 2013 even
    though the appellant claimed he had submitted an  application  in  time
    although that had been rejected by the respondent for non-payment.

 2. Judge Lloyd gave permission because he thought  it  arguable  that  the
    judge had failed to decide the validity  issue  by  considering  Basnet
    (Validity of application - respondent)  [2012]  UKUT  113  (IAC)  which
    placed the burden on the respondent to show that a  fee  had  not  been
    paid.

 3. In a response sent on 9th May 2014 the respondent  expressed  the  view
    that the judge had directed himself appropriately because the appellant
    had used a cheque to pay for the application but Basnet  was  concerned
    with credit card payments.

Error on a Point of Law

 4.  At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Harrison  produced  a  copy  of  the
    respondent's letter of  30th  May  2013  which  rejected  the  original
    application which had been made by the appellant on 17th May 2013,  two
    days before his leave to remain expired on 19th May 2013.  He  conceded
    that the letter gave no indication  as  to  the  manner  in  which  the
    appellant had made his payment and accepted that the subsequent  letter
    from the Home  Office  dated  17th  January  2014  confirmed  that  the
    appellant had paid by credit or debit card the  details  of  which  had
    been provided with the application.  Thus, he  accepted  that,  in  the
    absence of information from the respondent to show  precisely  how  the
    fees transaction had been effected and that the correct card number had
    been used to request payment, the respondent had not complied with  the
    requirement set out  in  Basnet  for  her  to  show  that  it  was  the
    appellant's fault that payment had not been made.

 5. Mr Hussain confirmed that reliance was  placed  upon  the  respondent's
    failure to show that the appellant was at fault yet had  not  done  so.
    The application made by the appellant on 17th May should therefore have
    been regarded as valid and his appeal should have proceeded.

 6. Having considered the information provided by the respondent I  reached
    the conclusion that the decision made by Judge Heynes in the First-tier
    Tribunal was in error and now give my reasons for that conclusion.  The
    judge does not show that he fully investigated the circumstances of the
    appellant's payment with the application made on 17th May  2013.   That
    application was not accompanied by a cheque, as stated  by  the  judge,
    but was paid for  by  debit  or  credit  card  as  the  respondent  now
    acknowledges.  This is clear from the document at page 26 of the latest
    appellant bundle received at the Stoke Hearing Centre on 13th June 2014
    although the full card details given by the appellant on that form have
    been  obliterated.   In  the  circumstances  the  judge   should   have
    considered the guidance set out in Basnet requiring the  respondent  to
    show that the application was not accompanied by information sufficient
    to enable a fee to be taken by means of the appellant's bank card.  The
    appellant claims that there were sufficient funds in his  bank  account
    to meet the card transaction at all times and that  is  also  a  factor
    which the judge should have  considered  if  he  had  drawn  the  right
    conclusion about the method of payment.

 7. The error is such that the decision should be re-made.  It  appears  to
    me that the appropriate course of action is for the  decision  on  this
    issue and, if appropriate, the appeal as a whole to be  dealt  with  by
    the First-tier Tribunal which will have to make findings afresh on  all
    issues.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider  the
    validity of the appeal applying the guidance of the Tribunal in  Basnet
    then, if appropriate, to consider the substantive  appeal  against  the
    decision of the respondent taken on 15th October 2013.

 2. The resumed hearing will take  place  at  either  Nottingham  or  Stoke
    Hearing Centres.

 3. The appellant's representatives should indicate  whether  or  not  they
    intend to rely upon the bundles of documents received by  the  Tribunal
    on  13th  and  18th  June  2014  in  respect  of  the  preliminary  and
    substantive issues to be dealt with before the First-tier Tribunal.  In
    the  event  that  further  documentation  is  to   be   supplied   then
    consolidated bundles should be filed and served.

 4. The appeal must not be heard before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Heynes.








Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


