
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46806/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th June 2014                               |On 1st July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                            MS ELIZABETH REVADELO
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah instructed by Bloomsbury Immigration
Specialists
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  the  Philippines  whose  appeal  was
    dismissed by First-tier Judge Taylor  in  a  determination  dated  24th
    February 2014.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged primarily  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant claimed she did not have sufficient time to  contact  her  GP
    and consultant to provide her with the necessary evidence and therefore
    an adjournment should have been granted.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the matter came before me.

 4. The Secretary of  State  lodged  a  Rule  24  notice  saying  that  the
    Respondent did not oppose the Appellant's application for permission to
    appeal and invited the Tribunal to remit the matter back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal because the Appellant was denied a hearing on  procedural
    unfairness grounds as disclosed.

 5. Before me both parties were agreed that the matter should  be  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for the reasons stated.  As  was  stated  in
    the granting of permission there was an impracticality of the Appellant
    obtaining the  necessary  supporting  documentation  from  the  medical
    profession prior to the date of the hearing.

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in
    its entirety.  No findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  are  to  stand.
    Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and  Practice  Statement  7.2
    the nature and  extent  of  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 8. I set aside the decision.

 9. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


