

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46725/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd May 2014                              |On 6th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             TOCHUKWU ROY AGADA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Ikehikechukwu of Moorehouse solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) appeals a decision  of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal which allowed an appeal by the respondent (hereafter the
      claimant) against a decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain  as
      the spouse of a British citizen on the grounds that the  claimant  had
      been  living  with  his  wife  during  the  past  two  years  and  the
      relationship was subsisting.


   2. Permission to appeal had  been  granted  on  the  basis  that  it  was
      arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  failed  to  give
      adequate reasons why he was satisfied that the marriage was subsisting
      in the light of the evidence before him. In particular the  judge  had
      referred in general terms to inconsistent answers given by the  couple
      to  questions  as  to  their  relationship,  to   witness   statements
      explaining the discrepancies without stating whether and if so why  he
      accepted those explanations and had also, again  in  general  and  non
      specific terms, stated that there was overwhelming evidence  that  the
      marriage was genuine subsisting.

   3. Although the judge refers to other documents and to  having  read  all
      the documents presented  to  him  he  gives  no  indication  what  the
      discrepancies were, what the explanation for the discrepancies was and
      why (if he does) he accepts that explanation and what  other  evidence
      there was that could result in his finding that there was overwhelming
      evidence that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting.  Although
      referring in the determination  to  the  possible  need  to  refer  to
      documents in the court file, this is  hardly  an  adequate  indication
      that the judge has undertaken an  assessment  of  those  documents  in
      reaching his decision; it is merely a statement that  that  there  are
      documents and records present.

   4. Although a judge is not required to spell out each and every piece  of
      evidence it is incumbent upon a judge to give some indication  of  the
      evidence and reasons for the conclusions reached and for there not  to
      be a contradiction in his findings. To fail to do  so  amounts  to  an
      error of law.

   5. Although the grounds seeking permission to appeal refer to  a  failure
      to give any reason why the appeal was allowed under  Article  8,  this
      would not amount to an  error  of  law  had  the  judge  drawn  proper
      reasoned  findings  for  his  findings  that  the  claimant  met   the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules. As it is the  failure  to  make
      such findings under the Rules renders the decision under Article 8  an
      error.

     6. I set aside the decision to be remade.

     7. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
        assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper Tribunal.

     8. The Practice Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration
        and Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal states:


                  7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion  to
                         proceed  to  re-make  the  decision,   instead   of
                         remitting the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
                         unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

                  (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal.




     9. In the light of the absence of total reasoned fact finding  by  the
        First-tier Tribunal I remit the appeal to be determined  afresh  by
        the First-tier Tribunal.


    10. I make no further directions save that it not be heard by Judge K W
        Brown.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I remit the appeal to be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal.

     Consequential Directions


Not to be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge K W Brown.


                                    Date 5th June 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
