
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46196/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23rd September 2014               |On 30th September 2014               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            ABDELAZIZ ABDI SALEH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, senior home office presenting officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Hersi of Hersi & Co solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Secretary  of  State  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
         decision of First tier Tribunal Judge S Aziz who allowed an  appeal
         by Mr Saleh against a refusal to issue a Permanent  Residence  Card
         under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Are)  Regulations  2006
         (EEA Regulations), regulation 15(1)(b).

         Background

      2. Mr Saleh had applied for a residence card on the  grounds  that  he
         was the family member of an EEA national and that he had resided in
         the UK with that EEA national  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
         years.

      3. The application was refused on the grounds that he had not provided
         evidence that the EEA national had resided in the UK in  accordance
         with the EEA Regulations during that five year period.

         Error of law

      4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  (and  these  findings  were  not
         challenged or disturbed):

          a. There was inadequate evidence to establish  to  the  requisite
             standard of proof that Mr Saleh's  wife  had  been  exercising
             Treaty Rights during the tax years 2003/4 and 2004/5.

          b. That Mr Saleh's wife was exercising Treaty Rights  within  the
             tax years 2005/6, 2006/7, 2007/8, 2008/9 and 2010/11.

          c. That Mr Saleh's wife was not exercising Treaty  rights  during
             the tax year 2009/10.

          d. That from 2011 to the date of hearing she was  mainly  looking
             after their children.

      5. It would have been of greater assistance to Mr  Saleh  and  to  the
         calculation of time generally had  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         made findings as to the dates when Mr Saleh's wife  was  exercising
         Treaty Rights, particularly given the need to  establish  that  she
         had been exercising those rights for a five year continuous  period
         and not merely during periods of time within tax years.

      6. On the basis of the general findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         judge and despite the lack of specificity I am  satisfied  that  Mr
         Saleh's wife was exercising Treaty rights from 5th April 2005 until
         4th April 2009. This amounts to a continuous period of four years.

      7. The Secretary of State submitted that the First-tier Tribunal judge
         had erred in law in finding that  the  resumption  of  exercise  of
         Treaty Rights by Mr Saleh's wife on 10th May 2011  meant  that  the
         period after May 2011 could be aggregated with the previous periods
         of time during which she had been  exercising  Treaty  Rights  such
         that she had accumulated five years continual  residence  and  thus
         that Mr Saleh had acquired a  right  of  permanent  residence.  The
         judge had, the Secretary of  State  submitted,  erroneously  relied
         upon SSWP v Dias (Case C-325/09)  CJEU  (Third  Chamber)  for  that
         proposition.

      8. Mr Hersi was unable to  point  to  any  part  of  Dias  which  gave
         authority for the conclusion drawn by the First-tier Tribunal.

      9. Dias is not authority for the proposition that periods of residence
         can  be  aggregated  for  the  purpose  of  calculating  continuous
         residence. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in finding it
         was. He has erred in law in finding that the established periods of
         time during which Mr Saleh's  wife  was  exercising  Treaty  rights
         amounted to five years continuous residence  and  thus  enabled  Mr
         Saleh to obtain permanent residence.

     10. I set aside the decision to be remade.

         Remaking the decision

     11. There had been no challenge  to  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge as to the periods during which Mr Saleh's  wife  was
         working. I heard no oral evidence but heard submissions  from  both
         representatives.

     12. Mr Hersi submitted that the period of  absence  from  work  between
         April 2009 and 10th May 2010 was permitted in accordance  with  the
         EEA Regulations and did not break continuity of residence. She  was
         entitled  to  6  months  unexplained  absence  and  thereafter  was
         entitled to absence from work as a result  of  pregnancy.  She  had
         become pregnant in October 2009 (as evidenced by the birth  of  the
         baby in  May  2010).  She  therefore  retained  her  continuity  of
         residence  and  thus  had  an  aggregate  period  of   five   years
         (regulations 3(2)(a) and 3(2)(c)). He submitted  that  it  did  not
         matter that she remained in the UK.

     13. Mr Hersi further submitted that in any event the Secretary of State
         was estopped from raising "anything that happened" between February
         2009 and May 2010 because from November 2008 until February 2010 Mr
         Saleh had an application pending before  the  Secretary  of  State,
         there was correspondence between Mr  Saleh  and  the  Secretary  of
         State to establish whether his spouse was exercising Treaty  Rights
         and the outcome of that application was to grant him  a  five  year
         residence document with effect from 2nd February 2010. During  that
         period of time, it was argued, the  grant  of  a  residence  permit
         meant that the Secretary of State accepted that Mr Saleh's wife was
         exercising Treaty Rights and she was thus estopped from now stating
         that  she  was  not.   Alternatively  it  was  submitted  that  the
         Secretary of State had waived the right to rely  on  the  assertion
         that  the  spouse  was  not  exercising  Treaty  Rights  given   in
         particular  that  Mr  Saleh  had  previously  been  granted   entry
         clearance in March 2007 as the spouse of an EEA national exercising
         Treaty rights.

     14. Regulation 3 (2) reads, so far as is relevant for Mr Saleh:

         3.- Continuity of residence

         (1)  This regulation applies for the purpose of calculating periods
         of continuous residence in the United Kingdom under regulation 5(1)
         and regulation 15.

         (2)  Continuity of residence is not affected by-

             (a)  periods of absence from the United Kingdom which  do  not
             exceed six months in total in any year;

             (b)  ...

             (c)  any one absence from the  United  Kingdom  not  exceeding
             twelve months for an important reason such  as  pregnancy  and
             childbirth, serious illness, study or vocational  training  or
             an overseas posting.

     15. There are  two  difficulties  with  Mr  Hersi's  first  submission:
         regulation 3 requires absence from the UK and secondly there is  no
         provision for aggregation of period covered by 3(2)(a) and 3(2)(c).
         On the basis of the findings of the judge as to the periods of time
         when Mr Saleh's wife was employed and exercising Treaty rights,  on
         the basis that she was not absent from the UK and on the basis that
         such periods when she was either not working or was pregnant cannot
         be  aggregated,  I  find  that  she  has  not  accrued  five  years
         continuous residence in accordance with  the  EEA  regulations.  Mr
         Saleh thus does not qualify under that head.

     16. In so far as the "estoppel" argument raised by Mr  Hersi  this  too
         must fail. The issue of a residence permit is declaratory only  for
         that time. The residence permit was issued in February 2010 and  is
         merely declaratory that at that date his wife was exercising Treaty
         rights. It has no bearing on the periods of time  before  or  after
         that date.

     17. Accordingly I find that the Secretary of State's appeal against the
         decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  succeeds;  Mr  Saleh's
         appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to
         issue him with a permanent residence permit is dismissed.

     18. It is of course open to Mr Saleh to submit  a  further  application
         for a permanent residence card with  evidence  that  his  wife  was
         exercising Treaty Rights for a continuous period of five years  and
         covering the actual dates for which she makes such a claim.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in  the  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue a  permanent  residence  card  by
    dismissing it


     Date 29th September 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
