
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46273/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 19 April 2016                  |On 28 April 2016                        |
|                                  |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                           mr muhammad azeem qadir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Majeed, a Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a  Pakistani  national  born  on  5  March  1985.   He
    applied for a residence card on the basis that he wished to  reside  in
    the EEA with Joanna  Pieczkowska,  a  Polish  national.   They  have  a
    daughter together called  Jasmin  Maria  Qadir  who  was  born  on  2nd
    December 2014.

2.   The respondent refused the application for an  EEA  residence  card  as
    confirmation of the appellant's rights to reside as the  spouse  of  an
    EEA national (i.e. Ms Pieczkowska) on 6 November 2014.   The  appellant
    appealed that decision to Judge Haria (the Immigration Judge) but Judge
    Haria dismissed the appeal on 28 September 2015.

3.   The  appellant  appealed  the  decision  and  Designated  Judge  Shaerf
    decided that there was, arguably, a material error in  the  Immigration
    Judge's decision.  He identified that the Immigration Judge had  failed
    to consider the fact that the respondent had not disclosed a record  of
    interview on which the reasons for refusal were based.  That  interview
    had been conducted on 30 October 2014.  The answers the appellant  gave
    in interview were said by the respondent to be inconsistent with  those
    that Ms Pieczkowska gave in an interview, presumably, at the same time.



4.   Additionally, the Immigration Judge appeared to Judge  Shaerf  to  have
    possibly misapplied the burden of proof in paragraph 23 of the decision
    where she said that the respondent had discharged the evidential burden
    owing to the fact that there were inconsistent answers between the  two
    interviewees.  Mr Iqbal, who appeared for the appellant at the  hearing
    before the FtT, pointed out that the records of interview had not  been
    produced but the Immigration Judge considered that no evidence had been
    produced that the appellant  had  actually  requested  such  documents.
    Both parties were under a duty to disclose them under  Rule  2  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  This placed  an  obligation  on  the  parties  to
    cooperate with the Tribunal and enable the Tribunal to deal with  cases
    fairly and justly in the  circumstances.   The  Immigration  Judge  had
    dismissed the appeal but Judge Shaerf considered that the approach  was
    arguably wrong.

The Hearing

5.   Following the grant of permission on 29 February 2016 on 7  March  2016
    the respondent  had  sought  to  maintain  the  decision  of  the  FtT.
    However, when the matter came before me the respondent was  represented
    by Mr Clarke, an experienced Presenting Officer.  Mr Clarke pointed out
    to the Tribunal that there had not been adequate consideration  of  the
    oral evidence in addition  to  a  failure  to  consider  the  interview
    records, which  had,  he  accepted,  not  been  disclosed.   This  was,
    unfortunately, an error which could not be rectified before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  He accepted an obligation on the part of the  respondent  to
    disclose the interview records and accepted this obligation had existed
    on his principal throughout.  Because the error was so  fundamental  it
    was necessary for the matter to be remitted to the FtT.

6.   Unsurprisingly, Mr  Majeed,  did  not  disagree  with  this  course  of
    action.

7.   Accordingly, I decided that there had been a material error of  law  in
    the decision of the FtT and acceded to the request of both  parties  to
    remit the matter to that Tribunal for a fresh hearing at which none  of
    the findings would be preserved.  The hearing was to be before a  judge
    other than the Immigration Judge.  Directions were made, subsequent  to
    the departure of Mr Majeed, that such hearing was to be attended  by  a
    Polish interpreter to assist the sponsor to give evidence.  However,  I
    direct that the parties are to notify  the  FtT  of  their  interpreter
    requirements within seven days of being notified of the transfer and of
    any other additional directions they require.

8.   All further directions will be issued by the FtT.

Notice of Decision

Having found a material error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  FtT  that
decision is set aside.  It is remitted to the FtT to make a  fresh  decision
following a hearing before a judge other than  Judge  Haria.   None  of  the
findings of fact are preserved so that the hearing is to be "de novo".

Directions

I direct:

(1)  That the matter is to be remitted to the FtT.

(2)  That the hearing is to be before a judge other than Judge Haria.

(3)  That a Polish interpreter is to be booked for the hearing.

(4)  That in the event that an additional interpreter is to be  required  or
    the Polish interpreter is not needed the FtT is to be  notified  within
    seven days of transfer.

(5)  All further directions are to be issued by the FtT.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
