

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46827/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Cardiff                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgation     |
|on 24 May 2016                         |on 27 May 2016                      |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     K O
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Miah, instructed by M A Consultants (London)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above,  but  the  rest  of  this  decision
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on [ ] 1974.  An  anonymity
    order was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  matter  was  not
    addressed in the Upper Tribunal, so that order remains in force.

 3. On 11 November 2014 the SSHD refused the  appellant  further  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his family and private life in the UK.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Kirvan  allowed  the  appellant's  consequent
    appeal by decision promulgated on 11 March 2015.

 5. The SSHD appeals to the Upper Tribunal  on  the  grounds  that  despite
    objection the judge permitted the appellant's representative to extract
    evidence from the appellant and witnesses by way of leading  questions,
    "a procedural irregularity  capable  of  making  a  difference  to  the
    fairness of the hearing and its outcome."

 6. To accompany the assertion in the grounds, the SSHD produced a copy  of
    a minute by the Presenting  Officer  who  appeared  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, prepared the day after the hearing.   Mr  Richards  submitted
    that the matter would then have been fresh in the Presenting  Officer's
    mind.

 7. The Secretary of State filed nothing further in support of the grounds.
     No request was made  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal  for  a  copy  or  a  transcript  of  the  judge's  record  of
    proceedings, or for a response from the judge to the allegation made.

 8. The minute is quite brief,  and  rather  vague.   Its  most  particular
    suggestion is that the appellant was to change  his  evidence  about  a
    date from December to February.  However, the precise questions put and
    answers extracted are not recorded.  It is not clear whether there  was
    timeous objection.  The minute records the matter under the heading  of
    submissions.

 9. It might well be relevant to submit that evidence had been elicited  by
    leading questions, being a matter going to the weight  properly  to  be
    given to that evidence, but any objection needs to be  taken  when  the
    question is put.

10. In advance of the hearing I identified the judge's handwritten  record,
    which is quite lengthy, on the file.  It  is  reasonably  if  not  100%
    legible.  It shows (as would normally  be  expected)  relatively  short
    questions and longer answers throughout the oral evidence.   I  advised
    the parties that while I had not perused every line of the record  line
    by line, I had seen no note of an objection or ruling.

11. If there had been one or more objections in  the  course  of  the  oral
    evidence, that ought to have been reflected both on the record  and  in
    the decision.

12. I did not call on Mr Miah to reply to the submissions on behalf of  the
    SSHD.

13. The SSHD asserts that the judge perpetrated a  procedural  irregularity
    amounting to a material error of law.  There are obvious steps, which I
    have mentioned above, which might  have  been  taken  with  a  view  to
    discharging the onus on the SSHD to the required standard, the  balance
    of probability.  I accept that the minute by the Presenting Officer  is
    an adminicle of evidence tending to support the grounds.  There  is  no
    reason  to  doubt  that  the  minute  is  anything  but  honestly   and
    conscientiously prepared.  However, it does not go very far to make the
    SSHD's case.  It  fails  to  record  the  precise  questions  to  which
    objection was taken, the stage  at  which  objections  were  made,  the
    submissions thereon, or the judge's ruling (except that "it was ok").

14. In my view, the SSHD has failed to establish to the necessary  standard
    that there was  any  procedural  irregularity,  and  has  fallen  still
    further short of showing that it might have been of such nature  as  to
    amount to material error of law.

15. I record that  the  shortcomings  in  the  SSHD's  case  were  not  any
    responsibility of Mr Richards, from whom I ascertained that he had seen
    the file only the day before the hearing (in  accordance  with  what  I
    understand to be the SSHD's regular practice).

16. If the SSHD were to have made anything of such grounds of  appeal,  the
    necessary steps should  have  been  taken  very  much  earlier  in  the
    proceedings (beginning when the application for permission was made).

17. The SSHD's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal, allowing the appellant to appeal, shall stand.


            [pic]


            25 May 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




