
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46343/2014,
                                                              IA/46356/2014,
                                                              IA/46369/2014,
                                                               IA/46364/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 February 2016                           |On 6 April 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                [AMITA H] + 3
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Coleman, Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellants are citizens of India. The first appellant entered  the
      UK on 19 March 2005 as a student, followed shortly after by the second
      appellant who was granted entry clearance as her dependent spouse  and
      the third appellant  who  is  a  child  of  their  union.  The  fourth
      appellant was born in the UK. On 21 August 2014 the appellants made an
      application on Form FLR-FP for leave  to  remain  based  on  10  yours
      residence under the family life as a parent and private  life  routes.
      This was stated as being made whilst the first  appellant  still  have
      leave to remain (set to expire on 21 August 2014).


   2. In her refusal decision the  respondent  stated  that  the  first  two
      appellants failed to qualify under the partner route, the parent route
      or under the private life route and the children failed because it had
      not been shown that it would be unreasonable for  them  to  return  to
      India with their parents. .


   3. In a decision sent on 5 August 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Maxwell
      dismissed their appeals against decisions made by the respondent on 31
      October 2014 refusing them leave to remain on the basis of family  and
      private life ties. The judge did not find that the appellants met  the
      requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  had  failed  to   show
      exceptional circumstances such as to  warrant  a  grant  of  leave  to
      remain outside the Rules.


   4. The grounds of appeal do not as such challenge the judge's conclusions
      as regards the Immigration Rules applied on the basis that  the  first
      two  appellants  had  failed  to  show  10  years  continuous   lawful
      residence. However, they challenged the assumption that the appellants
      had not accrued 10 years of continuous lawful residence  and  in  this
      regard were essentially twofold.


   5.  First it was submitted  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
      consider that by the time of the hearing before the  judge  the  first
      two appellant had spent 10 years continuous lawful residence in the UK
      and had produced evidence of that continuous residence  and  of  their
      ability to meet the other requirements of  para  276B  of  the  Rules.
      Second it was contended that the judge materially misdirected  himself
      as to the law in failing to comply with section 85(4) of the 2002 Act.
      In the latter regard, issue was taken with the judge's refusal of  the
      appellants' application to amend the grounds to include claims said to
      have been made in the appellants' section 120 notices under  the  long
      residence rules. It was said this involved wrongful  reliance  on  the
      decision in AQ (Pakistan) [2012] INLR 33 at [36]-[39].


   6. During the hearing reference was made by appellants'  counsel  to  the
      Home Office policy on  Long  residence,  governing  variations  of  an
      application or varying grounds during the  appeal  process,  where  an
      individual reaches 10 years lawful  residence  in  the  course  of  an
      application or an appeal; but this was not available in  full  at  the
      hearing before me. In accordance with my  directions  the  appellants'
      solicitors duly forwarded to the Tribunal  a  document  entitled  Long
      residence, Guidance-Long residence-v13.0 published 8  May  2015.  This
      version post-dates the decisions of the respondent under challenge  in
      these appeals, but it is not dispute  that  the  same  policy  was  in
      operation then and to illustrate that the further documents adduced in
      accordance with my directions post-hearing included IND IDIs dated May
      2007.


   7. As regards the first ground, it is not in dispute that  as  the  first
      appellant had only arrived in the UK on 19 March 2005 and 6 July  2005
      respectively, the could not qualify as person having been continuously
      resident for 10 years unless it was possible to calculate the relevant
      10 year period so as to cover their period of leave  to  remain  under
      section 3C(2). Between their dates of  arrival  and  the  respondent's
      decision made on 31 October 2014 there was less than 10 years.


   8. I am not persuaded that ground 1 is made  out.  For  the  purposes  of
      meeting the requirements of Appendix  FM  and  paragraphs  276ADE  the
      issue of whether they had shown 10 years continuous  lawful  residence
      stood to be assessed by reference to their period of lawful  residence
      as at  the  date  of  decision.  There  is  ample  authority  for  the
      proposition that appellants must take the Rules as the find  them  and
      that the respondent is entitled to  consider  matters  as  they  stand
      under the Rules at the date of decision: see e.g. Odelola v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department  [2009]  UKHL  25.   The  appellant's
      grounds referred to there being no "historic time line"  set  down  in
      paragraph 276. That is correct but that misses the point.  Whilst  the
      judge did refer (unhelpfully) in [11] to "historic time  lines",  that
      concept has been applied in decided cases in relation to the  date  of
      an application, not the date of decision. The judge in this  case  did
      not seek to rely on any historic time lines going back to the date  of
      application. The judge relied  simply  on  the  period  of  continuous
      lawful residence accrued as at the date of the respondent's decision.


   9. As regards the second ground, I see no merit in Mr  Wilding's  initial
      argument that  I  need  not  consider  that  because  the  appellants'
      challenge is in fact to the judges' refusal to amend  the  grounds  of
      appeal, not to his  refusal  to  accept  that  there  were  additional
      grounds that the appellants had raised in a  section  120  notice.  Mr
      Wilding is correct to point out that the propriety of  a  decision  to
      accept or refuse  permission  to  amend  grounds  of  appeal  must  be
      considered under Rule 4(3)(c) the Tribunal Procedure Rules  2014,  but
      whether or not  the  judge  erred  in  this  regard  must  still  turn
      ultimately on whether there was in fact legal merit in the appellants'
      argument based on s.120 of the 2002 Act when applied in the context of
      a decision regarding long residence.


  10.  I concur nevertheless with the judge that AQ (Pakistan)  [2011]  EWCA
      Civ 833 is authority for the proposition that  s.120  grounds  do  not
      require consideration of events subsequent to the Secretary of State's
      decision. It is clear  from  AQ  (  Pakistan)  that  it  too  was  not
      concerned with "historic time lines" in  the  sense  of  the  date  of
      application. As is clear from [38] of  AQ  (Pakistan)  the  limitation
      imposed by s.3C leave  is  inconsistent  with  the  argument  that  an
      application can rely on ...events occurring while the leave  has  been
      extended by virtue of the section". As noted by the judge, this dictum
      in AQ (Pakistan) was implicitly approved by the Supreme Court in Patel
      [2013] UKSC 72. I accept that Mr Wilding  appears  to  agree  with  Mr
      Coleman that the judge was wrong to rely on AQ (Pakistan);  but  I  do
      not accept that there was any error  in  the  judge  relying  on  this
      authority. It follows that the judge cannot be criticised for refusing
      to permit the appellants  to  amend  their  grounds  so  as  to  claim
      entitlement to ILR by reason of the first two appellants  -  by  April
      2015 and July 2015 -  having  achieved  10  years'  continuous  lawful
      residence in the UK.


  11. The only Tribunal case adduced by Mr Coleman to support  his  argument
      was MU (statement of additional grounds; long  residence;  discretion)
      [2010] UKUT 442. However, that case was  about  an  attempt  to  raise
      human rights as an additional ground of appeal, not  with  eligibility
      under existing Immigration Rules and the only discussion of the  s.120
      issue appears to have been in the context of a concession made by  the
      respondent that the judge had erred in law by declining  to  entertain
      an Article 8 claim and that, as the decision on the appeal would  have
      to be re-made,  a  statement  under  s.120  could  be  lodged  on  the
      principle expounded by the Court of Appeal in AS (Afghanistan).  I  do
      not  consider  there  is  any  legal  reasoning   in   this   decision
      transferable to the appeal with which I am concerned here.


  12. Mr  Coleman's  amplification  of  the  grounds  sought  to  raise  the
      additional issue of  whether,  even  if  the  judge  was  entitled  to
      conclude that the appellants did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
      Rules, their  appeals  should  be  allowed  nevertheless  because  the
      decisions made by the respondent failed to apply existing Home  Office
      policy. What is actually said in the policy document on which he seeks
      to rely is set out at p.28 of this Guidance as follows:


        "A person cannot make a fresh application for leave while they have
        3C or  SD  leave  pending  the  outcome  of  a  decision  on  their
        outstanding application. This means that someone who reaches the 10
        years threshold during  this  leave  cannot  apply  for  indefinite
        leave. This could occur in the following two situations:


        ...


        The applicant completes 10 years continuous lawful residence  while
        awaiting a decision on an appeal.


           A person may  complete  10  years  continuous  lawful  residence
           whilst they are awaiting the outcome of an appeal and submit  an
           application on this basis. Under sections 3C and 3D, it  is  not
           possible  to  submit  a  new  application  while  an  appeal  is
           outstanding. However, the applicant can submit  further  grounds
           to be considered at appeal. "


  13.  I can find nothing in this policy that supports the argument that the
      respondent accepts that 10 years lawful residence can  be  accrued  by
      taking account of s.3C leave.


  14. Had I accepted that the judge erred in not granting permission for the
      appellants to amend their grounds, or in not acceding to the  argument
      that they were entitled to rely on 10 years lawful  residence  on  the
      basis of their position post-decision, I would, pari passu, also  have
      accepted that the appellants had now shown they met the Life in the UK
      requirements of the Rules by virtue of the  documents  they  submitted
      showing they passed the requisite tests in  March  and  May  2015.  At
      best, however, that would have resulted in a decision on  my  part  to
      allow the appeal but only the  extent  that  it  remained  outstanding
      before the respondent to  consider  whether  the  appellants  met  the
      requirements of para 276B(ii). But my principal finding  is  that  the
      judge did not err.


  15. For the above reasons I conclude that the First  tier  Tribunal  judge
      did not err in  law  and  accordingly  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
      appellants' appeals must stand.















                               Signed        [pic]
                                   Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
