
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46823/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MD SHAHIDUL ISLAM
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K. Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss A. Cooke, instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                    (Delivered orally on 25 January 2016)

 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department. I shall refer herein to Mr Islam as the claimant.

 2. The claimant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 10 February 1983.  He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 29 October 2014 refusing his application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

 3. In refusing that application the Secretary of State awarded zero points
    for  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS),  providing  the
    following reasons for doing so:

         "You submitted a CAS, issued by St Patrick's International College.
          Your sponsor has confirmed in writing to UKV & I  that  they  have
         withdrawn the offer of sponsorship and are  no  longer  willing  to
         sponsor your studies.   As such you fail to meet  the  requirements
         of paragraph 116(c) of Appendix A  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and
         therefore you are not in possession of a valid CAS."

 4. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Amin on 2  June  2015.
    The claimant ostensibly put his case to the First-tier Tribunal on  the
    basis that there had been procedural unfairness  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision making process.

 5. In a determination of 16 June 2015 Judge Amin allowed  the  appellant's
    appeal "under  the  Immigration  Rules".    Permission  to  appeal  was
    subsequently granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge McCarthy on 26 August
    2015, and thus the matter came before me.

 6. The FtT set out relevant matters of fact at paragraphs 11 and 12 of its
    decision:

         "[11]    After  withdrawal  of  the  CAS  certificate  the  college
         informed him [the claimant] that he would be issued a 60 day letter
         from the Home Office allowing him to find an alternative college.

         [12]  Cross-examined  the  appellant  confirmed  that  the  college
         compliance officer had informed him that he would be issued with  a
         60 day letter by the Home Office following the  withdrawal  of  the
         CAS certificate.  The appellant confirmed that he took no steps  to
         ensure that the 60 day letter was issued.  However  he  did  liaise
         with  the  college  and  asked  them  to  reinstate  his  CAS.   He
         corresponded by email. The  appellant  agreed  that  there  was  no
         reason why he could not return to Bangladesh."

 7. It is beyond dispute that as of the date of the  Secretary  of  State's
    consideration of his application the claimant did not have a valid  CAS
    because his sponsor college had withdrawn its offer of sponsorship. The
    claimant did not therefore meet the mandatory requirements of paragraph
    116(c) to Appendix A to the Immigration Rules.

 8. The FtT's conclusion to the contrary at the  end  of  its  decision  is
    irrational and, in any event, is not supported by any  reasoning  found
    within the confines of the decision itself.

 9. Despite this clear error, Miss Cooke submitted that the FtT's  decision
    should stand because the reasoning it deployed inevitably leads to  the
    conclusion that the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance
    with the law. Indeed, Ms Cooke went as far as to say that the  FtT  had
    intended to allow the appeal on such basis.

10. The foundation for  this  submission  is  contained  in  the  following
    extract from the FtT's decision:

         "22. I have to agree with the  appellant's  forceful  arguments  as
             advanced in the skeleton argument.  This is an appeal in which
             the CAS was in force  at  the  time  the  appellant  made  his
             application.  When the SSHD made her decision the CAS had been
             revoked.  Fairness, as argued by  the  supporting  authorities
             cited by the appellant, required  that  the  appellant  should
             have been informed of this by the Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department and given an  opportunity  to  deal  with  the
             point. This did not happen here.

         23.   Relying  on  Patel  (Revocation  of  the  sponsor  licence  -
             fairness) India [2011] UKUT  00211  (IAC),  I  find  that  the
             policy for issuing a 60 day letter applied  here.  This  would
             enable the appellant an  opportunity  to  obtain  a  new  CAS.
             Failure to follow this policy was unlawful and the decision is
             therefore not in accordance with the law.

         24.  There is also a general principle of fairness  that  a  person
             who is subject of a forthcoming  decision  will  be  given  an
             opportunity to make representations in advance with a view.

         25.  In all the circumstances the appeal succeeds for  the  reasons
             cited above."

11. At the hearing before Upper Tribunal Miss Cooke properly accepted  that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider a relevant binding authority
    on the issue of procedural unfairness i.e. that of EK (Ivory  Coast)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1517.   This
    I find to be of great significance.

12. The facts of EK bear resemblance to those in the instant case, save for
    that in EK the college withdrew the applicant's CAS as a consequence of
    administrative error, whereas in the instant case  the  withdrawal  was
    through deliberate choice by the sponsor  college.   The  court  in  EK
    specifically considered the  issue  of  whether  procedural  unfairness
    arose in circumstances where the college had withdrawn the CAS in error
    and thus leading the applicant to fail for  the  same  reasons  as  the
    instant claimant could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.  It
    concluded in categorical terms that the circumstances of that case  did
    not give rise to any procedural unfairness. Lord  Justice  Sales,  with
    the agreement of Lord Justice Briggs, said as follows:

         "24. The position in which the appellant had been placed can, in  a
             general sense, be said to be unfair to her.   She  obtained  a
             valid CAS letter and made her application for leave to  remain
             to continue her studies on the basis of that letter. She had a
             limited  period  time  in  which  she  could  make   such   an
             application  on an in-country basis, granted  to  her  by  the
             Secretary of State  to give her an opportunity to rectify  the
             position and  which had arisen as a result of her first chosen
             college ... losing its authorisation  from  the  Secretary  of
             State to issue CAS letters.  She made her  application  within
             time. Unbeknown to her, as a result of an administrative error
             for which she had no responsibility, the college withdrew  her
             CAS letter.  As a result, after the period for making a  fresh
             in  country  application  had  elapsed,  her  application  was
             dismissed by the Secretary of State. The appellant  will  have
             to leave the United Kingdom and make a fresh  out  of  country
             application if she wishes to continue her studies here.

         25.  However, in my judgement, there was no breach by the Secretary
             of State of her public law duty to act fairly  in  considering
             the  appellant's  application  for  leave  to   remain.    The
             Secretary  of  State  is  not  responsible  for  the   general
             unfairness which the appellant  has  suffered.   That  is  the
             result of the actions and omissions by the college.  There  is
             no basis on which any of the decisions  of  the  Secretary  of
             State, the FTT and the  Upper  Tribunal  can  be  impugned  as
             unlawful."

13. The court also made relevant comments at  [38]  -  [40]  regarding  the
    Upper Tribunal's decisions in Patel [2011] UKUT  00211;  Thakur  [2011]
    UKUT  00151 and Naved [2012] UKUT 14; identifying that the  former  two
    cases were materially different to the circumstances  before  it,  each
    relating to a scenario in which the Secretary of State  had  revoked  a
    college's  licence  and  thereafter   had   refused   the   applicants'
    applications  in  circumstances  where  they  had  not  been  given  an
    opportunity to protect  themselves  against  the  consequences  of  the
    Secretary of State's actions. As to Naved, Sales LJ said at [40]:

         "If the Upper Tribunal intended to lay down a principle  formulated
         in a bald way, I disagree with it. As a formulation, it leaves  out
         of account the highly modulated and fact-sensitive way in which the
         general fact sensitive public  law  duty  operates.  It  also  pays
         insufficient attention to the issue which lies at the heart of  the
         cases in this area, which concerns the fair balance  to  be  struck
         between the public interest in having the PBS regime operated in  a
         simple way and the interest of a particular individual who  may  be
         detrimentally affected by such operation."

14. As identified above, the FtT failed to engage with the decision in  EK,
    relying instead on the decisions in Naved and Patel. In  my  conclusion
    there is no  material  difference  between  the  circumstances  of  the
    appellant in EK and that of the instant claimant.  The college withdrew
    the claimant's CAS in the instant case through  deliberate  action,  as
    opposed to by accident in EK, but the consequences for  both  were  the
    same and in neither case was it the action of the  Secretary  of  State
    that led to the CAS being withdrawn, or to the failure of the applicant
    to meet the requirements of the Rules.

15. In my conclusion the failure of the  FtT  to  consider  and  apply  the
    decision in EK amounts to an error of  law  capable  of  affecting  the
    outcome of  the  appeal  and  I  therefore  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision.

16. Re-making the decision for myself I observe that the Secretary of State
    bears no responsibility for the situation the  instant  claimant  finds
    himself in, and was not, in my conclusion,  required  as  a  matter  of
    procedural fairness to provide the  claimant  with  an  opportunity  to
    'protect' himself by granting him leave.

17. Miss Cooke submitted, in the alternative, that the Secretary of State's
    decision was not in accordance with the law for her failure to consider
    relevant policy.  I reject this submission.  It is for the claimant  to
    demonstrate the existence of the policy upon which he seeks to rely and
    thereafter to  demonstrate  that  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    consider and apply such policy.

18. This submission does not begin to get off the ground because it has not
    been demonstrated that the policy relied upon, which is said to be that
    annexed  to  the  Tribunal's  decision   in   Kaur   (Patel   fairness:
    respondent's policy) [2013] UKUT 00344, has any purchase on  the  facts
    of the instant case.

19. Miss Cooke asserts that the aforementioned policy does not limit itself
    to situations in which the sponsor college's  licence  is  revoked  and
    that the claimant's circumstances fall directly within its ambit. I  do
    not agree with the latter contention.

20. The relevant section of the policy states as follows:

         "Although the applicant does not possess a valid CAS and  so  falls
         to have their case refused, as their application was submitted  'in
         time' we will delay the refusal of their application for  a  period
         of 60 days to allow them to obtain  a  new  CAS  and  to  submit  a
         request to vary the grounds of their original application.

         In such cases, the caseworker will write  to  the  applicant  using
         ICD4500 and  information  leaflet  ICD4499  explaining  that  their
         previous sponsor has surrendered their licence or had their licence
         revoked and that they have 60 days to either leave  the  UK  or  to
         find a new sponsor, obtain  a  new  CAS  and  submit  all  required
         documents to show they meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules..."

21. In my conclusion there is no merit in the submission that the policy is
    of application in all scenarios in which  an  applicant's  CAS  becomes
    invalid during the period in which the Secretary of State's decision in
    awaited.  The  policy  itself  identifies  only  two  relevant  factual
    scenarios which trigger consideration under its third section - each of
    which also require an applicant to have made an in time  application  -
    that being either where (a) the sponsor  college  has  surrendered  its
    sponsorship licence or (b)  the  sponsor  college's  licence  has  been
    revoked by the Secretary of State.  The claimant does not  fall  within
    the confines of either scenario, his being a  case  where  the  sponsor
    college withdrew the CAS, not where the sponsor college's  licence  has
    ceased to exist.  I find that the claimant does not attract the benefit
    of the aforementioned policy.

22. Miss Cooke also sought to reinvigorate the Article 8  ECHR  claim,  but
    accepted that this claim  had  been  withdrawn  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The fact of  such  withdrawal  does  not  preclude  me  from
    exercising my discretion to reopen the issue but in  the  circumstances
    of this case I  decline  to  do  so.   As  already  indicated,  it  was
    specifically withdrawn before the First-tier Tribunal. There is no  new
    evidence of any substance on this issue before me and  it  appears  the
    claimant simply  wants  to  have  another  bite  at  a  cherry  he  has
    previously discarded.

23. Had I exercised my discretion and allowed the claimant  to  argue  this
    ground I would, in any event, have dismissed it.  Whilst  it  is  clear
    that the claimant has built up a private life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    through his studies, and that he has paid considerable sums of money to
    obtain qualifications that  he  would  not  now  obtain  should  he  be
    required to leave the United Kingdom, it is not suggested he meets  the
    requirements of the 'private or family life' Immigration Rules.

24. In giving consideration to the claimant's Article 8 private life  claim
    outside the confines of the Rules, little weight must  be  attached  to
    such private life as a consequence of the application of  s.117B(5)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  Looking  at  the
    claimant's circumstances as a whole there is nothing in the  least  bit
    compelling about them, a conclusion I  reach  even  having  taken  full
    account of the circumstances which led to  the  claimant's  application
    being refused by the Secretary of State. Had I allowed the claimant  to
    argue article 8 grounds I would,  without  hesitation,  have  concluded
    that requiring him to leave  the  UK  would  be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

Having re-made the decision under appeal for myself  I  dismiss  Mr  Islam's
appeal.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor

