
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46825/2013
                                                               IA/46828/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th June 2014                                |On 30th June 2013          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                   MRS Amina Rahma Audu (first appellant)
              MR Salahuddeen Mohammed Shitu (second appellant)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood - Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. These are in fact cross appeals,   the Appellants  and  the  Respondent
    both appealing against the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian issued on 14th March 2013 dismissing under Article 8 and under
    the Immigration Rules the appeal of the Appellants against the decision
    of the Respondent made on 23rd October 2013 to  refuse  to  vary  their
    leave to remain and to remove them by way of directions  under  Section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  Judge Andonian
    also made a finding that the decision of the Secretary of  State  under
    Section 47 was unlawful and remitted that element of  the  decision  to
    the Respondent so that a lawful decision could be made.

 2. The details of the two appeals made are set out thoroughly in the grant
    of permission of leave to  appeal  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Dearden who said,  having noted that there are cross appeals:

         "3.  Mrs Audu and Mr Shitu are nationals  of  Nigeria.   They  have
             applied to appeal the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
             Andonian who, in a determination  promulgated  on  14th  March
             2014 dismissed the appeals of Mrs Audu and  Mr  Shitu  against
             the refusal of the Secretary of State to grant leave to remain
             in the United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules HC  395  and
             under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

           4. The Secretary of State also seeks permission to appeal against
             the same decision of Judge Andonian.  For convenience I  shall
             deal with the appeal lodged by the Secretary  of  State  first
             and then deal with the appeals  lodged  by  Mrs  Audu  and  Mr
             Shitu.

           5. The judge made several decisions.  He dismissed the appeals of
             Mrs Audu and Mr Shitu under the Immigration  Rules  and  under
             Article 8 of the European Convention.  He also found that  the
             removal decision of the Secretary of State under Section 47 of
             the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was unlawful.



           6. For a period prior to 8th May 2013 it  was  unlawful  for  the
             Secretary of State to refuse further leave to  remain  and  to
             make a removal  decision  at  the  same  time.   However  that
             situation was altered on  8th  May  2013  by  the  passing  of
             Section 51 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013, which  thereafter
             allowed the Secretary of State to make a decision to refuse to
             extend leave to remain at the  same  time  as  a  decision  to
             remove.  The variation and removal decisions were made in this
             case on 23rd  October  2013,  after  the  change  in  the  law
             referred  to.   I  therefore  conclude  that  the   First-tier
             Tribunal Judge made an arguable error of  law  by  failing  to
             adequately understand what the  legal  situation  was  at  the
             relevant time.  I therefore grant permission to appeal to  the
             Secretary of State.

           7. I now turn to the grounds filed by Mrs Audu and Mr Shitu.   In
             short the  grounds  allege  that  the  judge  disregarded  the
             evidence of the lack of medical facilities in Nigeria,  failed
             to give adequate consideration of the  exceptional  nature  of
             the case and made irrational and disproportionate findings."

 3. Designated Judge Dearden then went on to  explain  in  detail  why  the
    Appellants had failed to establish that there was an arguable error  of
    law in the determination of the Judge, taking  the  view  that  he  had
    fully and adequately considered the case and had  given  sound  reasons
    for his findings.

 4. He refused the Appellants permission to appeal.

 5. The only issue in this case therefore is the decision  that  the  Judge
    made relative to Section 47 of the 2006 Act.

Decision

The appeal of the  Appellants  is  dismissed  and  that  of  the  Respondent
allowed.

I set aside the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  insofar  as  it
relates to the decision of the Secretary of  State  under  Section  47.  The
decision to remove under s47 was in accordance with the law and shall  stand
along with all the other findings made by Judge Andonian.

Signed                              Date: 26th June 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird



