
IAC-HX-MC/12-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46789/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 November 2014                  |On 19 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway


                                   Between

                              Mr RAJIM HUSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Karim
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born  in  1993.   He  appealed
    against decisions of the Respondent made on 25 October 2013  to  refuse
    him leave to remain and to remove.  The basis of the decisions was that
    the Appellant entered the UK with clearance as a visitor in  June  2006
    with leave until October 2007.  He last entered the UK  in  July  2007.
    He overstayed.  The Respondent concluded  that  he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.   Also  his  removal  would  not
    breach his rights to private and family life.

 2. He appealed.

 3. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 10 July 2014 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Kelsey dismissed the appeal under the Rules and on  human
    rights grounds.

 4. The judge's findings are at paragraphs 20-26.   At  [22]  he  noted  an
    application that was made in September 2009 and refused in  July  2010.
    It referred to a claim that family life existed between  the  Appellant
    and his second cousin.  The judge noted that there was no reference  to
    the Appellant's closer relatives including siblings  all  of  whom  are
    British citizens.  The judge concluded that the Appellant  had  'failed
    to  disclose  important  and  pertinent  evidence  when  he  made   his
    application with the intent only of submitting evidence that  he  chose
    to submit, and of failing to submit significant  evidence  relating  to
    his circumstances and his family members in the UK.'

 5. The judge did not believe the Appellant's evidence that  he  could  not
    return to Bangladesh because his parents are not there and  he  has  no
    relatives there.   The  judge  noted  evidence  from  others  that  the
    Appellant's mother was still there living with a maternal uncle.   Also
    his father lives in Bangladesh.  The parents phone the family in the UK
    occasionally [23].  The judge thus concluded  that  the  Appellant  has
    relatives in Bangladesh and has means of contacting his parents [24].

 6. At [25] the judge saw no reason why the Appellant should if  he  wished
    to live in  the  UK  not  return  to  his  home  country  and  make  an
    application.

 7. The judge concluded (at [26]) by stating again that the  Appellant  had
    withheld evidence and had not been truthful; he had  been  fully  aware
    that he had no right to stay in the UK but had made no effort to return
    to Bangladesh to make another application.  Further, 'he has not  given
    any evidence that he has any British friends or  any  private  life  in
    this country outside his own family'.  Also, 'he maintained that he has
    lost his connections to Bangladesh, but that (if it is the case)  is  a
    result of his own actions'.

 8. He sought leave to appeal which was granted on 8 October 2014.

 9. At the error of law hearing Mr Karim made  the  following  points.   In
    summary, the judge erred in failing adequately or at  all  to  consider
    Article 8 firstly within the Rules and secondly outside the Rules.   He
    failed to consider paragraph 276ADE.  He further  erred  in  concluding
    that if ties were lost (relevant for the purposes of  276ADE(vi))  such
    was by the Appellant of his own accord.  Such a finding was irrelevant.
     The fact that the Appellant may have lost ties whatever the reason may
    be, was an issue to be considered under the Rules.

10. Also the judge failed  adequately  to  consider  evidence  relevant  to
    private life including his length of  time  here,  his  education,  his
    integration.

11. Further, he made no findings in respect of the  evidence  of  witnesses
    other than the Appellant.

12. Moreover, his adverse  conclusion  about  the  Appellant's  credibility
    based on his failing to mention close family  members  in  the  UK  was
    perverse.   Such  failure  to  disclose  that  information  could  only
    prejudice his case as opposed to strengthening it.  In that  regard  he
    also failed to consider family life in the UK with his family members.

13. In reply Mr Jarvis submitted that  whether  or  not  the  determination
    could have been structured in a better way it was difficult to see  how
    the Appellant could have succeeded.  He  could  not  satisfy  paragraph
    276ADE, nor was there anything  exceptional  that  could  have  led  to
    separate consideration under Article 8.

14. In considering this matter I concluded that there was merit in some  of
    Mr Karim's submissions.  In his  brief  findings  the  judge  did  take
    against the Appellant's credibility that he had failed to mention  that
    he has siblings in the UK.  Such  was  an  irrational  finding  as  his
    failure to do so could only, as Mr Karim said, prejudice his claim  not
    strengthen it.  His  finding  that  any  ties  he  might  have  had  in
    Bangladesh were lost by his own actions was irrelevant.  The fact  that
    the Appellant may have lost ties, whatever the reason may  be,  was  an
    issue to be considered under paragraph 276ADE.

15. Further, the judge failed to give  adequate  if  any  consideration  to
    evidence that was before him as to private life in  the  UK.  He  erred
    also in failing to make findings on the evidence of the witnesses other
    than the Appellant.

16. I set aside the determination and noting that the directions served  on
    the parties indicated that in such event matters should be concluded at
    that hearing, proceeded to remake it.  There was no opposition to  that
    course of action.

17. There was no oral evidence.  It was agreed that  the  limited  findings
    made by the First-tier should stand.

18. In his brief submissions Mr Jarvis said there was no family  life.   He
    needed to be living with adults and even if he  was  the  relationships
    needed to be beyond normal emotional ties.  Such was not  indicated  in
    this case.  As for private life within the Rules paragraph  276ADE  had
    been  amended  such  that  the  Appellant  would  need  to  show   very
    significant obstacles to his integration into his home country. Looking
    at factors such as his age,  health,  and  ties  there,  he  could  not
    succeed under the Rules.

19. As for Article 8 outside the Rules even if such was reached  the  s.119
    factors of the Immigration Act 2014 needed to be considered.   In  that
    regard there  was  no  evidence  that  the  Appellant  was  financially
    independent.  Also his remaining here unlawfully  did  not  assist  his
    claim.  He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

20. Mr Karim submitted that in considering his human rights  the  Appellant
    has considerable factors in his favour including that he  had  come  to
    the UK at the age of 14, had gained GCSE qualifications and  has  close
    ties with family members here.  As for ties in Bangladesh his  evidence
    was that they were almost zero.  His position  about  his  parents  was
    that relations were not good.  The evidence about contact with them was
    not necessarily a discrepancy.  His position is that he has no contact.
     It may be that his sister does have contact.  It  would  be  difficult
    for him to reintegrate.

21. Mr Karim added  that  there  was  evidence  of  family  life  with  his
    relatives here.  He is living with them and dependent on them.  It  was
    more than just normal ties.  Even if there was no family  life  he  has
    ties and the numerous references enhanced his private life claim.

22. Mr Karim accepted that several of the s.117 factors count  against  the
    Appellant but emphasised  that  he  was  an  English  speaker  and  had
    established  life  here  through  no  choice  of  himself  having  been
    abandoned.  Looking at the factors overall the case should succeed.

23. I consider first  whether  the  Appellant  has  family  life  with  his
    siblings and others.  In Ghising (family life - adults - Gurkha policy)
    [2012] UKUT 00160  (IAC)  the  Tribunal  said  that  a  review  of  the
    jurisprudence disclosed that there was no general rule that  Article  8
    can never be engaged when the family life it is sought to establish  is
    between adult siblings living together.  Rather than applying a blanket
    rule with regard to adult children, each case should be analysed on its
    own facts, to decide whether or not  family  life  exists,  within  the
    meaning of Article 8(1).  Each case is fact sensitive.

24. In this case the evidence is that he  has  not  been  living  with  his
    siblings.  Indeed, for reasons unexplained he made no  mention  of  his
    brothers and sister in an application submitted  in  late  2009.   Such
    does not suggest any great closeness.  The evidence then  and  now  was
    that he has been living most of the time with a less close relative,  a
    cousin. It may well be that there is affection between them but  I  see
    nothing in  the  evidence  to  indicate  especially  strong  ties.  His
    cousin's  wife  in  her  statement  describes  him   as   'bright   and
    intelligent.'  Such  is  confirmed  by  his  ability  to   access   and
    successfully pursue qualifications. Such indicates a considerable level
    of self dependence. On the evidence I do not find  that  the  Appellant
    has shown that he has family life protected by Article 8.

25. As for private life within the Rules the relevant paragraph is  276ADE.
    There is no dispute that the only aspect of that paragraph  that  could
    apply is (vi), which at the time  of  the  Respondent's  decision  read
    '(the applicant) is aged 18 years or above, has lived  continuously  in
    the UK for less than 20 years ... but has no  ties  (including  social,
    cultural or family) to which he would have to go if required  to  leave
    the UK.'

26. Mr Jarvis noted that that paragraph had been amended from 28 July  2014
    to read ' ...is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the
    UK for less  than  20  years...but  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the UK, ' He queried  whether  it
    was necessary to apply that version.

27. In my judgement the Appellant does not establish either that he has 'no
    ties' or that there  would  be  'very  significant  obstacles'  to  his
    integration.

28. The evidence from his sister was that his  father  and  mother  are  in
    Bangladesh and that she at least is in occasional  contact  with  them.
    His claim was that his parents are not there.  I do  not  believe  that
    evidence.  Even if he himself has no contact with them I do not  accept
    that he would not have known through his sister that they  were  there.
    Such does not assist his credibility about other family members  there.
    There was evidence from the sister, which I see no reason to doubt,  of
    some five uncles there.    I find that even if he has no  contact  with
    his parents, at the very least he has some family ties in Bangladesh. I
    find also that having lived the majority  of  his  life  in  Bangladesh
    including his formative years, he has social and cultural  ties  there.
    He is not a stranger to the country,  the  people,  the  way  of  life.
    Further, he is a healthy young man with no medical conditions.  He  has
    qualifications got whilst in the UK, is  fluent  in  English  and  also
    speaks Bengali. He is likely to be in a better position than many young
    single men to get work and support himself. I conclude that as well  as
    having  ties  in  Bangladesh,  there  would  not  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration. He cannot satisfy paragraph  276  ADE  in
    either version.

29. I was urged by Mr Karim were I to be against the  Appellant  under  the
    Rules to find for him on Article 8 directly.

30. If the Rules are not a compete code (and it was not submitted that they
    were) I need to consider whether there are  good  reasons  to  consider
    Article 8 directly.  A good reason is one that is compelling or because
    there  are  exceptional   circumstances.    There   is   no   test   of
    exceptionality, there does not have to be anything extreme to  move  to
    Article 8 directly.  A good reason may be present if the Rules  do  not
    provide discretion to  examine  whether  the  immigration  decision  is
    proportionate in light of all of the Appellant's circumstances but only
    if the consequences of the decision are likely to  have  a  significant
    impact on the private life continuing.

31. I  consider  it  appropriate  to  consider  Article  8  (private  life)
    directly.

32. I am prepared to accept that the Appellant has  established  a  private
    life not least because he has been here for about seven years.  It  may
    well be that he was effectively left here by his  parents.  It  may  be
    that as indicated by the various witness statements he  also  has  ties
    with the considerable number of family members here.

33. It may also be that his removal would potentially engage Article 8.  In
    that regard the seriousness test for private  life  is  different  from
    family life; an Appellant  has  to  show  that  moral  and/or  physical
    integrity would be compromised by removal.

34. It is not disputed that the decision is in accordance with the law.

35.  Advancing  to  proportionality  I  need  to   have   regard   to   the
    considerations set out in s 117B of the 2002 Act as introduced  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

36. The Appellant is entitled to have taken into account in his  favour  in
    the balancing exercise his length of residence in the UK of some  seven
    years from the age of fourteen and his  ties  with  relatives  lawfully
    here.  It appears that he is fluent in English  (s  117B(2)),  and  has
    passed a number of certificates.

37. On the other hand, most of his private life has been established  at  a
    time when his presence here has been unlawful. As such I give it little
    weight (s 119B(4)). There is  no  indication  that  he  is  financially
    independent (s117B(3)). As indicated, he is a  young,  healthy,  adult.
    He cannot satisfy the Rules. There is no  indication  on  the  evidence
    before me that he has taken up  any  significant  ties  or  connections
    beyond his family members here. He has no work or property  here.  Even
    if he no longer has dealings with his parents and  does  not  wish  to,
    there is evidence of other relatives in Bangladesh.  He spent his first
    14 years there and it is reasonable to conclude having spent  the  vast
    majority of his life there that he has exposure  to  and  developed  an
    understanding of cultural norms there.  He knows the language.   Having
    attained some qualifications  including  GCSE  and  in  e-learning  and
    engineering, and having fluency in English as well as  Bengali,  he  is
    likely to be in a  better  position  to  get  employment  or  otherwise
    support himself than many of his fellow citizens. I  conclude  that  he
    clearly has a connection to life in that country. He can keep in  touch
    with family members here and they would no doubt give  him  support  as
    necessary, as they have here.

38. Looking at the factors in the round the balance weighs heavily  against
    the Appellant in the proportionality exercise.

39. I find that the decision to  remove  is  not  disproportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim.

40. The appeal fails on human rights grounds also.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
It is set aside and remade as follows:

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

The appeal is dismissed under Article 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 18 March 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

