
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46925/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 June 2014                                |On 9 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                            Miss Maureen Khabuya

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, instructed by Ivy Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S L Ong, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the respondent's decision of 28 October  2013
    refusing the appellant's application for a residence card.  The  appeal
    was heard by Judge Miles at Hatton Cross in March this year.

2.   The key issue as it  has  developed  is  a  finding  of  the  judge  at
    paragraph 21 of his determination that there is no documentary evidence
    to prove that the appellant's aunt on whom she claimed  dependency  and
    of whose household she claimed to have been a member in Germany had  in
    fact been living in Germany between 2000 and 2002 which  was  the  time
    when the appellant claimed to have been a member of her  household  and
    to have been dependent on her during that time.

3.   The documentary evidence that  was  provided  in  that  respect  was  a
    German passport which had been issued in 2008.  The appellant  and  her
    aunt both gave oral evidence to the effect that her aunt, Mrs  Schuler,
    had become a German citizen in August 1998 but there was no documentary
    evidence to support that.

4.   That having been said, issue was  not  taken  with  the  aunt's  German
    nationality at that relevant time of  2000  to  2002  in  the  decision
    letter and one can see  that  set  out  in  paragraph  2  and  also  at
    paragraph 17 as well in the letter also contained in the file.

5.   It is unclear to what extent the judge raised this as an issue  at  the
    hearing.  It would seem remarkable if he had been raising this  concern
    if Counsel, who was Mr Richardson, had not sought  an  adjournment  for
    the matter to be clarified since documentary evidence has been provided
    with the grounds of appeal to  show  that  Mrs  Schuler  had  a  German
    passport dated 1998 from  the  time  when  she  became  a  citizen  and
    therefore covering that relevant period.

6.   But the judge, as I say, noted  at  paragraph  21  that  there  was  no
    documentary evidence to prove she was a German national  from  1998  as
    claimed and in particular in the period between 2000 and 2002 when they
    both said that they were together in Germany.

7.   The judge went on to make a point that they might not have  been  aware
    of the significance of this but it was a fundamental point  that  their
    advisers should have been aware of, and  as  Mr  Richardson  makes  the
    point quite rightly I think that the appellant can only  reasonably  be
    expected to address issues that were the concerns of the respondent  in
    the decision letter and if there are further concerns, which course can
    always be raised by the respondent in the hearing, and if  they  cannot
    be addressed then there may need to be an adjournment, and he  reminded
    me of the appropriate course of action in this case.  It might not have
    mattered and I take the point that Ms Ong reminded me of as made in the
    Rule 24 response as to the argument as to a lack of materiality of this
    error as I find to be on the part of the judge but  that  is  a  matter
    that has not had any judicial decision made on it.  It may well be that
    Ms Ong and the respondent are right at the end of the day but the judge
    had made it entirely clear in paragraph 23 of  his  determination  that
    the finding that he made that the absence of evidence to show that  Mrs
    Schuler was an  EEA  national  in  2000  to  2002  meant  that  it  was
    unnecessary for him to make any findings on the issue of whether or not
    the appellant was a dependant or a member of her household  in  Germany
    between 2000 and 2002 or whether she continued to be a dependant  or  a
    member of the household of the  EEA  national  after  she  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2002.  These are matters upon which clearly  findings
    need to be made, and since the appellant has not  had  the  benefit  of
    findings in that regard and indeed made as yet by a judge then this  is
    a proper case in the practice statement for a matter to be remitted for
    a full hearing by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  relevant
    issues.  So to that extent the appeal is allowed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
