
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA461582014
     IA461592014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th May 2016                              |On 9th June 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                 Priyangani  Mudiyanselage (First Appellant)
                          [D S] (Second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Cooke (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants, Mrs P R Mudiyanselage and [DS] are mother and  daughter
    born respectively on 20th  February  1975  and  [  ]  2005.   They  are
    nationals of Sri Lanka.

 2. They have been  given  permission  to  appeal  against  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Grant) which in a decision promulgated on 12th  October
    2015 dismissed their  appeals  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to vary their leave to remain as the dependant wife/daughter  of
    Neelum Priyakantha Silva Dahadarage (the sponsor). The sponsor is  also
    a Sri Lankan national presently here in the UK as a Tier 4 Migrant with
    leave to remain until March 2017. A decision was also  made  to  remove
    both Appellants  under  Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

Background

 3. The Appellants arrived in the UK on 6th February 2010 and were  granted
    leave to remain as the dependants of the sponsor who had limited  leave
    to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant.  The Appellants' leave to remain expired
    on 12th August 2014.

 4. On 11th August 2014 they applied to vary their leave to  remain.  Those
    applications were refused by the Respondent on 30th October 2014 and it
    is those refusals which forms the basis of these appeals.

 5. The Respondent refused the applications because she was  not  satisfied
    that either Appellant could meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In particular neither could meet the requirements of  paragraph
    319(C)(i).  The reason for this is that it could not be shown that  the
    sponsor was a government sponsored student and was undertaking a course
    of study with a Sponsor who was either a recognised body  or  a  higher
    educational institution  as  required  under  the  current  Immigration
    Rules.  It remains the  case,  that  neither  Appellant  can  meet  the
    requirements of the current Immigration Rules.

 6. Nevertheless the Appellants  appealed  the  Respondent's  decision  and
    their appeals came before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal heard evidence from  the  Appellants'  sponsor.  His  evidence
    amounted to saying that he  and  his  family  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom together; they were a close family  unit  and  to  require  the
    Appellants to leave the United  Kingdom  whilst  he  remained  here  to
    complete his education, would be against their Article 8  ECHR  rights.
    In addition it was said that the second Appellant is now  10  years  of
    age and is in education in the UK.  She has been in the UK for a little
    over six years and therefore it would involve a disproportionate breach
    of her Article 8 rights in that she would be separated from her father.
    It would be against her best interests not to allow her to remain  with
    both parents until the whole family could return to Sri Lanka once  the
    sponsor's education was complete.

 7. Having heard this evidence, the FtT concluded that it was correct  that
    neither Appellant could meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.
     The judge set out that the appeals appeared to be based on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds only by saying that the family had never  been  separated,
    they are a close family unit. The judge set out that there was a  claim
    that there would be no accommodation for  the  Appellants  should  they
    return to Sri Lanka the sponsor. Further,  it  was  said,  the  sponsor
    could only pursue his course of studies in the UK.

 8. The FtT rejected much of the Sponsor's  evidence.  Clear  reasons  were
    given why that evidence rejected.  In essence the FtT  considered  that
    there was nothing exceptional or compelling in terms of Article 8  ECHR
    which enabled it to allow the Appellants' appeals.   The  appeals  were
    accordingly dismissed.

Permission to Appeal

 9. Both Appellants sought permission to appeal the  FtT's  decision.   The
    grounds seeking permission amount to this.

       . The FTT had materially erred by entering into speculation as to how
         the Appellants' Sponsor obtained his visas for studies up to  2017.
         It thereby wrongly found the Sponsor not credible.

       . It failed to properly  consider  the  Appellants'  Article  8  ECHR
         claims outside the Immigration Rules.

       . Allied with the point above, it failed to give proper consideration
         to the Section 55 best interests of the second Appellant, who is of
         course a minor and who is currently in education in the UK.

10. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms only:

         "1.  It is arguable that the Judge  has  set  out  an  insufficient
             analysis of the  relevant  factors  in  considering  the  best
             interests of the child in respect of the second Appellant.  It
             is arguable that the  Judge  has  not  set  out  a  sufficient
             analysis of the weight to be attached to the relevant  factors
             in this context.

         2.   It is further arguable that the Judge has not  set  forward  a
             sufficient analysis of the relevant  factors  appertaining  to
             exceptionality or the existence of compelling circumstances in
             deciding whether or not to proceed to consider  whether  there
             would be a breach of Article 8."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involves the making of an error of law such that it
    must be set aside and the decision remade.

Error of Law Hearing

11.  I  heard  submissions  from  both   representatives.    Miss   Cooke's
    submissions were helpfully contained in  a  skeleton  argument  and  in
    summary she makes the following points.

       . The FTT failed to set out and properly analyse the relevant factors
         and considering the best interests of the second Appellant.

       . Inadequate consideration was given to the effect of  separation  of
         the child from her father.

       . No consideration was given to the child's wishes.

       .  There  was  insufficient  analysis   of   the   relevant   factors
         appertaining to exceptionality/compelling circumstances in deciding
         whether or not to proceed to consider  whether  there  could  be  a
         breach of the Appellants' Article 8 ECHR rights.

12. Mr Tufan strongly defended the decision.   He  submitted  that  on  any
    version of events, the factors put  forward  by  the  Appellants  could
    hardly  amount  to  compelling/exceptional  circumstances  such  as  to
    entitle them to a freestanding Article 8 consideration.

13. The second Appellant who was 10 or 11 years of  age  would  be  removed
    with her mother to Sri Lanka.  Her father could either go with them  or
    remain in the United Kingdom until March 2017 thereabouts when his visa
    expired.  There was nothing exceptional  in  either  Appellant's  case.
    The second Appellant was in education in the UK but of  course  had  no
    right to remain here.  Her father, it was  claimed,  would  finish  his
    course in less than a year and would return to Sri Lanka then any  way.
    There was family in Sri Lanka and nothing had  been  forthcoming  other
    than to say the family would be separated for a short time.  That could
    hardly amount to compelling or exceptional circumstances.

Error of Law Consideration

14. It is contended on behalf of the Appellants that their circumstances at
    the date of  the  FtT's  decision  were  sufficiently  exceptional  and
    compelling that it was open to that Tribunal to exercise discretion and
    allow the appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

15. What then are the compelling circumstances put forward?   The  evidence
    amounts to this - the family are a  close  family  -  the  Respondent's
    decision will separate the family for  a  short  time  only  since  the
    sponsor says he is to return to Sri Lanka in March 2017 when his course
    finishes.  The second Appellant is currently receiving education in the
    UK.  She is now 10 or 11 years of age and has been here six years.  She
    will be removed with her mother.  There are other family members living
    in Sri Lanka.

16. In my judgment the Appellants' cases fall far short of that required to
    establish compelling  circumstances  not  covered  by  the  Immigration
    Rules.  They are far short of ones which would  satisfy  an  Article  8
    ECHR claim.  Regarding the fact that the family would be separated, any
    separation would be temporary in any event.  The sponsor's own evidence
    states that he will leave the UK in March 2017 when his current  course
    finishes and his visa expires.  Both Appellants were granted visas  for
    temporary purposes only; they cannot have entertained  any  expectation
    that  they  would  be  allowed  to  remain  in   the   United   Kingdom
    indefinitely, nor any expectation that they would be allowed to  remain
    once their current leave had expired.

17. Whilst it is the case that the second Appellant  attends  school  here,
    there was nothing of substance put before the FtT which could have  led
    it to the conclusion that she is entitled to receive her education here
    in the UK.  Indeed despite what was asserted in the  grounds,  the  FtT
    specifically dealt with that point at [15].

18. The second Appellant will return to Sri Lanka  with  her  mother.   Her
    father will join her, in March 2017; a separation of only a few months.



19. It is correct that the  judge  may  have  dwelt  unnecessarily  on  the
    sponsor's own immigration status but that does not amount to  an  error
    which casts doubt upon the rest of the decision.

20. It is clear on a full reading of the judge's decision, that she kept in
    mind all the  relevant  factors  which  had  been  placed  before  her,
    including the best interests of the minor Appellant.

21. I find therefore, that there is nothing to consider by way of  a  wider
    Article 8 assessment  and  can  find  no  evidence  of  any  compelling
    circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the Rules.

22. I find therefore, for the foregoing reasons that the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contains no material error requiring it to  be  set
    aside.  The decision is sustainable and stands.

Notice of Decision

The appeals of the Appellants are dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     08 June 2016


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

