
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46496/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 21 July 2014              |
|Delivered Orally                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Aleya Begum

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss N Forster, Counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant (hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of State) against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 9 April 2014 allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    Respondent (hereinafter called "the Claimant"), a citizen of Bangladesh
    born on 7 March 1982, against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    dated 23 October 2013 to refuse to grant to the Claimant further  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Claimant's immigration history  is  that  she  first  came  to  the
    United Kingdom on 24 July 2001 with leave to enter  as  an  EEA  family
    member valid until 30 March 2006.  On 17 September 2002 she applied for
    a residence document as the spouse of a British settler but was refused
    on 24 June 2003 because she failed to provide evidence to show that her
    spouse was exercising treaty rights in the UK.

3.   On 18 May 2005 her application for leave to remain as the spouse  of  a
    settled person was rejected and a renewed application on the same basis
    on 22 June 2005 was refused with no right  of  appeal  on  8  September
    2008.  On 24 October 2008 the Claimant applied for leave to  remain  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds and was granted an extension of stay in  the  UK
    until 17 December 2012 on the basis of her family life.  On 15 November
    2004 the Claimant's application for an extension of stay in the  United
    Kingdom was refused by the Secretary of State.

4.   Reference was made to paragraph 322(9) of  the  Rules  in  relation  to
    which it was pointed out  that  the  Claimant  had  failed  to  produce
    further  information  and  documents  within  a  reasonable   time   to
    substantiate  that  claim  despite  it  having  been  requested  on  18
    September 2014.  Therefore a further grant of discretionary  leave  had
    been refused.  Her application to be considered under Article  8  being
    since 9 July 2012 fell to be considered under Appendix FM and paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

5.   So far as is relevant to the  present  case,  the  requirements  of  E-
    LTRPT.2.3. were in the view of the Secretary of State not met, in  that
    the Claimant had failed to  demonstrate  that  she  had  sole  parental
    responsibility for her child.  The grounds contend that the  First-tier
    Judge simply failed to make any findings as to whether the Claimant was
    able to demonstrate to the requisite standard of  proof  that  she  was
    solely responsible for her  children  in  accordance  with  the  Rules.
    Further that the Judge failed  to  consider  paragraph  R-LTRPT.(d)(ii)
    that relates to the requirements to be met for  limited  or  indefinite
    leave to remain as a parent or partner, that requires the  Claimant  to
    meet the requirements of inter alia E-LTRPT.2.3., that, in turn,  makes
    clear that the applicant must have sole responsibility for the child.

6.   The Secretary of State pointed out in  her  grounds  that  this  was  a
    mandatory eligibility criterion for the purposes of  EX.1(a).   Further
    that, as held by the Tribunal in Sabir (Appendix FM  -  EX.1  not  free
    standing) [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC), the requirements of EX.1 could  not  be
    considered in isolation and was not freestanding.

7.   It is right to remind  myself  that  the  Claimant  made  a  successful
    application on 24 October 2008 for leave to remain on Article 8 grounds
    when she was granted an extension of stay in the United  Kingdom  until
    December 2012 on the basis of her family life.

8.   I pause there because it would be as well to recite the  head  note  to
    Sabir as follows:

         "It is plain from the architecture of the Rules as regards partners
         that EX.1 is 'parasitic' on the relevant Rule  within  Appendix  FM
         that otherwise granted leave to remain.  If EX.1 was intended to be
         a free-standing element some mechanism of identification would have
         been used.   The  structure  of  the  Rules  as  presently  drafted
         requires it to be a component part  of  the  leave-granting  Rules.
         This is now made plain by the [Secretary of State's] guidance dated
         October 2013."

9.   The Secretary of State further contends that given that the  First-tier
    Judge found at paragraph 5 of his determination that the  Claimant  and
    her husband had always resided together in Dagenham, it  followed  that
    this material finding would be  inconsistent  in  any  event  with  the
    requirements of E-LTRPT.2.3. (above).  It followed that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had not correctly applied the provisions of EX.1(a).

10.  It would be as well to set out below the Judge's  findings  so  far  as
    they are relevant to the  issues  in  this  appeal.   These  were  more
    particularly set out  at  paragraph  5  of  his  determination  but,  I
    observe, were contained in one lengthy paragraph over two pages, and  I
    would make  the  general  observation  that  shorter  paragraphs  in  a
    determination wherever possible result in better presentation and  ease
    of reading in more readily seeking to identify and understand the basis
    of the Judge's reasoning and findings.  The Judge had this to say:

         "The second basis of the refusal under E-LTRPT.1.1. is there was no
         evidence of a genuine and subsisting relationship with her husband.
          ...  But the evidence provided with the letter of 1  October  2012
         [that should  have  been  2013]  surely  establish  a  relationship
         centring upon the family home address.  ...  There were council tax
         bills/payslips/letters ... from ... schools/bank statements/letters
         from HMRC/medical cards/bills.  The oral  evidence  of  the  couple
         also establishes the same.  The Appellant  detailed  how  they  had
         always lived in Dagenham; initially in Dagenham Docks; her  husband
         living in Hemel Hempstead one hour away by  car;  where  he  was  a
         restaurant chef Thursday  to  Tuesday  night;  and  being  at  home
         Tuesday to Thursday  afternoon.   She  described  the  family  life
         together with her husband taking the children to school when he was
         at home and I found her to be a credible and honest witness as also
         was her husband.  The third basis of refusal under E-LTRPT.2.3.  is
         that the Appellant could not show that she had sole  responsibility
         for the children but she surely gets home on their father  being  a
         British citizen, and under EX.1(a) because the two eldest have been
         living in the UK continuously for seven years, and it would not  be
         reasonable to expect them not to leave the UK.  The latter  finding
         is surely reinforced by the best interests of the  three  children,
         including the toddler ... who had both parents residing legally  in
         the UK at the time of the application.  The Appellant fails  as  to
         private life under 276ADE for not living in the UK twenty years but
         she succeeds under Appendix FM particularly because under  EX.1  it
         would not be reasonable to expect her British  husband  to  disrupt
         the life he has  built  for  himself,  his  wife  and  his  British
         children in the UK so as to continue enjoying a semblance of it  in
         Bangladesh.  Even  is  she  had  not  succeeded  under  the  family
         provisions of the Rules, she would be bound  to  do  so  under  the
         separate  Article  8  jurisprudence  because  the   family   having
         established their life in the UK since 2001 any disruption would be
         bound to be disproportionate under the Razgar questions, taken into
         account in particular the  best  interests  of  the  three  British
         children of the family."

11.  In granting permission  to  appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Levin
    (having observed that the  Judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM on the grounds that the Appellant had established a  family
    life in the UK with her husband and her three children and also Article
    8 outside the Immigration Rules) had this to say:

         "The grounds maintain that the Judge erred in law by  allowing  the
         appeal under Section EX which is not a freestanding provision,  but
         the Judge failed to have regard to the requirements of  Section  E-
         LTRPT.2.3. of Appendix FM in reaching his  findings  and  that  the
         Judge's finding that the Appellant and her husband had always lived
         together in Dagenham made his allowing the appeal inconsistent with
         Section E-LTRPT.2.3.


         Having regard to  the  Judge's  findings  at  paragraph  5  of  his
         determination all the grounds arguably have merit.


         It follows therefore that both the grounds  and  the  determination
         disclose arguable errors of law."


12.  Thus the appeal came before me on 10 July 2014 when my first  task  was
    to  determine  whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier   Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

13.  At the outset of the hearing Mr Deller  most  typically  and  helpfully
    clarified the Secretary of State's position.  He described  the  Letter
    of Refusal as "going into some strange directions"  for  reasons  which
    were intrinsically illogical and which fell apart on  one  vital  fact.
    The critical point was that the Secretary of State made  enquiries  and
    asked for a reply by 2 October 2013 and then  proceeded  on  the  basis
    that no such response was received.

14.  Mr Deller acknowledged that, as the Judge rightly observed, this was  a
    mistake on the part of the Secretary of State because a letter had been
    sent dated 1 October 2013.

15.  In consequence of that oversight Mr Deller explained that there  flowed
    the basis upon which the Claimant's  application  was  refused  and  he
    explained it in this way:

         "We were not satisfied that  there  was  such  a  relationship  and
         therefore that the application had  to  fail  under  the  'partner'
         route under Appendix FM and because we were refusing on failure  to
         provide evidence, that focused on suitability which meant that  the
         Claimant has no access to paragraph EX.1 because  as  the  Tribunal
         explained in Sabir you have to reach EX.1, it does not exist on its
         own.


         It has also meant that the relationship with  the  children  failed
         under the 'parent' route under Appendix FM  because  there  was  no
         satisfactory evidence that Mrs Begum had  sole  responsibility  for
         them."

16.  Mr Deller continued that the above had two effects on the Secretary  of
    State's decision and he explained it as follows:

         "It has swept away  the  suitability  requirement  refusal  because
         there  had  not  been  a  failure  to  provide  evidence  within  a
         reasonable time.  That evidence that the  First-tier  Judge  found,
         easily established a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         British citizen and suddenly the reliance on the parent route  thus
         disappeared because it was clearly in reliance on the partner route
         and  a  bridge  to  EX.1  was   open,   because   the   suitability
         qualification was not there anymore and there was no other obstacle
         under Appendix FM to EX.1 being considered in this case.


         That sweeps away nearly everything about our challenge."

17.  Upon further thought, Mr Deller concluded his submissions on the  basis
    that given that the Secretary of State had now accepted the evidence of
    a relationship and that it was sent in before the time  requested,  and
    mindful of the fact that there were  British  children  and  a  British
    father, he no longer intended to place  reliance  on  the  grounds  and
    would concede the appeal.

18.  In those circumstances I did not trouble Miss Forster to address me.

19.  The Tribunal much appreciates Mr Deller's realistic reflection on  this
    case.  It is right that I can rely upon the factual conclusions of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.   Firstly  he  found  as  a  fact  that  the
    Claimant and her husband and her children had a  longstanding,  genuine
    and subsisting family life.  It was clear that he found the Claimant to
    be "a credible and honest witness as was also her husband".   Secondly,
    the Judge also found as a fact, that the Claimant,  having  established
    her family life in the United Kingdom since 2001, would face disruption
    that would be bound to be disproportionate, not least because, as found
    by the Judge, it would not be  reasonable,  to  expect  the  Claimant's
    British husband "to disrupt the life he has built himself and  for  his
    wife and his British children in the UK, so as to continue  enjoying  a
    semblance of it in Bangladesh."

20.   Thirdly,  the  fact  that  the  husband  and  children   had   British
    citizenship was also  relevant.   The  position  of  the  children  was
    important, albeit not a decisive consideration (see the analysis of the
    Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania)).

21.  Fourthly, this is not a case where the family life  was  at  all  times
    precarious because indeed, when the Claimant made her  application,  it
    was recognised by the Judge in terms of the best interests of the three
    children, that the Claimant and her husband were  residing  legally  in
    the UK at that time.  Indeed in this case I do not  consider  that  the
    Claimant's private life was  precarious  on  the  facts  as  they  have
    already been found, they were long-standing and not generated  for  the
    purposes  of  application.   On  the  contrary,   they   predated   the
    application by a number of  years.   See  for  example  the  Claimant's
    successful application on 24  October  2008  for  leave  to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds when she was  granted  an  extension  of  stay  until
    December 2012 on the basis of her family life.

Conclusions

22.  For the above reasons, I find that the making of the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a  point
    of law material to its outcome and I order that it shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 18 July 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
