
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46000/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                            SABIta Khadgi Sapkota
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Vishal, Counsel instructed by Malik & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant was born on 9 October 1987 in Nepal.  She  first  entered
    the United Kingdom on 30 July 2010 as a dependant of a Tier 4  Migrant.
    She subsequently got further leave in this capacity and her most recent
    leave was as the partner of a Tier 1 Migrant.  This was due  to  expire
    on 5 September 2014.  Before it expired she applied to vary  her  leave
    to that of someone enjoying family  and  private  life  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  This application was refused on 11 November 2014 on the basis
    that she was  not  able  to  show  that  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to her returning to Nepal.  She appealed on 14 November  2014
    and on 7  April  2015  her  solicitors  served  a  Section  120  notice
    informing the Tribunal that she had married a British citizen.

2.   Her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross and he  dismissed
    the appeal on 30 April 2015.  She appealed on 14 May 2015 and  she  was
    granted permission to appeal on 10 July  2015  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer. He found that it was arguable  that,  unlike  the  points
    based system, in other in-country appeals evidence can be  admitted  as
    at the date of appeal. On 21 July 2015 the Respondent lodged a Rule  24
    application in which she said she did not oppose the Appellant's appeal
    and invited the Tribunal to determine the  appeal  with  a  fresh  oral
    continuance.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

3.   At the  error  of  law  hearing  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    confirmed that this was still the Respondent's position.

4.   Section 120  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    applied as the Appellant was subject to a decision under section 82  of
    that Act and the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  had  by
    notice in writing required her to state any grounds on which she should
    be permitted to remain in the United Kingdom. I  have  noted  that  the
    Appellant was sent such a notice in a Notice of  Immigration  Decision,
    dated 7th November 2014. It clearly said "if,  at  a  later  date,  the
    reasons why you think you should be allowed to  stay  in  this  country
    change, or new reasons arise, you must tell us as  soon  as  possible".
    On 7 April 2015 the Appellant  gave  notice  that  she  had  married  a
    British citizen and asserted that she was entitled to leave  to  remain
    as the partner of a British citizen who was settled here.

5.   Section 85(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states that "if an  appellant  under  82(1)  makes  a  statement  under
    section 120, the Tribunal shall  consider  any  matter  raised  in  the
    statement which constitutes a ground of appeal  of  a  kind  listed  in
    section 84 against  the  decision  appealed  against.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge accepted that  this  was  the  case  and  also  reminded
    himself that in AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1076 the  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  new
    grounds could be raised following the service of a section  120  notice
    even where the Respondent had not had an opportunity to consider them.

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge then  considered  whether  the  Appellant
    could meet the requirements of Section E-LTRP of  Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules. In paragraphs 11, 13 and  14  of  his  decision  and
    reasons, he found that the Appellant met  all  of  these  requirements.
    However, in  paragraph  12  he  found  that  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE, as the documents relating  to  her  and
    her partner's gross income had not been submitted  when  she  initially
    applied for further leave to remain.

7.   However, I find that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  law  in
    relation to this latter finding. In the  lights  of  LS  (post-decision
    evidence; direction: appealability) Gambia [2015] UKAIT 00085 the  fact
    that this evidence had not been submitted at the time  of  her  initial
    decision was not a bar to the First-tier Tribunal Judge taking it  into
    account. The appeal was made in-country and did not refer to the points-
    based system and, therefore, no  restrictions  under  Section  85  were
    applicable.

8.   I read through and checked the  evidence  provided  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in support of the  submission  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to leave under Section E-LTRP of Appendix FM  and  agree  with
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge that all relevant requirements  had  been
    met.  Furthermore, the Respondent did not suggest that this was not the
    case. Therefore, I go on to allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence which is before me and which was before the previous judge  in
    terms of the application as the spouse of a  British  citizen.  I  find
    that she meets these requirements.

Notice of Decision

1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of  law  and  his  decision
    and reasons is set aside.

2.   I remake the decision under  Section  12(2)(b)(ii)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and allow the Appellant's appeal.


[pic]

Signed   Date 9 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

