
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46787/2014
                                                               IA/46794/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 November 2015                  |On 26 January 2016                   |
|Oral determination given following   |                                     |
|hearing                              |                                     |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD TURNBULL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

             Mrs Mary Roshmey Francis Assissi - first respondent
           Mr Aracakal Thomas Francis Assissi - second respondent
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Kannangara, Counsel instructed by Legend
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Bird, who had allowed the appeals  of  Mrs  and  Mr
    Assissi against the Secretary of  State's  decision  refusing  to  vary
    their leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  students  and  also  to
    remove them by way of directions under Section 47 of  the  Immigration,
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  For ease  of  convenience  throughout
    this determination I shall refer to the Secretary of State, who was the
    original respondent, as "the Secretary of State"  and  to  Mr  and  Mrs
    Assissi, who were the original appellants, as "the claimants".

 2. The facts can be summarised relatively briefly.  Mrs Assissi, the first
    claimant, arrived in the UK on 21 February 2013 as a Tier  4  (General)
    Student with limited leave to remain  until  30  September  2014.   Her
    husband, who is the second claimant, arrived  slightly  later  and  was
    granted leave to remain as a dependent partner of the  first  claimant,
    also until 30 September 2014.  Both claimants applied for further leave
    to remain but their applications were refused and the reasons for  this
    decision are set out in the Secretary of State's letter of  30  October
    2014.

 3. The claimants appealed against this decision and their joint appeal was
    heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird sitting at Taylor House  on
    22 June 2015.  The claimants were represented at that hearing but there
    was no appearance on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  although  the
    judge was in possession of the file which contained the documents which
    had been adduced on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State.   As  already
    noted, in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 29 June 2015 the  judge
    allowed the claimants' appeal and the Secretary of  State  now  appeals
    against that decision, permission to  appeal  having  been  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Juliet Grant-Hutchison on 17 September 2015.

 4. The issue is a very narrow one.  It is  not  disputed  that  the  first
    claimant is a genuine student.  However, what is said on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State is that she is not entitled to be awarded any points
    for maintenance (funds) because she has not satisfied the  requirements
    set out within Appendix C of the Rules which are set out at Appendix C,
    1B(d) and provide as follows:

         "(d) If the applicant is applying as a Tier 4 Migrant, an  original
             loan letter from a financial  institution  regulated  for  the
             purpose of student loans [my emphasis] by either the Financial
             Conduct  Authority  (FCA)  and   the   Prudential   Regulation
             Authority (PRA) or, in the  case  of  overseas  accounts,  the
             official regulatory body for the country the institution is in
             and where the money is held, which is dated no more  than  six
             months before the date of the application and clearly shows:

             (1)  the applicant's name,

             (2)  the date of the letter,

             (3)  the financial institution's name and logo,

             (4)  the money available as a loan,

             (5)  for applications for entry clearance, that the loan funds
                  are or will  be  available  to  the  applicant  before  he
                  travels to the UK, unless  the  loan  is  an  academic  or
                  student  loan  from  the  applicant's  country's  national
                  government and  will  be  released  to  the  applicant  on
                  arrival in the UK,

             (6)  there are no conditions placed upon the  release  of  the
                  loan funds to the  applicant,  other  than  him  making  a
                  successful application as a Tier 4 Migrant, and

             (7)  the loan is provided  by  the  national  government,  the
                  state or regional  government  or  a  government-sponsored
                  student  loan  company  or  is  part  of  an  academic  or
                  educational loans scheme."

 5. In support of her application the first claimant had submitted a letter
    from the Catholic  Syrian  Bank,  which  is  an  institution  which  is
    accepted by the Secretary of State for other purposes as being properly
    regulated by the Reserve Bank of India dated  3  September  2014  which
    states as follows:

         "LOAN SANCTION LETTER

         With reference to your application dated 01/09/2014, we are pleased
         to inform you that a loan of Rs.15,00,000/- (rupees 15 lakhs  only)
         has been sanctioned to you for pursuing your overseas education  on
         the following terms and conditions.

         Nature of loan: loan for educational purposes

         Amount sanctioned: Rs15,00,000/- (rupees 15 lakhs only)

         Loan account number: [this is given]

         Purpose: to pursue your higher education in the United Kingdom

         Rate of interest: 11% p.a

         Security offered: security as per bank's approved Norms

         Formalities remain: all the bank formalities are fulfilled ...".

 6. However, the Secretary of State determined that  this  letter  did  not
    satisfy the criteria set out in the Rules "because the Catholic  Syrian
    Bank is not a  financial  institution  regulated  for  the  purpose  of
    student  loans".   No  other  reason  was  given  for  the  refusal  of
    permission, it being said merely that "it has  therefore  been  decided
    that you  have  not  met  the  requirements  as  specified  within  the
    Immigration Rules and no  points  have  been  awarded  for  maintenance
    (funds)".

 7. As already noted above, in Appendix P to the  Immigration  Rules  where
    the list of  financial  institutions  whose  financial  statements  are
    accepted by the Secretary of  State  (within  Table  1)  in  India  the
    Catholic Syrian Bank is included and it is not suggested on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State that  this  bank  is  not  generally  one  whose
    financial statements are not acceptable.  The issue is whether  or  not
    it satisfies the criteria  of  being  regulated  "for  the  purpose  of
    student loans".  The Rule requires at (d)  that  "in  the  case  of  an
    overseas account" it must be so regulated by  the  official  regulatory
    body for the country the institution is  in  and  where  the  money  is
    held".

 8. As noted, it is  accepted  that  the  bank  is  regulated  for  general
    purposes by the appropriate regulatory body  for  India  which  is  the
    Reserve Bank of India but the suggestion is that  there  has  to  be  a
    specific Regulation for the purpose of student  loans.   Before  us  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State it is said that  the  requirements  of
    the rules are not satisfied because the  claimants  did  not  meet  the
    criteria set out within (d)(7) although this is not specified in  terms
    within the refusal letter, or indeed within the grounds themselves.

 9. In her decision Judge Bird noted that  it  was  "not  clear  where  the
    [Secretary of State] obtained the information that the Catholic  Syrian
    Bank was not an institution regulated to  provide  student  loans"  (at
    paragraph 12).  She accordingly was satisfied that in the absence of  a
    positive case to  this  effect  put  by  the  Secretary  of  State  the
    institution was so regulated because the claimants had established that
    that bank was an institution which was regulated by the Reserve Bank of
    India.  In our judgment Judge Bird was entitled  so  to  find.   It  is
    clear and not in  dispute  that  the  bank  is  regulated  for  general
    purposes and this must include, because there is no evidence to suggest
    that it does not include, making loans to people who want to study  and
    the wording requires merely that the financial institution is regulated
    for the purpose of student loans.

10. In the absence of any prohibition upon this bank making  student  loans
    the natural inference that  must  follow  from  the  fact  that  it  is
    regulated is that one of the purposes for which such loans are entitled
    to be made is student loans.  Indeed it would be quite remarkable if  a
    bank which is regulated by the Reserve Bank of India and recognised  as
    being such should otherwise be prepared to make loans to students which
    are specifically stated as being for  the  purpose  of  pursuing  "your
    higher education in the United Kingdom".

11. Accordingly we then have to consider whether or not there  can  be  any
    merit in the Secretary of State's submission  advanced  now  before  us
    that the criterion  set  out  within  (d)(7)  is  not  satisfied.   The
    criterion which has already been set out above is that the loan must be
    "provided by the national government, the state or regional  government
    or a government-sponsored loan company or is part  of  an  academic  or
    educational loans scheme [my emphasis]".

12. In our judgment, clearly the relevant part of this requirement is those
    words which have been set out above  in  bold  because  it  is  in  the
    alternative, so if the loan which is being given by the bank  which  we
    have already found to  be  authorised  for  among  other  purposes  the
    purpose of the student loans can be said to be "part of an academic  or
    educational loan scheme" this criterion would  be  satisfied.   In  our
    judgment, in order to make any kind of sense of these Rules at all  the
    only sensible meaning of "an academic or educational loans scheme" must
    be that this is the purpose of the loans which are being  made  because
    if a bank is prepared to  make  loans  for  the  purpose  of  advancing
    academic or educational progress of a potential student  that  must  be
    regarded as part of their academic or  educational  loans  scheme.   If
    this were not so it would follow that no  loan  from  a  bank  for  the
    purpose of education would be acceptable unless it  was  part  of  some
    formal "scheme" of which no information was placed before either  Judge
    Bird or this Tribunal.

13. In these circumstances we find that Judge Bird was not only entitled to
    reach the conclusions she did which was that there was  no  basis  upon
    which she could find that the requirements had not been  satisfied  but
    that upon the facts as put before her her decision was the  right  one.
    Accordingly this appeal by the Secretary of State must be dismissed and
    Judge Bird's decision affirmed.

Notice of Decision

There being no error of law  in  Judge  Bird's  decision  the  Secretary  of
State's appeal is dismissed and Judge Bird's decision is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 20 January 2016
