
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46868/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower Birmingham     |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 10th April 2015                        |          On 20th April 2015      |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             MISS GITA DEVI RANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R. Caswell promulgated on 27th January 2014, following a  hearing
    at Bradford on 23rd January 2014 "on the  papers",  whereby  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Miss Gita Devi Rana, who  subsequently  applied
    for, and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  and
    thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female national of Nepal who was born  on  19th  May
    1986.  She came to the UK as an overseas domestic worker in  a  private
    household on 11th March 2013.  She had leave to enter until  23rd  July
    2013.  On 12th June 2013, she applied for leave to  remain  in  the  UK
    again and this was refused on 23rd October 2013.  A decision to  remove
    her was also made under Section 47 of the IANA 2006.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she is employed by a British citizen, Mrs
    Sekhri, as a domestic worker.  She has been working  for  her  for  the
    last thirteen years,  since  she  was  16  years  old,  mainly  at  the
    employer's  address  in  India,  but  also  travelling  with  her  when
    required.  Her employer has a number of medical  conditions  (described
    as  "probable  sarcoidosis,  latent  TB  infection,  severe  vitamin  D
    deficiency, Hashimoto's thyrotoxicosis and dilated  cardiomyopathy"  in
    the medical notes), and has "anorexia nervosa with  heart  failure"  by
    Mrs Sekhri herself.  The basis of the claim is that the  employer,  Mrs
    Sekhri,  needs  personal  care  and  help  with  medication  and   food
    preparation which the Appellant, as  a  fellow  Hindu,  provides.   She
    cannot move or walk much.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered the evidence before him in what was a  hearing  on
    the papers, without the benefit of oral evidence.  She  concluded  that
    it had not been disputed that the Appellant had  already  been  granted
    leave to enter for six months.  What was being said  by  the  Appellant
    herself, and by the employer on her behalf, was that she had previously
    been granted a visa for twelve months, but the judge held  that,  "even
    if this were the case, it does not give the Appellant the right to have
    a similar period of leave on  a  subsequent  application".   The  fact,
    moreover, that "she was unable to use the earlier visa is not  relevant
    either".  As for the employer having special needs, the judge concluded
    that,

         "Despite a great deal of medical information being before me, it is
         not consistent, and does not suggest that  Mrs  Sekhri  needs  help
         from the Appellant or anyone else.  There seems to be some doubt as
         to the correct diagnosis of Mrs Sekhri's  ailments,  and  there  is
         some suggestion that she is over anxious and stressed  because  she
         has experienced too much medical investigation".

    Furthermore, there was no suggestion that she was currently  undergoing
    critical or arduous treatment for any condition.   Clearly,  therefore,
    the Appellant had failed  to  show  that  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances, in the event of  her  being  unable  to  meet  with  the
    Immigration Rules, that required her to remain in the UK (paragraph 6).



 5. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the Appellant's employer  suffers
    from sarcoidosis, respiratory infection, heart failure, DVT (deep  vein
    thrombosis) and epilepsy.  These matters are all written in typescript.
     What is also added, however, in handwritten bold letters is that, with
    respect to "respiratory infection", it  is  said  that  this  "requires
    constant supervision".  With respect to heart failure, it is said  that
    "oxygen level does not reach brain".  With respect to epilepsy,  it  is
    said that "therefore somebody should always need to be with her".

 7. On 8th April 2014, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.

 8. On 30th April 2014, a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State, where it was said  that  the  suggestion  that  the
    judge had misunderstood the medical evidence was not  borne  out.   The
    judge did consider the appeal outside the Rules as well  and  concluded
    that there was no basis for doing so.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, the Appellant  was  not  in  attendance,  and
    neither was there anyone else in attendance on her behalf.   Mr  Smart,
    appearing on behalf of the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  submitted
    that whatever it was that was  being  said  by  the  Appellant  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal, to the effect that her  employer  required  constant
    care and close supervision, was simply not borne  out  by  the  medical
    evidence.  The medical evidence was ambiguous.  Nowhere did it say that
    this degree of care was needed of the employer.   The  judge  therefore
    was not incorrect in the conclusions that she reached.  There were  two
    letters now presented.  One from the employer and the  other  from  the
    employee, the Appellant herself.  The medical evidence does not come up
    to the level that is being alleged  in  the  letters.   Therefore,  the
    Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules.  Consideration was  given
    to her situation  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  and  she  did  not
    demonstrate anything "exceptional" in this regard either.  The decision
    was sustainable.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such  that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision.   For  the
    Appellant to be able to succeed, she  has  to  show  that  the  judge's
    evaluation of the evidence before her was incorrect.  The  judge  makes
    specific reference to the precise range of  illnesses  that  are  being
    relied upon and had been diagnosed.  She is clear that  there  is  some
    doubt as to exactly what it is that she  is  suffering  from.   She  is
    clear that the employer is likely to have  been  in  a  state  of  over
    anxiety because of being  subjected  to  increased  number  of  medical
    procedures.  However, there is still no evidence that she is  currently
    under any treatment.  Still  less,  is  there  evidence  that  whatever
    treatment she has requires the degree and level of close attendance  by
    the employee that is being maintained in the Grounds of Appeal.

11. Accordingly, the Appellant fails to discharge the burden of proof  that
    is upon her.  The judge's conclusions with respect  to  Article  8  are
    equally well-founded in  that  the  Appellant  has  not  been  able  to
    demonstrate anything additional that requires the appeal to be  allowed
    under Article 8.  There is a public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    immigration controls and this is directly relevant to  a  consideration
    of Article 8 rights.

Notice of Decision

12. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

13. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 16th April 2015



