
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46681/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 March 2016                     |On 6 May 2016                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                 GURBIR KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant failed to attend the hearing.  There was  no  explanation
    for her non attendance.  As I was satisfied  that  she  had  been  duly
    served with the Notice of Appeal at her address on the Court's file,  I
    proceeded with the hearing in her absence.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 14 February 1991.   On  19
    November 2014 the respondent refused to vary her leave to remain in the
    UK as a Tier 1 (General) Student Migrant under  paragraph  245ZX(c)  of
    the Immigration Rules as amended.  The respondent also made a  decision
    to remove the appellant from the United Kingdom by  way  of  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

3.   The appellant's appal against the  respondent's  decision  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard on 25 June 2015.   The  appellant  did
    not attend the hearing citing illness. The judge noted that  there  was
    no doctor's certificate supporting this contention.  In an email  dated
    25 June 2015 the appellant sought an adjournment.  In  the  absence  of
    evidence to support her contention that she  was  ill,  the  judge  was
    satisfied that it was in the interests of justice to proceed  with  the
    hearing.

4.    The  judge  made  the  finding  that  the  appellant   submitted   her
    application on 23 August 2014 and at that time she  had  no  CAS.   The
    position remained the same as at the date of  hearing.   The  appellant
    had not submitted any evidence of having her ever had a CAS to  support
    her application for leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.
    Similarly, she had submitted no evidence to substantiate  a  family  or
    private life in the UK even though she cited Article 8 in  her  grounds
    of appeal.

5.   The  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 245ZX and dismissed the appellant's appeal.

6.   Permission was granted to the appellant to appeal the judge's  decision
    to proceed with the hearing in the absence of  supporting  evidence  to
    support the appellant's contention that she  was  ill.   An  email  was
    received on the day of the hearing and in the circumstances related  by
    the appellant, it was unlikely that medical evidence  would  have  been
    available on the morning of 25 June 2015.

7.   In her grounds of appeal the  appellant  had  said  that  she  did  not
    produce any  medical  certificate  or  evidence  because  she  had  not
    attended the doctor's. She had food poisoning and was  making  constant
    trips to the toilet and stayed at home.  By the evening she was  better
    and did not go and see a doctor.

8.   I find that even if the appellant had a  good  reason  to  support  her
    absence from the hearing, the judge's failure to  adjourn  the  hearing
    does not  materially  affect  his  decision.   The  appellant  has  not
    challenged the finding that she had not submitted a CAS to support  her
    application for leave as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  Migrant.  Indeed
    there was no such evidence before the judge or before me.

Notice of Decision

9.   Consequently the judge's decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    shall stand.


Signed                                  Date: 29 March 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun
