


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46205/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2014                          |On 30 September 2014         |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           MR FAISAL YUSEF MOHAMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Masih, Counsel, instructed by JR Jones,
Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Immigration History

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing on 7 May 2014. However, for  ease  of  reference,  the
    Appellant and Respondent are  hereinafter  referred  to  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal. Therefore Mr Mohamed is referred to  as
    the Appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  is  referred  to  as  the
    Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen  of  Canada.  His  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to  refuse  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his private and family life was allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Sangha (the Judge), the reasons for which  are  contained
    within  his  determination  promulgated  on  7  May  2014.   The  Judge
    dismissed his appeal under paragraph 276ADE of, and Appendix FM to, the
    Immigration Rules and allowed it under Article 8 directly applied.

 3. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    Judge failed to  apply  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  in
    that he did  not  first  consider  whether  there  were  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances which made it  appropriate  to  consider  the
    appeal by applying Article  8  directly  (the  freestanding  Article  8
    assessment); he simply moved straight  to  the  Article  8  assessment.
    Permission was granted on the basis that this was arguable.

 4. A detailed Rule 24 response was filed by Miss Masih on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, in which she identified  that  the  IDI  'Family  Migration'
    dated July 2014, at section  1.0a  confirmed  that  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM were 'intended for a parent who has responsibility  for  or
    access to their child following the  breakdown  of  their  relationship
    with the  child's  other  parent'.  However,  she  submitted  that  the
    unchallenged findings were that the Appellant was  not  the  biological
    father of the children (whose father had died in Somalia in  2006)  but
    he was their stepfather; there was  a  parental  relationship,  it  was
    genuine and subsisting and the Immigration  Rules  did  not  allow  for
    consideration  of  these  circumstances.  The  Immigration  Rules  were
    therefore  not  a  complete  code.  Furthermore,  the   Appellant   had
    established a private life in the UK and this was not recognised  under
    the Immigration Rules because the focus under paragraph 276ADE was  the
    Appellant's ties to Canada. She submitted that  the  Judge  established
    compelling circumstances on the  findings  of  fact  made  and  he  was
    entitled to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Mills  confirmed  that  he  had  read  the  Rule  24
    response and that whilst the Judge appeared  to  have  missed  out  the
    intermediate stage of identifying compelling circumstances (that is the
    particular factors which were not covered by  the  Rules),  he  had  to
    accept that refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences.

 6. Whilst the determination could have been better structured, in view  of
    the concession by Mr Mills, the finding that the decision would  result
    in unjustifiably harsh consequences is  not  challenged,  which  is  in
    effect  an  acknowledgement  that  there  are  compelling  reasons  for
    considering the  case  outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  although  not
    specifically identified by the Judge prior to moving  onto  identifying
    the  reasons  why  removal  would   result   in   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences.


 7. In the circumstances, I find that there is no material error of law  in
    the determination of Judge Sangha.





Decision

 8. The determination of Judge Sangha contains no material  errors  of  law
    and his determination must therefore stand.

 9. The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I see
    no reason to direct anonymity pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed                                  Date


M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(Rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules
2005 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note: Fee Awards in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the appeal has been dismissed,
Judge Sangha's fee award is confirmed.




Signed                          Dated

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

