

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46803/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Determination Promulgated
On 14th November 2014  On 25th November 2014
Prepared 21st November 2014


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                 ASFAND YAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Armstrong (Counsel, instructed by Marks and
Marks Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, he arrived in the  UK  on  the
    20th  of  June  1996  and  claimed  asylum  the  following  day.   That
    application was refused and his appeal dismissed  following  which  the
    Appellant failed to turn up for his removal flight in  July  1998.  The
    application that forms the basis of these proceedings was made  on  the
    16th of January 1996, it was refused  for  the  reasons  given  in  the
    Refusal Letter of the 25th of October 2013.

 2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge A Khan at  Birmingham
    on the 22nd of May 2014. In a determination promulgated on the 12th  of
    June 2014 he dismissed the appeal finding that the  Appellant  did  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and that his  claim  did
    not succeed under article 8.

 3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It was
    accepted that the Appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules as  they
    stood on the 8th of July 2012 and that he did not meet the new rules in
    Appendix FM, paragraph E-LRTP.2.2 in particular. It was submitted  that
    paragraph EX.1 applied. It was submitted that the Judge had  misapplied
    the  law,  failed  to  attach  proper   weight   to   the   Appellant's
    circumstances, made material errors of fact and  findings  contrary  to
    the evidence.

 4. Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on the 21st
    of August 2014 on the basis that the application had been made  out  of
    time. This was reversed  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  .  Permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley on the 14th of October 2014 on
    the basis that it was arguable that the Judge may erred in  failing  to
    find that the delay in deciding the Appellant's case  did  not  justify
    considering the Appellant's case outside  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings  and  referred  to
    where relevant below

 5. There are 2 errors said to infect the determination. The first is  that
    in paragraph 9 the Judge  incorrectly  stated  the  Appellant's  wife's
    details making her 7 years younger than she is and decreasing the  time
    she had spent in the UK. The  second  is  that  the  Judge  incorrectly
    stated that the Appellant had not pursued his claim whereas there was a
    letter at page 23 * of the * which showed that he had made  efforts  to
    prompt the Home Office.

 6. The letter in which it is clear that the Appellant had made efforts  to
    progress his case is not in my view,  material.  In  paragraph  10  the
    Judge considered the issues and found that the Appellant had  not  been
    prejudiced by the delay of the Secretary of State in dealing  with  his
    claim. While the judge was  wrong  to  find  that  the  supposed  delay
    cancelled out the Secretary of State's delay is relevant  to  the  life
    that an individual establishes whilst in the UK which  was  considered.
    This is considered further below.

 7. With regard to the Appellant's wife's age and time in the UK I find too
    that this was not material. The fact  is  the  Appellant's  wife  is  a
    British citizen and that is the basis that the Judge  dealt  with  her,
    that she had been her nearer to 30 years rather than the 22  years  the
    Judge erroneously stated in paragraph 9 does  not  affect  the  overall
    consideration. The Judge was aware the Appellant's wife had  been  here
    for many years and had been naturalised, the errors did  not  undermine
    the assessment made.

 8. The Judge considered the Appellant's history in the  UK  including  his
    failure to attend his removal in July 1998 which was  clearly  relevant
    and the delays that occurred. He  could  not  satisfy  the  Immigration
    Rules by reason of the service of the notice IS151A on him and  it  was
    found that the Appellant could return to Pakistan and, in paragraph  9,
    the Judge found that it would not unreasonable to expect  his  wife  to
    accompany him to Pakistan for the reasons  given  including  that  they
    must have a common language in which they communicate. This finding was
    not challenged in paragraph 7 of the  grounds  where  paragraph  9  and
    incorrect date of birth were addressed. On that basis  this  is  not  a
    case where the Appellant's removal would inevitably entail  separation,
    it follows from the Judge's finding  that  they  can  remain  together,
    whether they choose to is a matter for them.

 9. Delay does not itself give rise to a right to remain.  That  right  may
    arise from the  private  life  established  during  the  time  that  an
    appellant remains in the UK and the reducing expectation of enforcement
    that increases with length of time it takes for the Home Office to make
    a decision. The determination of Judge Khan  shows  that  all  relevant
    factors were considered by him, the factual errors were not material to
    findings made. The Judge considered the Appellant's immigration history
    which, even allowing for his contacting the Home Office, was  not  good
    and the fact that his wife was aware of  that  background.  He  had  no
    right to remain and no expectation and both knew that.

10. The circumstances of this case are not directly comparable to Chikwamba
    as the Judge found that the Appellant and  his  wife  could  reasonably
    relocate to Pakistan so there was a  finding  that  family  life  could
    continue outside the UK.  The  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  former
    Immigration Rules as he could not show 14 years residence  as  required
    and article 8 had to be assessed against the background of the post 9th
    July 2012 rules, Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE which  he  could  not
    meet either. Theirs was not a situation that was  not  contemplated  by
    the rules, they simply could not meet the requirements.

11. The determination read as a whole shows that the Judge  considered  all
    the relevant factors and  gave  appropriate  weight  to  the  different
    issues and supporting evidence that were before him. The factual errors
    relating to the Appellant's wife's age and time in the UK and the issue
    of further submissions were not material to the determination that  was
    made. The determination contains no material error of law.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.


Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 24th November 2014


