
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46866/2013
     IA/46867/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2014                               |On 23rd July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                zohaib wahid
                                ayesha zohaib
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr Iqbal, Farani Javed Taylor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Birk made following a hearing at Birmingham on 12th March 2014.

Background

 2. The Claimants are nationals of Pakistan. The second  Claimant's  appeal
    is dependent on her husband.

 3. The first Claimant entered the UK on  9th  March  2008  with  leave  to
    remain as a student valid until 30th June 2011.  He was granted further
    leave to remain as a post-study work migrant until 16th May 2013.   His
    wife joined him on 25th March 2012.

 4. He applied for further leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  but
    was refused on 11th June 2013.  The Secretary of State  said  that  the
    evidence of registration as the Director of a new company did not  meet
    the requirements as specified under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules
    and in any event was not acceptable because the Companies House company
    details provided did not show a current appointment report and did  not
    list him as a director.  Furthermore  the  Claimant  had  not  provided
    evidence of business activity with his application in  the  form  of  a
    contract as specified under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules. He was
    also refused on financial grounds.

 5. The judge said that the missing bank statements for the relevant period
    had now been provided and the Secretary of State  should  have  applied
    paragraph 245AA and requested  the  missing  documents.   There  is  no
    challenge to that aspect of the decision.

 6. The judge also stated that the Companies House document fell within the
    ambit of paragraph 245AA(b)(iv).  He then wrote as follows:

         "As for the contracts, I do not find that this is  covered  by  the
         application of paragraph 245AA.  The  Appellant  failed  to  submit
         these as evidence of his business trading.  I do  not  accept  that
         without any explanation from the  Appellants  of  the  difficulties
         that they had, the Respondent should have realised that there  were
         oral contracts available which could be put into writing.

         Accordingly, due to my other findings, I find that the Respondent's
         refusal was not in accordance with the law and that the  appeal  is
         allowed to the extent that  this  application  is  required  to  be
         remitted  to  the  Respondent  for  further  consideration  of  the
         documents."

The Grounds of Application

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had erred in finding that the appointment report fell  within
    the scope of paragraph 245AA(b)(iv) which concerns  instances  where  a
    document does not contain all of the specified information.  It is  not
    the case that the Claimant provided documents which failed  to  include
    all the relevant information, rather that  he  failed  to  provide  the
    document at all.  Additionally he accepts that he was unable to provide
    contracts with the application and the requirements of the  Rules  were
    therefore unambiguously  not  met.   He  should  have  found  that  the
    Claimant did not meet the requirements of the Rules and  dismissed  the
    appeal accordingly.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Levin for the reasons  stated
    in the grounds.

Submissions

 9. Miss Everett relied on her grounds.  She accepted that, with respect to
    the Companies House details, they were not a specified document as such
    and there was a certificate of incorporation before  the  Secretary  of
    State.  She also accepted that there was a relevant policy at the  date
    of decision which  was  arguably  more  generous  than  the  Rules  and
    conceded that the Claimant was entitled to benefit from the  generosity
    of the policy as held in AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773.

10. However she submitted that, so far as the contracts were concerned, the
    application was bound to fail.  The Claimant accepted that  as  at  the
    date of his  application  he  could  not  provide  any  contracts.   At
    paragraph 9 of his witness statement he said that he had  approached  a
    number of potential business clients who would be more  than  happy  to
    enter into contracts with him once he obtained leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant but not any earlier.  If the  case  owner
    had in fact contacted him requesting further information  the  Claimant
    could only have said that the contracts were not available.

11. She  accepted  that  he  had  now  put  forward  evidence  which  might
    potentially meet the requirements of the Rules and  the  proper  course
    was therefore a reapplication.

12. Mr Iqbal relied on his skeleton argument and submitted that in relation
    to the missing contracts, the Claimant was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    relevant policy which was:

         "Under the evidential  flexibility  process,  if  there  are  minor
         errors or omissions on a valid  application  but  there  is  enough
         evidence to show the application would otherwise  be  granted,  you
         may contact the migrant, Sponsor or representative  as  appropriate
         for  clarification  or  to   request   missing   documents   and/or
         information."

13. He submitted that the substantive requirements of the  Rules  were  met
    and the Claimant had shown that he was a bona fide  entrepreneur.   The
    missing documents were de minimis because he could show that he met the
    substantive requirements of the Rules.

Findings and Conclusions

14. The Secretary of State  confines  her  challenge  to  the  decision  in
    respect of the company's appointment report and the missing  contracts.
    With regard to the former, the judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that,
    given that there was evidence of incorporation and the Companies  House
    details are not a specified document as such, the missing  evidence  of
    directorship fell within the ambit of paragraph 245AA.

15. However on the judge's own findings, the missing contracts did not.  On
    the evidence, they did not exist at the time, and even if the Secretary
    of State had approached the Claimant, the evidence could not have  been
    produced.  He could not meet the requirements of the Rules.

16. The missing evidence was not de minimis but an essential element of the
    Rule which requires evidence of trading.

17. The judge therefore erred in law in allowing the appeals to the  extent
    that he did.

Decision

The judge's decision is set aside.  It is remade as  follows.   The  appeals
are dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


