
[pic]
IAC-AH-dp-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46031/2014
     IA/46029/2014
     IA/46025/2014
     IA/46019/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th March 2016              |On 5th April 2016                    |
|                                |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                   e a (1)
                                   a a (2)
                                   w a (3)
                                   j a (4)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D Jones of Counsel instructed by M K Suri & Co

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a decision of Judge Thew of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 8th September 2015.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FtT and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The first and second Claimants are married and are the parents  of  the
    third and fourth Claimants who were born on 30th October 2003 and  17th
    May 2006 respectively.  The Claimants are  nationals  of  Brazil.   The
    first and second Claimants  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  27th
    February 2003 with visit  visas  valid  until  27th  July  2003.   They
    overstayed without leave.  The third and fourth Claimants were born  in
    this country.

 4. Following unsuccessful applications, a further application was made for
    leave to remain on 6th August 2013 which resulted in  the  applications
    being refused on 27th October 2014.  The Claimants appealed to the  FtT
    against that refusal.

 5. The appeals were heard together on 14th August  2015.   The  FtT  found
    that the appeals of the third and fourth Appellants should  be  allowed
    under the Immigration Rules pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) because
    they are under 18 years of age, they had  lived  continuously  in  this
    country in excess of seven years at the date  of  application,  and  it
    would not be reasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom.

 6. The appeals of the  first  and  second  Claimants  were  allowed  under
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on  Human  Rights  (the  1950
    Convention) outside the Immigration Rules, on the basis that  it  would
    be disproportionate to remove the parents, when it had been found  that
    it would not be reasonable to expect the children to leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the FtT had focused  almost
    exclusively on the potential disruption to  the  children's  education,
    and this had been afforded undue weight.

 8. Reliance was placed upon Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 at paragraph 24, and EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 at paragraphs 59, 60 and 61.  It  was
    contended that the FtT had erred in failing to  consider  the  cost  of
    educating the children in the overall proportionality  assessment,  and
    had reached a conclusion that was too favourable to the Claimants,  and
    the public interest in an effective immigration control  had  not  been
    afforded sufficient weight.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Colyer of the FtT.  Following
    the grant of  permission  the  Claimants  did  not  submit  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.

10. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

11. I recorded the submissions made by both representatives in my Record of
    Proceedings and will summarise them briefly here.

12. Mr Wilding relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal and  submitted  that  the  FtT  had  taken  a  one
    dimensional view when considering whether it was reasonable  to  expect
    the third and fourth Claimants to leave the  United  Kingdom.   It  was
    submitted that the FtT had concentrated exclusively on the education of
    their children, and had not taken into consideration that  if  removed,
    the family would return to Brazil together.

13. Mr Jones conformed that there was no skeleton argument, but that it was
    contended that the FtT had not erred in law.

14. Mr Jones observed that the weight to  be  attached  to  evidence  would
    rarely give rise to an error of law, and in this case it could  not  be
    said that the FtT's decision was perverse.

15. Mr Jones also relied upon the decisions in Zoumbas and EV (Philippines)
    and pointed out that distinctions could be drawn when those cases  were
    considered, in that neither case had the children acquired seven years'
    residence, whereas  both  the  third  and  fourth  Claimants  had  been
    resident in the United Kingdom for in excess of seven years.

16. Mr Jones submitted that the FtT had  taken  all  material  issues  into
    account, and had not neglected to consider the immigration  history  of
    the first and second Claimants, in that they had remained in the United
    Kingdom without leave.

17. Mr Jones pointed out that in this case, the third and fourth  Claimants
    could  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  that  being  paragraph
    276ADE(1)  because  they  had  acquired  in  excess  of  seven   years'
    residence, which was not the case with the children in  either  Zoumbas
    or EV (Philippines), who could not succeed under the Rules.

18. I was asked to accept that the FtT had taken all relevant matters  into
    account, and the finding that it would not be reasonable to expect  the
    third and fourth Claimants to leave the United Kingdom, was  a  finding
    which was open to the FtT to make on the evidence, and that sustainable
    reasons had been given.

19. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

20. In my view the FtT did not err in law for the following reasons.

21. The FtT did not ignore the principles in Zoumbas, to which there  is  a
    specific reference in paragraph 25 of the FtT decision.  The FtT had in
    mind the correct legal principles, in that while the best interests  of
    a child are a primary consideration, they  are  not  the  only  primary
    consideration, neither are they a paramount  consideration.   The  best
    interests of a child can be outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of
    other considerations, and a child must not be blamed  for  matters  for
    which he or she is not responsible, such as conduct of a parent.

22. Although there is no specific reference to EV (Philippines) the FtT did
    not ignore the principles contained therein.

23. The FtT  was  correct  to  focus  (paragraph  29)  on  whether  it  was
    reasonable to expect the children  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  and
    return to Brazil with their parents.

24. I find that it is relevant  that  the  circumstances  of  the  children
    considered in Zoumbas and EV (Philippines) can  be  distinguished  from
    the circumstances of the third and fourth Claimants.   For  example  in
    Zoumbas, although the children had been born  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    none had acquired seven years' residence.

25. The children in EV (Philippines)  had  not  been  born  in  the  United
    Kingdom, and again had not acquired seven years' residence.

26. Unlike the children considered in  Zoumbas  and  EV  (Philippines)  the
    Claimants could potentially satisfy the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules because they were under 18, and had resided in the United Kingdom
    for in excess of seven years at the date of application  for  leave  to
    remain.

27. In summary the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) at paragraphs  34-37
    stated that in considering whether the  need  for  immigration  control
    outweighs the best interests of children, the relative strength of  the
    factors which makes it in the best interests of the children to  remain
    must be determined, and also account must be taken of any factors  that
    point the other way.  The Court of Appeal found the  following  factors
    to be relevant when considering the best interests of children;

       . their age;

       . the length of time that they have been here;

       . how long they have been in education;

       . what stage their education has reached;

       . to what extent they have become distanced from the country to which
         it is proposed they return;

       . how renewable their connection with it may be;

       .  to  what  extent  they  will  have  linguistic  medical  or  other
         difficulties in adapting to life in that country;

       . the extent to which the course proposed will interfere  with  their
         family life or their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

28. The Tribunal should be concerned with how emphatic an answer  falls  to
    be given to the question as to whether it is in the best interests of a
    child to remain.  Greater weight should be placed on one  side  of  the
    scales the longer a child has been in this country, the  more  advanced
    or critical at this stage of his education, the looser  his  ties  with
    the country in question, and the more deleterious the  consequences  of
    return.  If it is overwhelmingly in the child's best interests that  he
    should not return, the need to maintain immigration  control  may  well
    not tip the balance, but if  it  is  only  just  in  the  child's  best
    interests to remain, the result may be the opposite.

29. Account must be taken of the strong weight to be given to the  need  to
    maintain immigration control, and the fact that the applicants have  no
    entitlement to remain.  The immigration history of the parents may also
    be  relevant  for  example  if  they  are  overstayers  or  have  acted
    deceitfully.

30. I conclude that the FtT has taken into  account  the  factors  set  out
    above.  It is clear that the FtT took into account the poor immigration
    history of the first and the second Claimants  and  reference  is  made
    (paragraph 10) that they have been in the United Kingdom without  leave
    or  a  considerable  period  of  time.   There  is  further   reference
    (paragraph 12) the  first  and  second  Claimants  choosing  to  remain
    illegally in the UK when they did not have a right to do so.

31. The FtT conclusions in relation to the third and fourth  Claimants  are
    set out in paragraphs 30-36.  The FtT takes into account their age, and
    the fact that they were born in the  United  Kingdom  and  have  always
    lived here.  Their education is considered, together with their lack of
    ties to Brazil, and it is noted  that  they  have  never  visited  that
    country.  It is noted that they are able to speak Portuguese,  although
    not read and write in that language, and the FtT notes at paragraph  33
    that their parents would be returning to  a  country  "where  they  are
    entirely familiar with the language and culture  given  the  length  of
    time that they lived there".  The FtT is clearly aware that  the  third
    and  fourth  Claimants  are  not  British  citizens,  but  observes  at
    paragraph 35 that the third Claimant could make an application pursuant
    to the British Nationality Act 1981, on the basis that he has lived  in
    the United Kingdom for the first ten years of his life.

32. The FtT recognises that there would be no interference with the  family
    life of the third and fourth Claimants, as they would be  removed  with
    their parents.

33. I conclude that it cannot fairly be  said  that  the  FtT  concentrated
    almost exclusively on the potential disruption of the education of  the
    third and fourth Claimants.  The FtT,  in  fact,  concentrated  on  the
    relevant principles set out in EV (Philippines) and  did  not  omit  to
    consider any material factor.  The FtT was entitled to conclude that it
    would not be reasonable to expect the third  and  fourth  Claimants  to
    leave the United Kingdom, even though weight was attached to  the  poor
    immigration history of their parents.

34. The conclusions  reached  by  the  FtT  are  supported  by  sustainable
    reasons, and the grounds submitted by the  Secretary  of  State,  while
    disclosing a disagreement with those conclusions, do not  disclose  any
    material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  In view of the  fact  that  the
third and fourth Claimants are minors, I make an  anonymity  order  pursuant
to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.    Unless
and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Claimants  are  granted
anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify them.   Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 16th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the decision of the FtT stands, so does the decision not to  make  a  fee
award.






Signed                              Date: 16th March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
