
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46963/2014
                                                               IA/46971/2014
                                                               IA/46977/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 09 December 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                DEVIKA SURNAM
                               MADAN GOPALSATE
                           N (ONE CHILD DEPENDENT)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Harris, Counsel instructed by Raj Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellants appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.  The  first  and  second
    appellants are the parents of the third appellant "N"  who  is  now  13
    years old. They are no longer married but continue to live as a  family
    unit and to raise their child together.

2.    The first appellant entered  the  UK  on  10  April  2004  with  entry
    clearance as a student that was valid until 10 October 2004. The second
    appellant says that he entered the UK in June 2004 with entry clearance
    as his wife's dependent. The first appellant had left her son N in  the
    care of her sister. She says that her sister migrated to Canada in 2007
    so they decided that he should join them in the UK. He was four  and  a
    half years old on arrival  in  the  UK  in  February  2007.  The  first
    appellant was granted further leave to remain as  a  student  with  her
    husband and son as dependents until 31 January 2011. Three applications
    for further leave to  remain  as  a  student  were  either  refused  or
    rejected during 2011. It is said that during 2012 the second  appellant
    and his son made at least two applications each for leave to remain but
    those applications were refused or rejected. On 22 July 2013 the  first
    appellant applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds with  her
    husband and child as dependents. The application was refused without  a
    right of appeal on 10 October 2013 because it was considered reasonable
    to expect them to return to Mauritius as a family unit. The  respondent
    agreed to  reconsider  the  application  following  the  settlement  of
    judicial review  proceedings  by  way  of  a  Consent  Order  dated  20
    September 2014. The application was refused in a further decision dated
    07 November 2014 with a right of appeal.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge C. H. O'Rourke ("the judge")  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 16 April 2015. The  judge  did  not
    accept the first appellant's claim that she had come to the UK in order
    to study and concluded that, in the absence of sufficient  evidence  of
    any educational achievements, that she had used this as a "smokescreen"
    to enable her and her family to remain in the UK. The  judge  concluded
    that the parents' intentions were to remain in the  UK  permanently  by
    whatever means available to them [14(ii)].  The  judge  concluded  that
    there was little evidence of  any  particularly  strong  or  compelling
    private life established by the parents in the UK. The first  appellant
    didn't  work  and  the  second  appellant  worked  illegally  part-time
    [14(iii)].

4.    The crux of the appeal turned on whether it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK for the purpose of paragraph  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE(iv)  of  the  immigration  rules.  The
    judge accepted that N clearly had a "well-established private  life  in
    the UK" but considered that he could reasonably "recreate" that life in
    Mauritius. The judge noted that many 12 year olds move  countries  with
    their parents and had to make new friends. His parents would be able to
    assist him to learn French or Creole, and  in  any  event,  English  is
    widely spoken in Mauritius. The judge found that it is his  country  of
    origin and he would be able  to  successfully  reintegrate.  The  judge
    noted that N expressed a wish to remain in the UK  but  concluded  that
    his best interests lay in remaining  with  his  parents.  Although  the
    parents are divorced they continued to live with one  another  and  the
    judge could see no reason why they could not  continue  with  the  same
    arrangement in Mauritius despite their protestations that it  would  be
    more difficult for them to do so there. The judge  concluded  that  the
    fears expressed by the parents as to the risk to the child as a  result
    of a  family  feud  were  not  "particularly  persuasive".  The  events
    occurred ten years ago and there was no evidence of a current feud. The
    judge also took into account the fact that four of the eight years that
    N had lived in the UK were during a time when his leave was  precarious
    albeit through no fault  of  his  own.  For  these  reasons  the  judge
    concluded that it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
    UK with his parents [14(iv)].

5.    The appellants seek to appeal the decision on the following grounds:
    (i)    The First-tier Tribunal erred in attaching less  weight  to  the
         child's private life because it was established at a time when  his
         immigration status was precarious despite the fact that  the  judge
         recognised that it was through no fault of his own: Zoumbas v  SSHD
         [2013] UKSC 74 referred. It was argued  that  there  is  a  tension
         between section 117B(4) and section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002").
    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate  weight  to  the
         best interests of the  child  in  accordance  with  the  principles
         outlined by the Tribunal in Azimi-Moayed [2013] UKUT  197  and  the
         Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 894.

Decision and reasons

Findings relating to error of law

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

7.    While the judge took into account a number of relevant factors, in  my
    assessment, the considerations outlined in paragraph 14 of the decision
    focus largely on whether there are likely to be any practical obstacles
    to the appellants returning to Mauritius with their son and  failed  to
    give adequate consideration to the nature of the ties  that  the  third
    appellant has established in the UK. While the judge accepted that  the
    child has a "well-established"  private  life  in  the  UK  what  seems
    lacking is any evaluative assessment of the strength of those  ties  in
    order to assess whether it would be reasonable to remove the child from
    an environment in which he is now well established. Although the  judge
    considered that it was in the best interests of  the  child  to  remain
    with his parents the assessment of the best interests of a child is not
    confined solely to that issue and should have  involved  a  more  well-
    rounded assessment of his interests, including whether it  was  in  his
    best interest to remain in the UK. In doing so the principles  outlined
    in ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and
    EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874  needed  to  be
    addressed in substance. For these reasons I conclude  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on  a  point  of
    law and I set aside the decision.

Findings relating to the remaking of the decision

8.    The central issue in this appeal is whether it would be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK. At the date of  the  application  for
    leave to remain on 22 July 2013 N had not yet lived in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of seven years.  The  original  reasons  for  refusal
    letter dated 10 October 2013  did  not  consider  whether  he  met  the
    private  life  requirements  contained  in  paragraph  276ADE  of   the
    immigration rules. The respondent subsequently agreed to reconsider the
    decision and made a fresh decision on 07 November 2014.  At  that  date
    the second reasons for refusal letter the respondent  accepted  that  N
    had lived in the  UK  for  a  continuous  period  of  seven  years  but
    considered that it would be reasonable to expect him to leave  the  UK.
    It  is  unclear  whether  the  respondent   specifically   waived   the
    requirement contained in paragraph 276ADE(1) for the appellant to  have
    accrued seven years continuous residence "at the date of  application".
    On the face of the chronology, I conclude that the third appellant  did
    not meet the strict requirement of paragraph 276ADE(1) as  required  at
    the date of the application.

9.    However, in this particular  case  it  makes  no  material  difference
    whether N's appeal  is  considered  within  the  context  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration rules or outside the rules given  that
    the test set out in the  public  interest  consideration  contained  in
    section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("NIAA 2002") is  in  essence  the  same  test  as  that  contained  in
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) and paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM.  The  only
    difference is that paragraph 276ADE(1) requires the applicant child  to
    have accrued seven years continuous  residence  "at  the  date  of  the
    application" while section 117B(6) focuses on the relationship  between
    the parents and a "qualifying child". The test for a "qualifying child"
    is set out in section 117D(1)  but  is  not  limited  to  the  date  of
    application. Nevertheless, the main thrust of all three  provisions  is
    an assessment of whether it would be "reasonable" to expect a child who
    has lived in the UK for a continuous period of at least seven years  to
    leave the UK.

10.   In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74  the  Supreme  Court  summarised  the
    applicable principles drawn from earlier cases such as ZH (Tanzania)  v
    SSHD [2011] UKSC4 and H(H) v Deputy Prosecutor of the Italian  Republic
    [2013] 1 AC 338:
         "(1)     The best interests of a child are an integral part of  the
             proportionality assessment under article 8 ECHR;
         (2)      In making that assessment, the best interests of  a  child
             must be a primary consideration, although not always the  only
             primary consideration; and the child's best interests  do  not
             of themselves have the status of the paramount consideration;
         (3)      Although the best interests of a child can  be  outweighed
             by the cumulative effect of  other  considerations,  no  other
             consideration can be treated as inherently more significant;
         (4)      While different judges might approach the question of  the
             best interests of a child in different ways, it  is  important
             to ask oneself the right questions in  an  orderly  manner  in
             order to avoid the risk that the best  interests  of  a  child
             might be undervalued when other important considerations  were
             in play;
         (5)      It is  important  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  a  child's
             circumstances and of what  is  in  a  child's  best  interests
             before one asks oneself whether those interests are outweighed
             by the force of other considerations;
         (6)       To  that  end  there  is  no  substitute  for  a  careful
             examination of all relevant factors when the  interests  of  a
             child are involved in an article 8 assessment; and
         (7)      A child must not be blamed for matters for which he or she
             is not responsible, such as the conduct of a parent."

11.   The Supreme Court went on  to  add  these  further  qualifications  to
    those existing principles:
         "13.     ... First, the decision-maker is required  to  assess  the
             proportionality of the interference with  private  and  family
             life in the particular circumstances in which the decision  is
             made. The evaluative exercise in assessing the proportionality
             of a measure under article 8 ECHR excludes any "hard-edged  or
             bright-line rule to be applied to the generality of cases": EB
             (Kosovo) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]
             AC 1159, per Lord Bingham at para 12. Secondly, as Lord  Mance
             pointed out in H(H)  (at  para  98)  the  decision-maker  must
             evaluate the child's best interests and in some cases they may
             point only marginally in one, rather than another,  direction.
             Thirdly,  as  the  case  of  H(H)  shows  in  the  context  of
             extradition, there may be circumstances in which the weight of
             another primary consideration can tip the balance and make the
             interference proportionate  even  where  it  has  very  severe
             consequences for children. In that case an Italian  prosecutor
             issued a European arrest warrant seeking the  surrender  of  a
             person who had earlier broken his bail conditions  by  leaving
             Italy and ultimately seeking safe haven in the United  Kingdom
             and had been convicted of very serious crimes. This court held
             that the treaty obligations of the United Kingdom to extradite
             him prevailed over his children's best  interests.  The  third
             principle in para 10 above is subject to the first and  second
             qualifications and may, depending  on  the  circumstances,  be
             subject to the third. But in our view, it is not likely that a
             court would reach in the context of  an  immigration  decision
             what Lord Wilson described in H(H) (at para 172) as the  "firm
             if bleak" conclusion  in  that  case,  which  separated  young
             children from their parents."

12.   The Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines) and others v SSHD [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874 also considered what factors should be considered in  assessing
    the weight to be given to the best interests of a child:
         "34.     In determining whether or not,  in  a  case  such  as  the
             present, the need for immigration control outweighs  the  best
             interests of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the
             relative strength of the factors which make it in  their  best
             interests to remain here; and also  to  take  account  of  any
             factors that point the other way.
         35.      A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.
         36.      In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.
         37.      In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken
             into account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to
             maintain immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-
             being of the country and the  fact  that,  ex  hypothesi,  the
             applicants have no  entitlement  to  remain.  The  immigration
             history of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if  they  are
             overstayers, or have acted deceitfully."

13.    In  the  same  case  Lord  Justice   Lewison   made   the   following
    observations:
         "58.     In my judgment, therefore,  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis  that  the
             facts are as they are in the real world. If one parent has  no
             right to remain, but  the  other  parent  does,  that  is  the
             background against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  If
             neither parent has the right  to  remain,  then  that  is  the
             background against which the assessment is conducted. Thus the
             ultimate question will be: is  it  reasonable  to  expect  the
             child to follow the parent with no  right  to  remain  to  the
             country of origin?
         59.      On the facts of ZH it was not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
             deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which  they
             were citizens.
         60.      That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case
             none of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to
             remain in this country. If the mother is removed,  the  father
             has no  independent  right  to  remain.  If  the  parents  are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go  with  them.  As  the  immigration  judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents. Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the
             tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents. Just  as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world."

14.   In Azimi-Moayed (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)  [2013]
    UKUT 00197 the Tribunal emphasised that it  is  normally  in  the  best
    interests of children to be with both  parents.  If  both  parents  are
    being removed from the United Kingdom then the starting point  is  that
    dependent children should also be removed unless there are  reasons  to
    the contrary. In general it is in the  interest  of  children  to  have
    stability and continuity of social and  educational  provisions,  which
    may have developed over  a  long  period  of  residence.  The  Tribunal
    observed that the period of seven years from the age of four is  likely
    to be a more significant period in a child's life than the first  seven
    years of life where very young children are more likely to be  focussed
    on their parents rather than their peers.

15.   I begin by making an assessment of the best interests of the child  in
    this case. In assessing N's best interests I have  taken  into  account
    the above principles as well as  the  statutory  guidance  "UKBA  Every
    Child Matters:  Change  for  Children"  (November  2009),  which  gives
    further detail about the duties owed to children under  section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. In that guidance the
    UKBA  acknowledges  the  importance  of  a  number   of   international
    instruments relating to human rights including the UN Convention on the
    Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes on to confirm:  "The  UK
    Border Agency must fulfil the  requirements  of  these  instruments  in
    relation to children whilst exercising its functions as expressed in UK
    domestic legislation and policies." I take into account the  fact  that
    the UNCRC sets out rights including a child's  right  to  survival  and
    development, the right to know and be cared for by his or her  parents,
    the right not to be separated from parents and  the  enjoyment  of  the
    highest attainable standards of living, health  and  education  without
    discrimination. The UNCRC also recognises the common responsibility  of
    both parents for the upbringing and development of a child.

16.   N was brought to the UK by his parents when he  was  only  four  years
    old. He is now 13 years old. He has lived in the UK  for  a  continuous
    period of nine years. During  that  time  he  started  school  and  has
    completed his primary education. He  has  now  moved  on  to  secondary
    education. This is exactly the period of time envisaged by the Tribunal
    in Azimi-Moayed when a child is likely to begin to form ties in the  UK
    outside his immediate family unit.

17.   In his witness statement N says that he learnt English at  school  and
    has received a lot of merit certificates. His  favourite  subjects  are
    maths, computing, drama, English and French. When he grows up he thinks
    that he would like to be a physiotherapist or a game designer. He loves
    football and supports Manchester United. N has made friends in  the  UK
    and he described the activities that they like to do together. He  said
    that he doesn't remember Mauritius and it would now  be  unfamiliar  to
    him. He feels more British  than  Mauritian  and  feels  upset  at  the
    thought of having to leave the UK because he considers this country  is
    his home. He would miss his friends and his school if he had  to  leave
    and thinks that it would be hard to make new friends. His parents  told
    him that they teach in French and Creole  in  Mauritius  and  for  this
    reason he doesn't think he will be able to continue his studies.

18.   As the First-tier Tribunal Judge made clear N has a  "well-established
    private life in the  UK".  He  has  been  attending  school  during  an
    important developmental period of his life.  Given  his  young  age  on
    arrival in the UK no doubt he has few memories of Mauritius. As far  as
    he is concerned he has spent most of his life in the UK and feels  well
    settled here. It is understandable that he would not want to leave  his
    friends and is worried about what a new  life  in  Mauritius  would  be
    like. His parents are no longer married but have been able to  maintain
    stability in his life. They continue to live together as a family  unit
    because they consider that it is in the best interests of the child.  N
    increasingly has developed a private life outside the immediate  family
    unit but is still a young adolescent. It is  undoubtedly  in  his  best
    interests to remain in a family unit with both parents. Although he has
    now started secondary education he is not yet at the stage where he has
    begun studying for significant qualifications such as GCSEs.

19.   Little  background  evidence  has  been  produced  to  show  what  the
    conditions are likely to be in Mauritius save for an internet print out
    relating  to  Mauritian  languages.  The  website   states   that   the
    administration of the former  British  colony  is  still  conducted  in
    English and that English is taught in schools at primary  level  albeit
    that French and Mauritian Creole are the most widely spoken  languages.
    There is no evidence to suggest that N would  not  be  able  to  access
    education or healthcare facilities in Mauritius or  to  show  that  his
    parents would be unable to provide for his day to day needs. It may  be
    difficult for his parents to re-establish themselves and find work  but
    there is no evidence to suggest that they would be  unable  to  do  so.
    They both spent their formative years in Mauritius. His  parents  would
    prefer to remain in the UK where there is likely to be greater economic
    opportunity but no good reasons have been given as to  why  they  could
    not re-establish themselves in their country of origin. The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found that there was no evidence to show that the  child
    would be at any risk as  a  result  of  historic  family  arguments  in
    Mauritius. It might be necessary for N to develop his  existing  French
    language skills in order to continue his education in Mauritius but  he
    is still of an age that he is likely to be  able  to  adjust  with  the
    assistance of his parents, who clearly want the best for their child.

20.   In light of the above I find that it is likely to be  in  the  child's
    best interests to remain in the UK with his  parents.  However,  it  is
    quite clear from the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings, with which I
    agree, that there  is  very  little  evidence  to  show  any  practical
    obstacles to the  family  being  able  to  re-establish  themselves  in
    Mauritius. No doubt it would be an upheaval after this length of  time,
    but there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  the  child  would  face  any
    significant hardship over and above the normal disruption that might be
    expected when a child moves to a new home or school. For this reason, I
    find that it is only marginally in the child's best interest to  remain
    in the UK because it would provide him with continuity  and  access  to
    slightly better services, education and longer term opportunities.

21.   For the reasons given above [8] I conclude that  the  third  appellant
    does not meet the strict requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the
    immigration rules because he had not lived in the UK for  a  continuous
    period of seven years at the date of the application in July  2013.  As
    such, I turn to consider the appellants' right to  private  and  family
    life under Article 8 outside the immigration rules.

22.   Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  protects  the
    right to private and family life. However, it is not an absolute right.
    The state is able to lawfully interfere with an appellant's private and
    family life as long as it is  pursuing  a  legitimate  aim  and  it  is
    necessary and proportionate in all the circumstances of the  case.  The
    starting point is the basic principle that a state  has  the  right  to
    control the entry and residence of people within its borders. There  is
    a  strong  public  interest  in  maintaining  an  effective  system  of
    immigration control. This is done through  the  immigration  rules  and
    policies, which set out the requirements for leave to enter  or  remain
    in the UK. The immigration rules and policies are  the  main  guide  to
    what  decisions  are   likely   to   be   considered   reasonable   and
    proportionate. It is still possible for cases that fall  outside  those
    requirements to engage the operation of Article 8 but only if there are
    compelling circumstances that are not sufficiently recognised under the
    immigration rules: see Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11, Patel  &  Others  v
    SSHD [2013] UKSC 72, R (on the application  of  MM  &  Others)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

23.   All three appellants are Mauritian citizens  and  none  of  them  have
    leave to remain in the UK. The  right  to  family  life  would  not  be
    infringed by removal because all  three  appellants  would  be  removed
    together as a family unit. They would be able to continue their  family
    life together in Mauritius. The parents have lived  in  the  UK  for  a
    period of 11 years but there is little evidence to show that they  have
    developed any particularly strong ties to the UK. N has lived in the UK
    for a significant period of his young life and  there  is  evidence  to
    show that he is likely to have developed far stronger ties  to  the  UK
    than his parents and that he is well settled.  I  bear  in  mind  that,
    following the decisions in AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] INLR 407  and  VW
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5,  the  threshold  for  showing  an
    interference  with  an  appellant's  rights  under  Article  8  is  not
    particularly high. In the circumstances I accept that  the  appellants'
    length of residence and other ties to  the  UK  show  that  removal  is
    likely to interfere with their right to private life in a  sufficiently
    grave way as to engage the operation  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention (questions (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five stage  approach
    in Razgar v SSHD [2004] INLR 349)

24.   The appellants do not meet the requirements of the  immigration  rules
    and the normal course of action would be to require them to  leave  the
    UK. While the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control  is  an
    important  factor  the  balancing  exercise  under  Article  8   is   a
    complicated one and must  take  into  account  a  number  of  different
    factors  balancing  the  public  interest  considerations  against  the
    specific circumstances of each individual.

25.   In assessing what weight  to  place  on  the  public  interest,  where
    relevant, the Tribunal must take into account  section  117B  (general)
    and 117C (deportation) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 ("NIAA 2002"),  which  outlines  a  number  of  factors  that  the
    Tribunal must consider when assessing whether an  interference  with  a
    person's right to respect for private and family life is justified  and
    proportionate.

26.   In balancing the individual circumstances of this family  against  the
    public interest considerations I give due weight to the fact  that  the
    best interests of the child are a primary consideration.  However,  the
    best interests of the child can be outweighed by the cumulative  effect
    of other factors. Due  weight  should  also  be  given  to  the  public
    interest in maintaining an effective system of immigration control.  As
    outlined in EV (Philippines) the case must be  assessed  in  the  'real
    world' situation where none of the family members  have  had  leave  to
    remain since January 2011. The assessment must also take  into  account
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  negative  finding  that  the  first
    appellant effectively used her studies as a "smokescreen" to allow  the
    family to remain in the UK for as long as possible. Since  their  leave
    to  remain  expired  the  parents  made   repeated   and   unsuccessful
    applications for leave to remain in order to avoid having to return  to
    Mauritius.

27.   It is likely that all three appellants speak English  given  that  the
    first appellant studied in the UK and the second appellant is  said  to
    be working in the UK (albeit without permission). It is  clear  that  N
    speaks good English. Indeed it is now likely to be his first  language.
    While this is a factor I must take into  account  for  the  purpose  of
    section 117B(2) of the NIAA 2002 it is merely neutral and does not  add
    anything to the appellants' case: see AM (s.117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT
    0260. Although the second appellant is said  to  be  working  there  is
    little evidence to show how the family supports itself.  Even  if  both
    parents would be in a position to work without becoming a burden on  UK
    taxpayers, again, this is a  factor  that  is  merely  neutral  in  the
    assessment under section 117B(3).

28.   Prior to 2011 the appellants lived in the UK  with  limited  leave  to
    remain, and for the last four years, in the full  knowledge  that  they
    had no leave to remain. In those circumstances their  private  life  in
    the UK could not be described as anything other than precarious and  by
    virtue of sections 117B(4) and (5) should be given little weight.

29.   I take into account the fact that the third appellant is a  child  and
    bears  no  blame  for  his  precarious  immigration  status.  His  best
    interests are nevertheless to be given  primary  consideration  when  I
    turn to consider section 117B(6) and whether it is reasonable to expect
    him to leave the UK. For the purpose of section 117B(6) the  qualifying
    period is not restricted to  seven  years  residence  at  the  date  of
    application and for this reason I find that the third  appellant  is  a
    qualifying child within the definition contained in section 117D(1)  of
    the NIAA 2002.

30.   I have given due weight to the fact that N is well settled in  the  UK
    and that it would cause an upheaval in his life if he had to leave  and
    re-establish himself in, what he  considers  to  be,  a  less  familiar
    environment. However, I also have to take into account the fact that no
    member of the family is a British citizen or has leave to  remain.  The
    family would not be separated. Their status in the UK has at all  times
    been precarious. The parents bear responsibility for bringing their son
    to the UK. It seems clear that they wish to remain on a long term basis
    because they consider that it would be in the best interests  of  their
    child. While that is entirely understandable the family does  not  meet
    the requirements of the immigration rules for leave to  remain  in  the
    UK. There is no evidence to suggest that the parents or the child would
    face any  particular  difficulties  in  re-establishing  themselves  in
    Mauritius albeit that there would be an initial upheaval. There  is  no
    evidence  to  show  that  the  child's  welfare  or  safety  would   be
    significantly affected if he were to return to his  country  of  origin
    with his parents. He may find it challenging to start at a  new  school
    but there is no evidence to suggest that he would be unable  to  access
    adequate education or healthcare in Mauritius.

31.   The only issue of any note is the child's length of residence  in  the
    UK, but apart from that, the evidence does not disclose any  compelling
    circumstances. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision  because  I
    considered that more consideration was needed to  this  aspect  of  the
    case. I have set out the guiding principles outlined  in  the  relevant
    case law above. I do not seek to diminish the weight to be given to the
    length of time that N has lived in the UK. No doubt he now has a strong
    affinity to this country. However, he is not at a particularly  crucial
    point in his education at the current time. His parents do not meet the
    requirements of the immigration rules and would normally be expected to
    leave the UK. A dependent child would normally be expected to accompany
    his parents. It seem to me that the circumstances in this case are  not
    dissimilar to those considered in  EV  (Philippines)  where  the  'real
    world' situation was that none of  the  family  members  had  leave  to
    remain. I have concluded  that  it  is  only  marginally  in  the  best
    interest of N to remain in the UK with his parents and that  there  are
    no factors that point strongly in  favour  of  it  being  in  his  best
    interest to remain in the UK e.g. health issues or any other compelling
    or compassionate circumstances.

32.   After having weighed the particular circumstances of this  case  as  a
    whole, giving primary consideration to the best interests of the child,
    I conclude that it would be reasonable to expect him to  leave  the  UK
    with  his  parents.  The  cumulative  effect  of  the  public  interest
    considerations are sufficient to outweigh the marginal best interest of
    the child to remain in the UK. While  it  is  understandable  that  the
    first and second appellants would prefer to remain in  the  UK  because
    they consider that this would provide the family with better long  term
    opportunities, unfortunately, their desire to remain in the UK does not
    necessarily equate to a right to do so under the law. For these reasons
    I find that removal in consequence of the decision would not amount  to
    a disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellants'  rights  under
    Article 8 of the  European  Convention  (points  (iv)  &  (v)  of  Lord
    Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar).

33.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error of law and set aside the decision. I  remake  the  decision
    and dismiss the appeal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I re-make the decision and DISMISS the appeal


Signed      [pic]      Date 21 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
