
 [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46415/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th June 2014                             |On 17th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                            MS JULIA DIONNE CHIN
                        (NO ANONMYITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Z Ahmed of Regents & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 6th January 1969.  She
       arrived  in  the  UK  on  30th  September  2001  as  a  visitor  and
       overstayed. She applied to remain in the UK  on  the  basis  of  her
       relationship with Mr Ewan Natty,  her  unmarried  partner  and  long
       residence. This application was refused.  As an overstayer she could
       not  satisfy  the  requirements  at  paragraph   295D(iv)   of   the
       Immigration Rules, so  the  application  was  considered  under  the
       provisions  in  the  Immigration  Rules  which  reflect   the   UK's
       obligations under Article 8 ECHR at Appendix FM  and  paragraph  276
       ADE.  Whilst it was accepted that she had lived with  her  unmarried
       partner for more than two years and could satisfy other  aspects  of
       the Immigration Rules at Appendix FM to remain as  his  partner  she
       could  not  satisfy  the  requirement   at   EX1   that   there   be
       insurmountable obstacles to their continuing their  family  life  in
       Jamaica, particularly as it was said that the appellant's partner is
       Jamaican, lived there until 1998 and thus would be able to integrate
       in that country. The appellant was refused under paragraph 276ADE of
       the Immigration Rules because she had  only  lived  in  the  UK  for
       twelve years, and because she was found to have social, cultural and
       family ties with Jamaica having  spent  the  majority  of  her  life
       there. Her appeal against  the  decision  was  dismissed  under  the
       Immigration Rules but allowed under  the  general  law  relating  to
       Article 8  ECHR  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 17th March 2014.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Colyer on 28th April 2014 on the basis that it was arguable that the
       First-tier judge had erred in law  in  failing  to  give  sufficient
       reasons why there were not insurmountable reasons to satisfy EX1  at
       paragraph 11 of her determination. Similarly there were  no  reasons
       for the finding that the appellant had not shown she  had  lost  all
       ties with Jamaica.

    3. The matter came before me to determine if  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       had erred in law. I made some enquiries with the appellant to ensure
       that she understood that whether Judge Chamberlain had erred in  law
       on this matter or not would make no difference to the type of  leave
       to remain given by the Secretary of State. The same leave to  remain
       would be given to those who  qualified  under  the  Article  8  ECHR
       provisions of the Immigration Rules  as  under  Article  8  ECHR  at
       large. It became clear however that this was an appeal pursued on  a
       matter of principle rather than one which related to  any  practical
       outcome.  There was no cross-appeal by the Secretary of State.

Submissions and Conclusions on Error of Law

    4. Mr Wilding conceded that there was an error of law at  paragraph  11
       of the determination as Judge Chamberlain  had  uncharacteristically
       failed  to  give  reasons  for  her  decision  that  there  were  no
       insurmountable obstacles to family life taking place  elsewhere.  He
       said that perhaps Judge Chamberlain had been confused by submissions
       regarding the case of Sabir (Appendix FM- EX.1  not  free  standing)
       [2014] UKUT 00063, and had mistakenly thought that the facts of  the
       appellant's case did not bring it within EX1 so there was no need to
       give reasons.

    5. In the circumstances I told Mr Ahmed that I was satisfied that Judge
       Chamberlain had erred in law in failing to give any reasons for  her
       conclusion at paragraph 11 of her determination that there  were  no
       insurmountable obstacles to the appellant and her partner, Mr Natty,
       having family life in Jamaica  particularly  in  the  light  of  her
       factual findings that led to her  conclusion  that  the  appellant's
       removal would be a disproportionate breach of  her  Article  8  ECHR
       rights. In the light of R (on  the  application  of  Nagre)  v  SSHD
       [2013] EWHC 720, for instance at paragraph 42, the two  tests  ought
       to have reached the same conclusion as this was a case involving  an
       appellant  who  had  precarious   immigration   status   and   whose
       relationship  developed  when  this  was  the  case.  Further  Judge
       Chamberlain had also given no reasons for  her  statement  that  the
       appellant had not shown she had lost all ties  with  Jamaica,  which
       was also at odds with her subsequent factual findings.

    6. I therefore set aside the decision of Judge Chamberlain  that  there
       appellant could not succeed under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
       Rules due to failure to show insurmountable obstacles to her  family
       life taking place in Jamaica, but  preserved  her  factual  findings
       which were not challenged by any of the parties.

Submissions Re-making

    7. Mr Wilding said in the light of Judge Chamberlain's  findings  about
       the degree of difficulty of relocation and  the  lack  of  ties  the
       appellant and her partner have with  Jamaica,  which  had  not  been
       challenged by the Secretary of State, he accepted that it  would  be
       appropriate to  find  that  the  appellant  met  the  insurmountable
       obstacles test.

    8. I told Mr Ahmed that he did not need to make any further submissions
       as I agreed with Mr Wilding, and would remake the  decision  finding
       that there were insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant's  family
       life taking place in Jamaica, and thus that she qualified for  leave
       to remain under Article 8 ECHR as embodied in the Immigration  Rules
       at Appendix FM.

Conclusions: Re-making

    9. To satisfy the test  that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to
       family life between the appellant and Mr Natty taking place  outside
       of the UK it is  necessary  to  show  that  there  would  not  be  a
       practical possibility of relocation, see paragraph 42 of Nagre. This
       is not a test which literally requires obstacles that are impossible
       to surmount as that would be  too  stringent  an  approach,  see  MF
       (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

   10. The findings in  the  determination  of  Judge  Chamberlain  can  be
       summarised as follows. That neither the appellant nor Mr Natty  have
       any close family living in  Jamaica;  that  the  appellant  has  not
       returned to Jamaica since she entered the UK twelve years ago and Mr
       Natty has not been there since 1996 (for 18 years); that neither  Mr
       Natty nor the appellant has a property in  Jamaica  and  they  would
       have no support in that country; that the  appellant  is  depressed;
       that she has an unusually close relationship  with  her  adult  son,
       going beyond normal emotional ties and which is rightly  seen  as  a
       family life relationship, who is a  British  citizen  and  with  her
       grandson, who is also a British citizen, whom she sees  up  to  four
       times a week  (who  in  turn  cannot  relocate  to  Jamaica  as  the
       appellant's grandson lives in the UK with his mother and  all  these
       people could not be expected to go to that  country);  and  that  Mr
       Natty is a British citizen who  has  work  and  established  himself
       here, and who could not reasonably be expected to leave the UK.

   11. I find that in the  light  of  these  findings  that  there  was  no
       practical possibility of the appellant's family life with  Mr  Natty
       taking place in Jamaica, and thus that she was able to  satisfy  the
       test that there were insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with
       her partner continuing outside the UK. She  was  therefore  able  to
       satisfy EX.1 (b) as the Secretary of State had rightly accepted that
       she had a genuine and subsisting relationship with Nr Natty who is a
       British citizen. As the other relevant aspects of Appendix  FM  were
       accepted as being satisfied by the Secretary of State, the appellant
       therefore qualifies for leave to remain on the basis of  her  family
       life under this provision.

Decision

   12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant failed in
       her appeal under Appendix FM is set aside.

   14.  The decision is re-made allowing the appeal  under  the  Article  8
       ECHR aspects of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules  as  set  out
       above.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
16th June 2014

