
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46967/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 27 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Kasonde Nsofu Munonyedi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr A Adewole, Liberty & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Mrs Kasonde Nsofu Munonyedi, was born on  10  September
    1975 and is a citizen of Zambia.  She entered the United Kingdom  as  a
    student in 1994 and left the country, returning at a later  date  apply
    for leave to remain in 2003.  That leave was refused but  she  remained
    in the United Kingdom without leave until she returned to Zambia  again
    in 2009.  In 2010, she  married  Mr  Peter  Munonyedi  in  Zambia.   Mr
    Munonyedi is a British national.  She applied for  entry  clearance  to
    the United Kingdom but was refused.   Her  appeal  was  allowed  by  an
    Immigration Judge and she was granted leave to enter  as  a  spouse  in
    September 2011.  However, she failed  to  use  that  visa  and  instead
    applied for a family visit visa in  2014  which  was  granted.   Having
    remained following her visit, she was refused further leave  to  remain
    on 6 November 2014 and a decision was also made  to  remove  her.   She
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Caswell)  which,  in  a
    decision and reasons dated 1 May  2015  allowed  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds (Article 8, ECHR).  The Secretary of State now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The Secretary of State asserts that the judge failed  to  indicate  why
    the Immigration Rules had  not  been  met  by  the  appellant  in  this
    instance.  The judge had failed adequately to explain why the appellant
    should be granted leave to remain under Article 8, ECHR when it was not
    clear at all that she would satisfy any of  the  necessary  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The judge found [29]  that  the  appellant's  husband's  child  (A)  is
    "genuinely attached to the appellant as a maternal figure" and  it  was
    then challenged  evidence  that  the  child  which  the  appellant  was
    carrying at the date of the First-tier Tribunal would  be  British  and
    could not reasonably be expected to relocate to Zambia with her mother.
     The judge found [24] that it would be in the interests of the child  A
    and also the unborn child not to be separated from  the  appellant  and
    that she should remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. As often happens in cases of this sort, matters have moved on since the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  On 8 May 2015 (a  week  after
    the First-tier Tribunal decision was promulgated)  the  appellant  gave
    birth to a male child.  That child is a British citizen.  The Secretary
    of State does not challenge the appellant's evidence that the child  is
    a British citizen nor did  Mr  Diwnycz,  for  the  appellant,  seek  to
    persuade me that the child's interests would be properly  addressed  if
    his mother were to be removed from the United  Kingdom.   Likewise,  Mr
    Diwnycz did not seek to persuade me that the young child, as a  British
    citizen, could properly be required to leave the European Union.

 5. In the circumstances and even if I were to accept  that  Judge  Caswell
    erred in law (and I make no such finding,  none  being  necessary),  I
    would exercise  my  discretion  and  refrain  from  setting  aside  her
    decision and reasons.  Given  the  circumstances  as  they  now  stand,
    nothing whatever would be gained by my setting aside and  remaking  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

 6. This appeal is dismissed.

 7. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 26 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
