
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46232/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th October 2015                 |On 19th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                           Mrs Liudmila Melnikova
                       (anonymity direction NOT Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Judge Barcello promulgated on 6th February 2015 in which  the
    judge concluded that the Appellant had not met the burden upon  her  of
    establishing that her application for an EEA residence  card  had  been
    wrongfully refused by the Respondent.  The relevant Regulation is  that
    set out at 9(1) of the EEA 2006 Regulations.

 2. The grounds complain that the judge when making his decision failed  to
    take into account a bundle of documents submitted by the Appellant  and
    received by the Tribunal on 6th February 2015.  The grounds assert that
    the directions issued by the court required  that  those  documents  be
    lodged by that date and  in  the  use  of  that  wording  included  6th
    February to the point that it was grossly procedurally unfair  for  the
    judge to reach his decision on 6th February without having taken  those
    documents into account.  Those documents also amended  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal before the judge to include a  ground  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to a residence permit or entitled  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and not to be removed on the basis of  a  derivative  residence
    right under 15A of the 2006 Regulations.

 3.  The  directions  issued  by  the  court  are,  Mr  Richards  concedes,
    ambivalent in the context that the direction to the Respondent is  that
    documents must arrive before 6th February 2015 but the direction to the
    Appellant is differently worded to the point that they must be received
    by 6th February 2015 and he does not dispute  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to assume that those documents would be taken into account  by
    the judge. Further Mr Richards indicated that  the  evidence  that  had
    been submitted and had been before the judge, or would have been before
    the judge and which he had had the opportunity of looking at, was  such
    that he would not seek to make a decision  defending  the  Respondent's
    refusal under the regulations.

 4. Taking into account those submissions and  the  adversarial  nature  of
    these proceedings I find that the decision of the judge is vitiated  by
    material legal error, namely failing to take into  account  documentary
    evidence which was provided to the court, albeit not before the  judge,
    by the date of his decision, and I set it aside. I remake the  decision
    in this Tribunal, allowing the Appellant's appeal  on  EEA  Regulations
    grounds.

 5. It follows that the Appellant is entitled  as  a  family  member  to  a
    residence card in the context of Regulation 17.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

