
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46925/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 July 2015                      |On 28 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Miss MAUREEN KHABUYA
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson (counsel), instructed by Ivy
Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    For the purposes of this decision, I refer to the Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department as  the  respondent  and  to  Miss  Khabuya  as  the
appellant, reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.    This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  decision  of
First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Miles,  promulgated  on  19  March  2014  which
dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
refuse a residence  card  under  regulation  17  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
Regulations 2006.

Background

4.    The Appellant was born on 18 September  1978  and  is  a  national  of
Uganda.

5.    On 14 January 2013 the Appellant applied for a residence card  as  the
extended family member of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty  rights  of
movement in the UK. On 28 October 2013 the Secretary of  State  refused  the
Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

6.    The appellant appealed against that refusal and in a determination  of
the First Tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  19  March  2014,  her  appeal  was
dismissed. The appellant appealed that decision to the  Upper  Tribunal  and
in a determination of the Upper Tribunal promulgated on  9  July  2014,  the
appeal was allowed and the appellant's case was remitted to the  First  Tier
Tribunal to determine of new. In a  determination  of  First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge Rothwell promulgated on 14 November 2014, the appellant's  appeal  was
allowed under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  It  is  against  that
decision (promulgated on 14 November 2014) that this appeal is directed.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged  and  on  7  January  2015,  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge R A Cox granted permission to appeal stating inter alia:

         "... the grounds do not take issue with the  judge's  findings  but
         contend that, instead of allowing the appeal  outright,  the  judge
         should have allowed it to the extent that the decision was  not  in
         accordance with the law and remitted  the  matter  to  the  SoS  to
         exercise her  discretion  under  Regulation  17(4).  The  point  is
         clearly arguable."

The Hearing

8.    Even though this is the respondent's appeal, Mr Richardson took me  to
the appellant's bundle and directed me to page 6,  where  there  is  a  copy
letter  dated  14  January  2015  (incorrectly  dated  2014)  responding  to
directions dated 8 January 2015 and stating "on the condition that  all  the
other findings of the First Tier  Tribunal  are  preserved,  the  respondent
consents to the Secretary of State's  appeal  being  allowed  by  the  Upper
Tribunal  to  the  extent  that  a  decision  is  substituted  allowing  the
respondent (Ms Khabuya's) appeal on the basis that the Secretary of  State's
refusal to issue a residence card was not in accordance with  the  law".  He
told me that the appeal has not been resisted for more than six  months  and
asked me to consider making a costs order in terms of Paragraph  10  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

9.    Mr Tufan for the respondent moved the appeal and urged me not to  make
an order for costs.

Analysis

10.   This appeal is no longer contested. By letter dated 14  January  2014,
the appellant's solicitors conceded the appeal on  the  condition  that  the
findings  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  are  preserved.  The  Home  Office
presenting officer had the opportunity to address me on the preservation  of
the First Tier Tribunal's findings and adopted a neutral position.

11.   I therefore preserve the findings of the First Tier Tribunal as  there
is no challenge to those findings and no obvious error in those findings.

12.   In Ihemedu (OFMs -  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  00340  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence  card  to
an OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion.  Where  the  Secretary
of State has not yet exercised  that  discretion  the  most  an  Immigration
Judge is entitled to do is to allow the appeal as being  not  in  accordance
with the law leaving the matter of whether to exercise  this  discretion  in
the appellant's favour or not to the Secretary of State.

13.   The conclusion that the respondent's decision dated  28  October  2013
was made in error  of  law  is  not  challenged.  However,  because  of  the
operation of Regulation 17(4) of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006,
the notice of decision allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  (EEA)
Regulations 2006 contains a material error of  law.  Section  17(4)  of  the
2006  Regulations  provides  for  the  Secretary  of   State   to   exercise
discretion. The Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion.

14.   I therefore set aside the decision promulgated  on  14  November  2014
because it contains a material error of law.

15.   But I preserve the findings in  fact  of  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
Rothwell made in the determination promulgated 14 November 2014.

16.   It is now for the respondent to consider the  application  of  new  in
light of the findings  in  fact  of  the  determination  promulgated  on  14
November 2014.

17.   The appellant asks for an order for costs because, in January 2015,  a
concession was made by the appellant. That concession was made  in  writing.
It is the appellant's position that the respondent delayed in accepting  the
concession offered  by  the  appellant.  Although  the  appellant  does  not
specifically say  so,  it  is  implied  that  today's  hearing  is  entirely
unnecessary and has been caused by the respondent.

18.   It would have been helpful if the respondent  had  paid  attention  to
the appellant's letter of January 2015, but it  is  not  clear  to  me  what
contact the appellant had with the respondent  after  January  2015.   Quite
properly, I am not told of discussions which  may  or  may  not  have  taken
place between the appellant and the respondent throughout  2015.  The  offer
made by the appellant is conditional on the  preservations  of  findings  in
fact. It was only when this case called before me that the  preservation  of
the findings in  fact  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  could  be  clarified.
Arguably, my decision is necessary to set aside the decision  of  the  First
Tier Tribunal (whilst preserving the findings in  fact)  and  so  frees  the
respondent to consider the appellant's application once more.

19.   In all the circumstances, I cannot  see  that  either  a  party  or  a
representative has acted unreasonably in the conduct of  these  proceedings,
nor can I see that the appellant's agents have made  a  written  application
for costs and intimated  that  written  application  to  the  respondent.  I
therefore make no order for costs.

Decision

20.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of
law. I therefore set the decision aside, but preserve the findings  in  fact
made by the First tier Tribunal in the decision promulgated on  14  November
2014. I substitute the following decision.

21.   The appeal is allowed. The application remains outstanding and  awaits
a lawful decision by the Secretary of State in  light  of  the  findings  in
fact contained in the decision of the First tier Tribunal promulgated on  14
November 2014.



Signed      Date 25 July 2015

                                        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
