
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46213/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 April 2016                          |On 28 April 2016                    |
|Judgment given orally at hearing         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        HIREN RAMNIKBHAI BHINGRADIYA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance by or on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    for convenience I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 4 April 1990.  He  made  an
    application for leave to remain on 3 September 2014.  That  application
    was refused with reference to paragraph 322(1) of the Immigration Rules
    in a decision dated 10 November 2014.  At the same time a decision  was
    made to remove him under Section 47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The respondent's decision identifies the basis of the  application  for
    leave to remain as being that the appellant required a short period  of
    leave whilst a pending judicial review application against  a  previous
    refusal of leave was concluded.  The respondent  did  not  accept  that
    this was  a  truly  exceptional  basis  warranting  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules. It was concluded that the fact  that  the  appellant
    still has a pending judicial review  itself  ensures  that  no  removal
    action would be taken against him until the matter was  completed.   To
    summarise, it appears that the appellant had a pending judicial  review
    application in relation to a leave to remain application under  Tier  1
    and sought further leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules  pending  the
    determination of that judicial review.

 4. The appeal against the respondent's decisions  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Haria ("the FtJ") at a hearing on 22 May 2015.  The  FtJ
    referred to the appellant's immigration history as  including  that  he
    arrived in the UK on 1 January 2011 having been granted entry clearance
    as a student.  He referred to the appellant having made an  application
    for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the points-
    based system and that that application was refused on 15 July  2014.  A
    challenge to that refusal by way of judicial review was pending at  the
    time of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There  is  then
    reference to the application which is the subject matter of the  appeal
    before me, namely the application  for  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules.  In his consideration of paragraph 322(1) the FtJ said  that  he
    had no power to exercise the Secretary of  State's  discretion  outside
    the Rules.  In passing, it is important  to  recognise  that  paragraph
    322(1) is a mandatory ground for refusal.

 5. The FtJ went on to consider Article 8 of the ECHR  and  noted  at  [19]
    that there were no witness statements from any friends,  colleagues  or
    family in support of the appellant's  claim  of  having  established  a
    strong private and family life in the UK.  Again, it  is  important  to
    remember that the appellant arrived in the UK in January 2011.

 6. At [23] the FtJ noted that the appellant does not have  a  wife  and/or
    children and had not produced any evidence  to  show  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to his continuing  a  family  life  in  India,
    bearing in mind that he had lived most of his life there.  He  did  not
    own property in the UK and lived in rented accommodation.

 7. The FtJ concluded that the appellant had not advanced any  evidence  to
    establish that there may be problems in  returning  to  India  although
    noting that the appellant claimed to have become accustomed  to  living
    in the UK.  On the other hand the FtJ pointed out that he had only been
    in the UK from January 2011, a period of just  over  four  and  a  half
    years, and therefore the time that the appellant had spent  in  the  UK
    was much shorter in comparison to the time he had spent  in  India.  He
    had produced no evidence to show that he has no cultural or family ties
    in India.  The FTJ's view was that the appellant had merely indicated a
    preference for living in the UK as opposed to living in India.

 8. The only tie that the appellant evidenced was a fairly recent  business
    started by him in which he employs a handful of people.  The contention
    that it would be disproportionate to remove him as  his  employees  may
    face redundancy was referred to.  However the FtJ also pointed out that
    that was not something that was in the  appellant's  witness  statement
    and there was no information as to what the appellant's intentions  are
    in the event that he is required to leave the UK  in  relation  to  the
    business.  It would not necessarily result in all his employees  having
    to be made redundant, it was concluded.

 9. In considering Article 8 of the  ECHR  the  FtJ  referred  to  relevant
    authority and concluded at  [28]  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control outweighed any interference  with  the  appellant's
    rights to a family or private life.

10. However the FtJ then went on to reflect on Article 6 of the ECHR, being
    the right to a fair trial in the context of  the  outstanding  judicial
    review proceedings.  He referred to the decision in MH (pending  family
    proceedings - discretionary leave) Morocco [2010] UKUT 439 (IAC)  which
    relates to family court proceedings and what was considered to  be  the
    appropriate course where such proceedings are pending, namely  for  the
    respondent to grant a period of discretionary leave.   The  appropriate
    course it was said in that case  was  for  the  appeal  to  be  allowed
    pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR rather than for the proceedings to be
    adjourned and that it was for the respondent to decide on the period of
    leave in each case.

11. The FtJ noted that although the case of MH concerned family proceedings
    he concluded  that  the  principles  applied  equally  to  other  court
    proceedings, such as judicial  review  proceedings,  finding  therefore
    that in the circumstances the respondent ought to have granted a  short
    period of discretionary leave merely to cover  the  period  whilst  the
    judicial review proceedings were pending.  His conclusion at  [31]  was
    that   "As   a   result   the   decision   to   remove   is   therefore
    disproportionate".

12. He then went on at the end of the determination under the sub-paragraph
    "Notice of Decision" to state that the appeal  was  allowed  "on  human
    rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules".

13. There was no appearance before me by or on  behalf  of  the  appellant.
    There was a letter submitted on his behalf by his representatives, that
    letter being dated 31 March 2016.  It stated that  the  representatives
    had just received instructions to the effect that  the  appellant  does
    not wish to appear at the Upper  Tribunal  and  does  not  wish  to  be
    represented.  I note that there is no application for an adjournment of
    the  proceedings  before  me  and  it  is  not  suggested  that  it  is
    appropriate for the appeal to be decided 'on  the  papers'.   There  is
    provision for that in the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 but its circumstances do not apply here.

14. I heard submissions from Mr Staunton on behalf of  the  respondent  who
    relied on the respondent's grounds, and raised the issue of  Article  6
    although not in the terms in which I now consider that issue.

15. I am satisfied that the FtJ  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the  appeal,
    seemingly with reference to Article  6  of  the  ECHR.   In  the  first
    instance it is  not  explained  why  the  outstanding  judicial  review
    proceedings would be affected in Article 6 terms were the appellant not
    to be granted further leave to remain.  Apart from anything else, there
    is no reason as  to  why  he  could  not  pursue  the  judicial  review
    proceedings from outside the UK.

16. Secondly, and perhaps more importantly, it is recognised that Article 6
    has no application to immigration and asylum proceedings such as  those
    that are before me.  It is not necessary for me to set  out  in  detail
    all the authorities on the point.  They are referred  to  at  paragraph
    7.77 of the 9th Edition of Macdonald's Immigration Law and Practice  at
    pages 596-597.  It is sufficient only to refer  to  part  of  paragraph
    7.77 in which it states that:

         "...the right to a fair trial guaranteed by Article 6 has been held
         not to apply to decisions about the entry and residence of  aliens,
         nor about the determination of British  citizenship,  since  'civil
         rights' is an autonomous concept equated by and large with  private
         law rights as opposed to administrative decisions"

    In the footnotes a number of authorities are referred  to  including  a
    starred decision of the then IAT, MNM [2000] INLR 576 which stated that
    Article 6 does not apply to asylum appeals, for example.

17. I am satisfied that the FtJ's conclusion that there was a parallel with
    family court proceedings and  the  decision  in  MH,  is  misconceived.
    Apart from anything else, those proceedings related to Article 8 of the
    ECHR and concern decisions affecting children of which notably this  is
    not such a case.

18. Furthermore, the FtJ in this appeal expressly dismissed the appeal with
    reference to Article  8  ECHR  (see  [28])  and  the  parallel  is  not
    therefore apparent.

19. In addition, the FtJ  had  already  in  his  decision  stated  that  he
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules so it is not clear the
    basis on which he expressed himself as allowing the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules at the end of his decision.  He had concluded at [18]
    that he was not able to interfere  with  the  respondent's  Rules-based
    decision.

20. I am satisfied therefore, that the FtJ erred in law in terms of Article
    6 of the ECHR, and seemingly, but inconsistently, allowing  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules. The errors of law are such as  to  require
    the decision to be set aside.  In the re-making  of  the  decision  the
    appropriate course on the facts is for the appeal to be dismissed.

21. In conclusion, I am satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on  a  point  of  law.   Its
    decision is set aside and I re-make the decision dismissing the  appeal
    on all grounds.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        26 April 2016
