
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46450/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|(By Video Link to Bradford Hearing Centre)    |On 4 June 2014               |
|On 30 May 2014                                |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             One Onalenna Chappy
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Williams, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnston, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a 26 year old citizen of Botswana, appeals  against  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Grimshaw)  promulgated
    on 19 February 2014 which held that  the  appellant  had  no  right  of
    appeal against the respondent's earlier decision and that there was  no
    valid appeal before the Tribunal.

2.   The background to the present application is  that  the  appellant  had
    leave to remain in the UK as a student from 26 September 2005 until  12
    October 2012 (barring about  a two months gap which is not relevant  to
    this decision).  She had previously implied on 26 October  2012,  after
    her leave to remain had expired, for leave to remain  because  she  was
    seeking to secure a place  to  undertake  a  Masters  Degree  at  Leeds
    Trinity University on a course which was due to commence on  1  January
    2013.  That application was refused on 15  March  2013  -  there  is  a
    dispute as to when that decision was actually received by the appellant
    - and that application was refused as being outside the requirements of
    the Rules: the appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    245ZX(l) because the course did not commence within the expiry  of  the
    appellant's current leave or (as in this case) where the applicant  had
    overstayed, within 28 days of when the  period  of  overstaying  began.
    Nor did the appellant meet the Article 8 provisions of paragraph 276ADE
    of the Rules.  There was no right of appeal.

3.   On 22 April 2013 the appellant made a new  application  for  permission
    to remain as a student.  It appears that she had already commenced  the
    course at Leeds Trinity University on 1 January 2013 and the course was
    due to end on 30 November 2013.  I do not  know  whether  she  in  fact
    completed that course.  On 23 September 2013 the respondent refused the
    application with no right of appeal.  The application  was  refused  by
    reference to paragraph 245ZX(m) of the Immigration Rules which provides
    that the applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration  laws
    "except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or  less
    will be disregarded". The respondent maintains that the  appellant  had
    overstayed for more than 28 days.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal refused  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In refusing permission the judge said this:

         "Section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act only  gives  a  right  of  appeal
         against a decision to refuse or extend an applicant's leave 'if the
         result of the refusal is that the person has no leave to  enter  or
         remain'.  In other words, it is only  if  an  application  is  made
         during the currency of existing leave that a  refusal  to  vary  or
         extend will be appealable - save the indulgence provided by the  28
         day period above, which the appellant could not benefit from."

5.   Permission was later granted by the Upper Tribunal.  It was  considered
    arguable that  if  a  grace  period  of  28  days  is  allowed  in  the
    circumstances set out above then an application made within that period
    cannot be treated as being out of time with no right of appeal.

6.   On 10 May 2014 the respondent filed a  notice  under  Rule  24  arguing
    that  the  Judge  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal   directed   himself
    appropriately and that there was  no  material  error  of  law  in  his
    determination.  For  the  reasons  below,  I  have  come  to  the  same
    conclusion.

7.   Although the appellant claims that the first  refusal  dated  15  March
    2013 was not served on her until 26 March 2013 she has not produced any
    evidence, such as the franked envelope containing  the  decision,  that
    she received the decision eleven days after its date.   The  letter  is
    deemed to have been received by 17 March unless there  is  evidence  to
    the contrary and the appellant has  not  produced  any  such  evidence.
    Accordingly, her application of 22 April 2013 was  more  than  28  days
    after deemed receipt of  the  earlier  refusal  decision.   She  cannot
    therefore meet the requirements of paragraphs 245ZX(l) or  (m)  of  the
    Rules. Thus, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings at paragraphs  19
    to 25 contain no material error of law.

8.   The grounds make no reference at all to Article 8  and  accordingly  it
    is not necessary for me to consider any aspect of Article 8.

Decision

     There was no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
and that decision shall stand.  The  appellant  had  and  has  no  right  of
appeal.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
3 June 2014
