
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
                                                               IA/46157/2014
                                                               IA/46164/2014
                                                               IA/46173/2014
                                                               IA/46177/2014
                                                               IA/46182/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 23rd  March 2016                |On 12th May 2016                   |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                    E T O
                                    F D O
                                   J G O O
                                   J G A O
                                   J O A O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Balroop of Green land Lawyers LLP
For the Respondent: Ms Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  An  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of these Appellants and shall continue.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Davies promulgated on  1  May  2015  which  dismissed  the
   Appellants appeals on all grounds.
Background


4. The Appellants are a husband and wife, citizens of Nigeria together  with
   their 3 children.
5. Central to this appeal is that the third Appellant was born in the UK  on
   12 June 2005 and therefore at the time of the application  in  issue  (27
   March 2013) she had been in the UK for 7 years and at  the  time  of  the
   hearing in April 2015 she had been in the UK for 9 years and 10 months.
6. The Appellant and her husband claimed to have entered  the  UK  in  2004,
   Their three children were then born on 12 June 2005, 16 July 2009 and  21
   February 2012 respectively.
7. On 27 March 2013 the Appellants applied for leave to remain on the  basis
   of their family and private life. This was refused.
8. On 23 April 2014 the application was reconsidered and  the  decision  was
   maintained.
9. 6 October 2014 a consent order was signed for the reconsideration of  the
   application.
10. On 30 October 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application.


The Judge's Decision
11. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Davies ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
   decision. The Judge :
   a)  Noted  at  paragraph  5  of  the   decision   that   the   Appellants
      representative  conceded  that  the  Appellants  could  not  meet  the
      requirements save and except the third Appellant who at  the  time  of
      the application  had  been  in  the  UK  for  7  years  and  therefore
      potentially met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  and  he
      therefore stated that the issue for him was to determine  whether  "it
      was reasonable to expect her and the other Appellants to leave  to  UK
      and return to Nigeria as a family unit."
   b) He noted again at Paragraph 32 of the decision that this was the issue
      he had to determine as advanced by the Representative in submissions.
   c) He found that it was probable the parents entered the UK illegally.
   d) He noted the concession made  that  only  the  third  Appellant  could
      potentially meet the requirements of the Rules  and  it  was  for  the
      Appellants to satisfy him that it would be unreasonable to expect  the
      third Appellant to leave the UK.
   e) He found that there was no evidence before  him  to  suggest  that  it
      would be unreasonable for the Appellants  all  to  return  to  Nigeria
      together.
   f) At paragraph 46 he found that the family would be able to re establish
      themselves in Nigeria as they had when they came to the UK.  He  noted
      they were all in good health and there was no evidence to suggest they
      could not work or find accommodation.
   g) He found there would be a disruption to the children's  education  but
      there was a functioning education system in Nigeria. English is widely
      spoken in Nigeria.
   h) He rejected the assertion that the female Appellants were at  risk  of
      FGM because this was a claim made very late  in  the  proceedings  and
      there was no basis to conclude that the husbands family would know  of
      their return.
   i) He considered the appeal under Article 8 outside the Rules taking into
      account those factors set out  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
12. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 6  July  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Landes gave permission to appeal suggesting that  it  was  arguable
   that the Judge should have considered the best interests of the  children
   separately from the family.
13. There is a Rule 24 response dated 9 July 2015 which  argues  that  there
   was no evidence  before  the  Judge  showing  why  it  would  be  in  the
   children's best interests to remain in the UK.

14. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Balroop  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellants that

   a) That the only issues that he wished to pursue from  the  grounds  were
      that the Judge had failed to take into account the best  interests  of
      the children; had failed to engage with the fact that the third  child
      was a 'qualifying child' for the purpose of section 117B  (6)  of  the
      2002 Act and that the Judges assessment of  the  public  interest  was
      flawed.

   b) In the assessment of reasonableness at paragraph 46 the Judge  focused
      on the parents before considering the child.  There  was  no  adequate
      assessment of the third Appellants circumstances for the  purposes  of
      either paragraph 267ADE(1) or s117B(6) .

   c) It did not automatically follow that of the parent goes so should  the
      child.

   d) The Judge set out the parent's immigration history at paragraphs 42-44
      but this was not relevant to the child.

   e) In his assessment  of  the  public  interest  factors  the  Judge  was
      factually mistaken to suggest that the Appellant used  an  interpreter
      nor was the family in receipt of public funds.

15. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Johnstone submitted that :

   a) She relied on the Rule 24 notice.

   b) The Judge  applied  the  correct  test  as  assessed  whether  it  was
      reasonable for the third Appellant to leave the UK and concluded  that
      it was.

   c) Mr Balroop relied on the impact leaving  the  UK  would  have  on  her
      education and her family but the Judge relied on the  evidence  before
      him.

   d) There was no evidence before him that the Appellants were  financially
      independent.

   e) She relied on PD and Others (Article 8-conjoined  family  claims)  Sri
      Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108(IAC) to suggest that any  consideration  of  a
      claim such  as  this  had  to  consider  and  take  into  account  the
      circumstances of all family members.

Finding on Material Error

16. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

17. This was an application by a husband and wife and their  three  children
   for leave to remain in the UK based on  their  family  and  private  life
   established in the UK for 10 years  as  illegal  overstayers.  The  three
   children were all born in the UK and the third Appellant had been in  the
   UK for 7 years at the time of the application and nearly 10 years at  the
   date of hearing.

18. The  Judge  noted  at  paragraph  5  in  his  decision  that  the  legal
   representative conceded that the issue for the  Judge  to  determine  was
   whether the third Appellant met the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(1)
   (iv) which are that at the time of application she :

   "... is under the age of 18 years and has lived in the UK for at least  7
   years....and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to  leave
   the UK ;"

19. The implicit thrust of the Representatives argument appeared to be  that
   if the child succeeded all of the remaining family members would  succeed
   under Article 8 as they could not themselves meet either Appendix  FM  or
   Paragraph 276ADE(1).

20. It is argued that the Judge fell into error because he did not  consider
   the best interests of the children. I am satisfied that he did  and  that
   this is clearly reflected when the decision is read as a  whole.  I  note
   that at paragraph 9 of the decision the  Judge  notes  that  the  refusal
   letter  considered  took  into  account  section  55  of   the   Borders,
   Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and set out those  factors  that  it
   considered relevant to that issue : that the Appellants would  return  to
   Nigeria as a family unit; there was no evidence that they  would  not  be
   supported in Nigeria; the children  could  continue  their  education  in
   Nigeria where there was a functioning education system and  their  safety
   and welfare could be protected by their  parents.  Even  allowing  for  a
   degree of disruption  their  best  interests  would  be  served  by  them
   remaining with their parents who had no right to remain in the UK.

21. I am satisfied that in his very detailed  analysis  of  whether  it  was
   reasonable for the Appellants and their children  to  return  to  Nigeria
   while he did not specifically refer again to the best  interests  of  the
   children the Judge considered those factors referred to at  20  above  as
   relevant to the children best interests and analysed all of the  material
   considerations that he had before him.  I do  not  accept  the  assertion
   that he was obliged to look at the third Appellant  separately  from  his
   parents as PD makes clear the provisions of the Rules and Article 8  have
   to  applied  to  each  Appellant  separately  and   this   will   require
   consideration of the claim jointly.

22.  Therefore  in  assessing  whether  it  was  reasonable  for  the  third
   Appellant to leave the UK and return with her parents to the  country  of
   their nationality the Judge was entitled to consider those  factors  that
   were also relevant to the issue of the child's best interests and this he
   did at paragraphs 46-48. The evidence before him that he accepted gave no
   hint of a suggestion that the welfare of the children was  threatened  by
   the immigration  decision  in  question,  or  that  the  children's  best
   interests were undermined: there was certainly no evidence from any other
   source he noted , either  educational,  from  background  material  or  a
   social worker to suggest that such a move would not  be  in  the  child's
   best interests. I  note  of  course  that  the  provisions  of  paragraph
   276ADE(1)(iv) envisage the possibility that it may be  reasonable  for  a
   child who has been in the UK for more than 7 years to leave the UK and in
   the fact specific circumstances of this case based on the evidence before
   him it was open to the Judge to conclude that this was such a case.

23. Having assessed the best interests of the  children  and  the  issue  of
   reasonableness of leaving the UK the Judge was not required to address it
   again: AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)   where the  headnote  6
   summarises :

   "When the question posed by  s117B(6)  is  the  same  question  posed  in
   relation to children by paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  it  must  be  posed  and
   answered in the proper context of whether it was reasonable to expect the
   child to follow its parents to their country of origin; EV (Philippines).
   It is not however a question that needs  to  be  posed  and  answered  in
   relation to each child more than once. "

24. It is argued that the Judge's assessment  under  Article  8  was  flawed
   because he failed to properly set out the provisions of  s  117B  of  the
   2002 Act and was based on factual mistakes in relation to  them  speaking
   English and being financially independent. I find this  argument  has  no
   merit. The Judge heard evidence from the  adult  Appellants  and  read  a
   letter from a friend who  claimed  to  support  them  and  rejected  that
   evidence as incredible and this was a finding  open  to  him:  again  the
   writer of the letter did not attend court to have her evidence tested and
   the Judge had no other evidence such as  bank  statements  to  prove  the
   payment of funds to the Appellants. He was entitled to find the  evidence
   was not credible. The Judge at paragraph 13 refers to an interpreter when
   no interpreter was used. That was a factual error and while it is one  of
   the considerations under s117B such a mistake made no material difference
   to the outcome in the case as I  am satisfied  that  the  Appellants  can
   obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to remain from either  s117B
   (2) or (3), whatever the degree of their fluency in English.

25. Mr Balwoop suggested that the parents' immigration  history  was  of  no
   relevance to the decision to be made. I am satisfied that as part of  his
   findings the Judge considered as PD requires him to  the  material  facts
   that related to all of the Appellants. He could not  ignore  the  adverse
   history of the parents but nowhere in the decision does he  suggest  that
   it is of relevance to the decision in relation to  the  children:  it  is
   simply part of the factual matrix of findings that he makes.  He  was  of
   course entitled to take it into  account  in  his  Article  8  assessment
   having determined that it was reasonable for the family to  return  as  a
   unit to Nigeria as it was  a  public  interest  factor  relevant  to  the
   importance of immigration control.

26. I remind myself of what was said in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:  set
   aside) Afghanistan  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)  about  the  requirement  for
   sufficient reasons to be given in a decision in headnote (1) :  "Although
   there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of the  conclusions  on
   the central issue on which an appeal is determined,  those  reasons  need
   not be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense, having regard to
   the material accepted by the judge."

27. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

Signed                                                              Date
9.5.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell














