



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46808/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 15th January 2016                   |                  On 22nd February    |
|                                       |2016                                  |
|                                       |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                              Mr nadeem akhtar
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Riaz Khan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lodge, promulgated on 24th February 2015, following a hearing  at
    Birmingham on 4th February  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal  of  the  Appellant  under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    whereupon the Respondent Secretary  of  State,  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  15th
    April 1979.  He appealed against a decision dated 28th October 2014  of
    the Respondent to refuse him leave to remain in the UK, on grounds that
    the recent decision of Judge Prior had been received by the  Respondent
    on 15th November 2013.  The Appellant, however, contended that  he  did
    not receive that decision with the written reasons  until  2nd  January
    2014.  His application, therefore, was not out of time because  he  had
    made it within a week of having received that determination.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before Judge Lodge, there  was  an  application  for  an
    adjournment by the Appellant's representative to enable an  enquiry  to
    be made with the Tribunal Service as  to  the  precise  date  that  the
    written reasons were issued to the Appellant,  and  more  generally  to
    investigate the question of whether  the  service  of  written  reasons
    could be so long delayed.  This was a case where the Appellant had been
    granted a five year work permit which expired on 22nd August 2012.   He
    had submitted an application for indefinite leave  to  remain  on  21st
    August 2012.  The judge found that that application was in  time.   The
    appeal against the refusal of indefinite leave was heard and  dismissed
    and the judgement promulgated on 14th  November  2013.   The  Appellant
    then had fourteen days from receipt of the written reasons  to  request
    permission to appeal the  decision.   The  Tribunal  had  received  the
    request not later than fourteen  days  after  the  date  on  which  the
    applicant was provided with written reasons for the decision.  In  this
    case, the Appellant contended that the decision and  the  reasons  were
    posted to him on 24th December 2013.

 4. The judge went on to refuse the application for an adjournment and gave
    his reasons for doing so.  However, he allowed the appeal on the  basis
    that if one looks at the evidence then it is easy to conclude that  the
    Appellant was not sent the written reasons until they  were  posted  to
    him on 24th December 2013.  The judge went on to say that,

         "I cannot accept the alternative that the  Appellant  has  received
         some other post from the Tribunal service and used that date  stamp
         in order to give the  impression  that  the  written  reasons  were
         received later than they in fact were.  As Mr Khan, said  following
         the issue of written reasons, there was no  other  reason  for  the
         Tribunal service to contact the Appellant.   I  find  this  a  fact
         therefore that having regard to  the  Tribunal  Rules  the  written
         reasons were not received by the Appellant until 2nd January 2014."
          (See paragraph 14).

 5. The judge went on to say that the appeal would be allowed  because  the
    application had been made in time.







Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the Appellant  had  not  made  an
    application for leave to remain in time and consequently he  could  not
    say that the had the benefit of existing leave on 31st January 2014  by
    which time his said leave would have expired.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me, however, Mr Mills, appearing on behalf of the
    Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that  if  one  looked  at  the
    Appellant's SET(O) form, which Mr Mills  helpfully  handed  up  to  the
    Tribunal, it is clear from this that the date of receipt of  this  form
    is stamped at the top left hand corner.  This is given as  23rd  August
    2012.  This being so, it must have been posted the  day  before.   That
    would have been 22nd August 2012.  The Appellant's leave did not expire
    until 22nd August 2012.  The point was not  argued  before  the  judge.
    Therefore, the judge did not deal with it.   The  present  Rules  state
    that the date of the postal application is  the  relevant  date  rather
    than the date of receipt.  If the application was posted on 22nd August
    2012 then it was in time.   Therefore,  the  Respondent  Home  Office's
    appeal would have to be dismissed.

 8. For his part, Mr Riaz Khan submitted that he could  not  disagree  with
    that.

No Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    that this is clearly a case where the application was made in time,  at
    the time when the Appellant had existing leave  to  remain,  which  was
    22nd August 2012 and it was received by the Respondent on  23rd  August
    2012.  On the evidence before him, the  judge  below  had  properly  so
    found.  To his credit, Mr Mills has confirmed that this is  indeed  the
    correct position and for this reason the appeal of the Home Office must
    be dismissed.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 13th February 2016


