
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46898/2014
                                                               IA/46922/2014
                                                               IA/46925/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                BHARTI SHARMA
                                GRACY SHARMA
                                 AJAY KUMAR
                          (ANONYMITY Order NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Ms Mehtab Malhotra, Counsel instructed by Shri
Venkateshwara
For the Respondent:    Ms J. Isherwod, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The First Appellant is a national of India born on 21  September  1985.
    The third appellant is her husband,  an  Indian  national  born  on  12
    January 1984. The second appellant is their daughter  born  on  24  May
    2011.

 2. The First appellant entered the UK with entry clearance  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student in September 2009. She applied for, and was  granted,
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post  Study)  migrant  on  4  August  2012
    expiring on 25 September 2014.

 3. On 19 September 2014 she applied for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    (general) student.  This  was  refused  on  the  basis  that  paragraph
    245ZX(o) of the Immigration Rules was not satisfied, the  Secretary  of
    State not being satisfied that she was a genuine student.

 4. On 18 November 2014 the appellants lodged an  appeal  on  Form  IAFT-1.
    They ticked the box to say that they wanted the appeal to be decided on
    the papers and paid the corresponding fee. On the form they stated that
    grounds will follow. They were sent  a  notice  giving  them  until  11
    February 2015  to make further submissions. The  First  appellant  duly
    sent these in the form of a letter by registered post.  The  letter  is
    dated 28 January 2015 and was received on 9 February 2015.

 5. The appeal was considered by Judge O'Hagan on 12 February 2015  without
    a hearing. The judge did not  find  the  letter  of  28  January  2015,
    setting out the appellant's grounds, on the file and therefore did  not
    take  the  arguments  and  submissions  made  in   this   letter   into
    consideration.

 6. In reaching his decision the judge noted that the  appellants  had  not
    "put forward any case to set against the Secretary  of  State's  case,"
    and found the respondent's evidence to be unchallenged, the  appellants
    not having "advanced any argument, or presented any evidence, to  stand
    against the respondent's case".

 7. The appellants appealed on the basis that they  had  submitted  grounds
    but the judge had not considered them.

 8. At the hearing Ms Isherwood, for the respondent, acknowledged that  the
    judge had not had sight of the appellants' submissions/grounds  despite
    these having been submitted within time, but argued that this  was  not
    material as the appellants' submissions did not  properly  address  the
    relevant issues and they could not, in any event, have succeeded in the
    appeal.

 9. Ms Malhotra argued that the judge may have taken a  different  approach
    had he had the  benefit  of  seeing  the  appellants'  submissions  and
    arguments and that his approach to the evidence  was  affected  by  the
    mistaken belief that the appellants had not submitted any  evidence  or
    arguments to support their appeal.

10. I informed the parties that I agreed the points made  by  Ms  Malhotra.
    The appellants have not had an opportunity to  have  their  submissions
    and arguments considered. The  failure  of  the  judge  to  review  and
    consider the appellants' grounds, although almost certainly through  no
    fault of his own, amounts to a serious procedural unfairness.

11. In considering whether I should remake the decision or remit it to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  I  keep  in  mind  the  comments  made   in   MM
    (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 105 (IAC)

         "By section 12 of the 2007 Act, where the Upper Tribunal  concludes
         that the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal involved the making of
         an error on a point of law and decides to set the  decision  aside,
         it must either remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal or  remake
         the decision itself. We consider that, as a fairly  strong  general
         rule, where a first instance decision is set aside on the basis  of
         an error of law involving the deprivation of the Appellant's  right
         to a fair hearing, the appropriate course will be  to  remit  to  a
         newly constituted First-Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. This  is
         so because the common law right to  a  fair  hearing  is  generally
         considered to rank as a right of constitutional importance  and  it
         is preferable that the litigant's statutory right of appeal to  the
         Upper Tribunal should be triggered only where the former right  has
         been fully enjoyed."

12. Accordingly, I have decided  to  remit  the  appeal  to  a  differently
    constituted First-tier Tribunal to be determined afresh.

13. Ms Malhotra submitted that the appellants' preference would now be  for
    the  appeal  to  be  heard  orally.  However,  as  is  clear  from  the
    application form, the appellants applied for the  appeal  to  be  dealt
    with on the papers only. I am not satisfied that there  is  any  reason
    why the appeal should now be heard on a different basis to  that  which
    the appellants originally applied (and paid the fee) for.

DECISION

14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and is set aside in its entirety.

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh on
    the papers and without an oral hearing by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    O'Hagan.

16. I have not been asked, and see no reason, to make an anonymity order.


|Signed                               |Dated                                |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |


