
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46222/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th June 2015                             |On 23rd June 2015              |
|                                              |                               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                            MARTINS NNAMDI IJENDU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adjarho, legal representative of Chancery CS
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On 27th April 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cruthers  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Place in which she dismissed the appeal against
    the decision of the respondent to refuse to grant a permanent residence
    card in accordance with the provisions  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

 2. When granting permission Judge Cruthers thought it  arguable  that  the
    judge had failed to take full account of evidence about the exercise of
    treaty rights by the appellant and his former wife.  In  particular  he
    thought that it was incorrect for the judge to state  that  the  former
    wife's P60 for the year ending 5th April 2014 was the  latest  document
    to show evidence of her working.

 3. In the grounds of application it was  also  alleged  that  the  judge's
    conclusions were against  the  weight  of  evidence  showing  that  the
    appellant had been continuously working since the date  of  divorce  on
    28th April 2014 when there were 22 wage slips covering the period  from
    April 2014 to January 2015 and not two as stated by the judge.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr McVeety submitted that the grounds appeared
    to  refer  to  additional  evidence  which  had   been   submitted   by
    representatives on 17th March 2015 for the purpose of  the  application
    for leave to appeal.  The bundle for the hearing which  took  place  on
    10th February  2015  was  that  submitted  by  representatives  on  9th
    February 2015.  The latter does not appear to include  the  claimed  22
    payslips referred to in  the  application  although,  even  if  it  had
    included such payslips, that would not get over the problem that it had
    not been shown that the appellant's former wife was  exercising  treaty
    rights at the  date  of  the  divorce  in  April  2014.   Without  that
    information the appeal had to be dismissed, in any event.

 5. Whist Mr Adjarho conceded that the problems in relation to the evidence
    showing the former wife's employment had not been resolved, he  thought
    that the bundle before the judge had included the additional wage slips
    covering the period from April 2014 to beyond the date of the P60s  for
    the appellant in that year.

 6. After considering the matter for a few moments I indicated that  I  was
    not satisfied that the decision showed a material error on a  point  of
    law and should  stand.   I  now  give  my  reasons  for  reaching  that
    conclusion.

 7. Whilst it is possible that the judge had before her additional payslips
    relating to employment  for  the  appellant  in  addition  to  the  two
    payslips she identified dated September 2014  and  January  2015,  that
    does not affect the judge's conclusions about the  exercise  of  treaty
    rights for the appellant's former wife in paragraphs 10 and 11  of  the
    decision.  As the judge points out, there is a gap in the  evidence  of
    at least 23 days between the P60 for the tax year to 5th April 2014 for
    the former wife and the date of divorce and, additionally, the evidence
    of her exercising treaty rights  between  2010  and  2014  was  limited
    especially in relation to her self-employment business.  The judge  was
    entitled to conclude, in those circumstances,  that  it  had  not  been
    shown that the appellant's former wife was a qualified  person  at  the
    time of divorce  as  required  by  paragraph  10  (5)(a)  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  On this basis the  judge  was  entitled  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.






Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.



Anonymity

Anonymity was not granted by the First-tier tribunal  or  requester  in  the
Upper Tribunal nor do I consider it appropriate in this appeal.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


