


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/46130/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 6th October 2016                      |On 10th October 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
                       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            Mr Zuhaib Babar Syed
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N S Aluwalia, instructed by Visa Expert Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of  Pakistan  born  on  1st  May  1988  and
    appealed against the Secretary of State's  decision  to  refuse  him  a
    residence card as confirmation of a right of residence as  an  extended
    family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  Regulation  8(1)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. On 1st August 2016 First Tier Tribunal Judges Thomas and  Page  allowed
    the appellant's appeal.

 4. The Respondent filed grounds for permission to appeal on the basis that
    in  the  absence  of  any  argument  from  either  party  as   to   the
    applicability  of  Regulation  8(3)  (medical  dependence  on  an   EEA
    sponsor), and on which the appeal was  allowed,  there  was  procedural
    unfairness.  Permission to Appeal was granted by  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Judge Easterman.

 5. At the hearing before me Ms Pal submitted that the Upper  Tribunal  had
    no jurisdiction as there was no right of appeal for an extended  family
    member.

 6. The Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2011 No
    2 (amended July 2015)  Reporting  Decisions  of  the  UTIAC  states  as
    follows

         'In the event of diverging jurisprudence on an  important  question
         of law, a decision of a panel of the Chamber may be reported  as  a
         starred case, when it will become binding.  In  the  absence  of  a
         starred case the common law doctrine of  judicial  precedent  shall
         not apply and decisions of the AIT  and  one  constitution  of  the
         Chamber do not as a matter of law bind later constitutions.  Judges
         of the First-tier Tribunal  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  are,
         however, expected to follow the law  set  out  in  reported  cases,
         unless persuaded that the decision failed to take into  account  an
         applicable  legislative  provision  or  a  binding  decision  of  a
         superior court. Where there is reasonable  doubt  about  whether  a
         decision of the AIT or the Chamber should continue to  be  followed
         permission to  appeal  to  the  Chamber  may  well  be  granted  in
         appropriate cases'.

 7. Despite the very interesting arguments proposed by Mr Aluwalia, I  will
    follow the decision in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal) [2016]  UKUT  00411
    (IAC) which established that 'there is no  statutory  right  of  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State not to grant a Residence
    Card to a person claiming to be an Extended Family Member'.

 8. Sala was a two panel  decision  and  although  I  have  considered  the
    submissions carefully I do not accept them. Rahman and  Others  C-83/11
    merely appears to confirm that legal  redress  for  an  EFM  should  be
    within the limits of the discretion set by the  directive  and  I  note
    that the preamble of the Directive 2004/38/EC at  [25]  and  [26],  and
    Articles 15, 27, 31,  all  appear  to  refer  to  'family  members  not
    'extended family members'. There may be some advantage ascribed to EFMs
    under the Directive but they are in a wholly  different  category  from
    'family members'. Further, the examination of the facts is in  relation
    to 'facilitation' rather than judicial redress but even if I  am  wrong
    about that, there is a wide margin of appreciation  for  member  states
    and moreover, even if the CJEU  did  not  state  that  applicants  were
    entitled only to judicial review nothing in Rahman confers a  right  of
    statutory appeal or in turn suggests that judicial review  would  be  a
    breach of Article 47 of The EU Charter on Fundamental Rights.

 9. Turning to the argument on non-discrimination the analogy of appeal for
    a partner or adult dependent relative does not apply.   This  applicant
    does not fall into either category.  On the point of the interpretation
    of Regulation 26A and the effect of an amendment on the construction of
    legislation, Mr Aluwalia submitted that the construction of EEA law was
    wholly different.  The Tribunal in Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  [2016]
    UKUT 00411 (IAC), however, was interpreting United Kingdom  legislation
    albeit in relation to EU law and Brown v SSHD [2015] UKSC 8  refers  to
    'construing any  legislation'.   I  have  already  given  my  views  in
    relation to  the  Directive  itself.   Finally,  it  is  a  matter  for
    parliament as the rights  conferred  in  other  jurisdictions  and  the
    Tribunal in Sala was merely interpreting the Regulations attached to  a
    wholly separate and discrete jurisdiction.

10. I find, therefore, that I must follow  Sala  (EFMs:  Right  of  Appeal)
    [2016] UKUT 00411 (IAC) and I do not  have  jurisdiction  to  entertain
    this appeal.

Decision

No valid appeal or jurisdiction



Signed                 Helen Rimington



Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

Dated       6th October 2016

