
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46340/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 February 2016                    |On 17 October 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                        SATCHITHANANTHAM KAJENTHIRAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Lingathajorthey, Counsel, instructed by Linga &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Hussain  which  was
    given on 15 May 2015.  The appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka.   He
    came to this country initially as a working holidaymaker.   He  made  a
    claim for asylum in 2008 and was in fact in that year also convicted of
    an offence in relation to use of a false identity card.   However  what
    this appeal concerns relates to his application in  March  2009  for  a
    residence card which was then brought to an end  following  application
    for permanent residence in June 2014 which was refused.

2.   The basis upon which  he  had  applied  for  and  indeed  received  the
    residence card originally was as the family member of an  EEA  national
    who was exercising treaty rights in this country.  It seems that he set
    up with  the  EEA  national,  we  need  not  go  into  details  of  her
    background, but her brother in  particular  was  very  opposed  to  the
    arrangement which he had entered into with her and  exercised  violence
    towards her.  They were hoping, he says, in the end to marry but  as  a
    result of the violence and threats of violence  from  her  brother  the
    relationship broke down. And it is the breakdown  of  the  relationship
    which is relied on as a basis for permitting him to remain  here  based
    upon the equivalent right  given  under  paragraph  289  of  the  Rules
    relating to indefinite leave as a victim of domestic violence.

3.   What was before the judge were the two decisions, one, the  application
    for permanent residence, and two, it followed from that, the revocation
    of the residence card.

4.   The revocation was based on Regulation 20(2)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
    2006 which enables the Secretary of State to revoke a registration card
    or refuse to renew it if the holder has ceased to  have  the  right  to
    reside in accordance with the Regulations and the decision was that  he
    had ceased to have the right to reside, and further in accordance  with
    the Regulations the judge decided that he was not entitled to permanent
    residence here.

5.   The  relevant  provisions  of  the  Regulations  put  into  effect  the
    Directive from the European Union which relates to the  rights  of  EEA
    nationals to set up in other member states.

6.   Article 13 deals with the  retention  of  the  right  of  residence  by
    family members in the  event  of  divorce,  annulment  of  marriage  or
    termination of registered partnership and it is important to note  that
    it applies only to family members who are in the position of  being  no
    longer family members because of divorce or termination of a registered
    partnership.  The Directive thus clearly requires that if there is  not
    a marriage there must be a registered partnership and it does not apply
    beyond that, and that is put into effect by Regulation 10 of  the  2006
    Regulations and  that  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the
    Directive applies to family members only.

7.   The appellant is not a family member but is an extended  family  member
    because there is no marriage and there is no civil partnership which is
    the equivalent of what is referred to in the Directive as a  registered
    partnership.

8.   Paragraph 10(5) of the 2006 Regulations provides so far as material  "A
    person satisfies the conditions in  this  paragraph  and  that  is  the
    conditions under which right of residence can be  retained  if  (a)  he
    ceased to be a family member  of  a  qualified  person  or  of  an  EEA
    national with a permanent right of residence on the termination of  the
    marriage or civil partnership of that person.

9.   Then (d) provided either what is in (i), (ii) and  (iii)  or  (iv)  the
    continued right of residence in the United Kingdom  of  the  person  is
    warranted by particularly difficult circumstances  such  as  he  or  an
    other family member having been a victim of domestic violence while the
    marriage or civil partnership was subsisting, and it  is  to  be  noted
    that that right is not limited to domestic violence. Domestic  violence
    is given as the example,  but  it  can  be  extended  beyond.  And  the
    circumstances described in this case could possibly, and we do not have
    to go into the details, qualify as particularly difficult circumstances
    if there was sufficient evidence to support that.

10.  We say "if there was sufficient  evidence"  because  as  Judge  Hussain
    stated in paragraph 30:

         "Before I deal with his submissions, I should make it clear that  I
         have not made a finding as to whether the appellant's wife has been
         the subject of domestic violence because firstly,  other  than  the
         appellant's assertions there is no independent evidence of it,  and
         secondly, it is not at all clear to me whether the alleged violence
         by his partner's brother  constitutes  domestic  violence  for  the
         purpose of the Regulations."

11.  We should say quite clearly it does not. There is no question but  that
    domestic violence is limited to violence between the partners, or those
    living together, or violence to a child where, for example, as a result
    of that violence, the other partner decides that it is quite impossible
    to continue to live with the individual who has  been  guilty  of  that
    sort of violence.

12.  But it is a  purely  family  violence,  internal  to  the  family,  and
    violence from an outsider albeit in this case a relative of the lady in
    question cannot in our view  be  regarded  as  domestic  violence,  and
    certainly would not qualify within  paragraph  289A  which  deals  with
    victims of domestic violence. This provides again so far  as  material,
    that the requirements to be met by  a  person  who  is  the  victim  of
    domestic violence and who is seeking indefinite leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom are that various requirements relating to what sorts  of
    leave had been granted in  the  past  and  that  the  relationship  was
    subsisting at the beginning of the last period of leave, and,  this  is
    the important one,  the  applicant  is  able  to  produce  evidence  to
    establish that the relationship was caused to  permanently  break  down
    before the end of that period as a result of domestic violence.

13.  So if it is  possible  to  prove  that  domestic  violence  caused  the
    relationship to break down then the individual can succeed and by  (ii)
    the relationship extends to unmarried partners or same sex partners and
    so extends to what would  be  in  the  EEA  Directive  extended  family
    members.

14.  The argument which has brought the appeal to this Tribunal  stems  from
    observations in paragraphs 32 and 33 of Judge Hussain's  decision.   Mr
    Lingathajorthey who appeared then and  appears  again  before  us,  had
    submitted that there was inequality in treatment  between  persons  who
    are married and persons who are not, between those who were not  within
    the EEA Directive and those who  might  qualify  under  289A.   And  he
    relied on a report, and we emphasise it is but a report, of a  decision
    of a First-tier Tribunal reached in November  2012,  and  the  argument
    that appealed to that Tribunal was that there was a breach  of  the  EU
    principle of equal treatment because the rights provided for  unmarried
    partners or unregistered partners or those who have  not  gone  through
    the necessary procedure in this country and  those  who  might  qualify
    under the domestic violence provisions would show such inequality.

15.  That is not, as it seems to us, an argument that could  conceivably  be
    correct in the terms of the law.  As  we  have  already  indicated  the
    starting point is the Directive and the Directive clearly  covers  only
    married persons or registered partners, and thus does not extend beyond
    what are regarded as family members for that purpose.

16.  There is no power in this Tribunal, indeed there is  no  power  in  any
    court in this country to challenge or to  disapply  the  Directive  and
    what the Regulations do is faithfully to apply into  domestic  law  the
    requirements of the Directive. But it goes further  than  that  because
    the right under  289A  depends  upon  the  partner  in  question  being
    settled.

17.  An EEA national does not have to be settled here to  enable  a  partner
    to be allowed to remain here with him or her so long as he  or  she  is
    exercising his or her treaty rights.  If he is here long enough and can
    apply for and succeed in obtaining permanent leave to remain  here  and
    so becomes settled here then 289A will apply, and so the  unmarried  or
    unregistered partner is in exactly the same position as he would be  to
    enable  use  to  be  made  of  289A.   The  reality  is  there  is   no
    discrimination which could  conceivably be said to amount to amount  to
    such.  Indeed, as we have indicated too,  the  rights  under  paragraph
    10(5)(iv) extend beyond pure domestic  violence.   So  to  that  extent
    there is an advantage given to EEA nationals because, as we say, it  is
    somewhat wider than the rights under 289A.

18.  Judge Hussain decided that it was not necessary to go into  that  issue
    and although he had read the report he did not think it was open to him
    to interpret the law in a way that would run counter  to  the  explicit
    language in the Regulations.  So far as that is concerned, we  have  no
    doubt that he was entirely correct  but  he  did  say  that  the  issue
    appeared to him to be of sufficient importance for a  senior  court  to
    examine and make pronouncements on it and  that  is  what  resulted  in
    leave to appeal being given.

19.  We are clearly of the view that there is no conceivable argument  which
    can overcome the clear words of the Directive followed by  the  equally
    clear words of the Regulations which put the Directive into  force.  We
    have not seen the decision itself, the report of which  was  relied  on
    and that in itself should not happen because if there is to be reliance
    on a decision the decision must be produced and it  is  not  sufficient
    simply to rely on a report of the decision which may or may not include
    everything that is material.

20.  We also of course make the point that this appeal is not  concerned  in
    any way with Article 8. We are not dealing with any question of removal
    merely of refusal to allow there  to  be  a  recognition  of  leave  to
    remain.

21.  If a removal decision is made then no doubt Article 8 or other  grounds
    may be able to be raised if there is a refusal but that is a matter for
    the future and is not a matter for us to consider at this stage.

Notice of Decision

22.   Accordingly  for  the  reasons  we  have  indicated  this  appeal   is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 2 March 2016

Mr Justice Collins




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date: 2 March 2016

Mr Justice Collins
