
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46770/2014
                                                               IA/46780/2014
                                                               IA/46781/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 February 2016                  |On 9 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                      and Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                RANJIT SINGH
                                NARINDER KAUR
                                SANDEEP SINGH
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
Appellants:   Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr R Sharma, of counsel,  instructed  by  Malik  Law  Chambers
                    Solicitors


                                  DECISION

      1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the decision of
         the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT")  promulgated  on  the  29  July
         2015.  By its decision the FtT allowed the  appeals  of  the  three
         Appellants, who  together  constitute  a  family  unit.   The  most
         important feature of the appeal from the perspective of  the  legal
         framework is that the third  Appellant,  who  is  the  son  of  the
         family, satisfied the seven years residence  requirement  enshrined
         in paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the rules.  Accordingly, the issue to be
         decided by the Judge in his case was whether  the  'reasonableness'
         requirement enshrined in this rule was  to  be  determined  in  his
         favour.

      2. We have considered the Secretary of State's challenge by  reference
         to the recently reported decision of this Tribunal in the  case  of
         Dabare.  It is important to reflect on the core complaint  advanced
         by  the  Secretary  of  State,  namely,  that   in   applying   the
         reasonableness test  the  Judge  considered  the  child  alone  and
         disregarded the parents. The question of whether that complaint  is
         made good requires an exercise of construing the determination.  It
         is trite that the determination is to be considered as a whole  and
         is to be read fairly, broadly and in bonam partem.

      3. In a case involving several family members in which the Rules apply
         only to one or some, but not all, the kind of architecture found in
         the FtT's decision is unavoidable.  As I put to  Mr  Clarke,  every
         judgment must have a structure and a sequence in the  interests  of
         coherence and comprehension. From that perspective this judgment is
         beyond criticism.  The key issue is whether the Judge erred in  the
         respects identified in Dabare, namely by considering  the  case  of
         the child in a self-sealed compartment and the case of the  parents
         in a further self-sealed compartment.

      4. Adopting the approach which I have just outlined we  are  satisfied
         that the Judge did examine all three cases in the round.   That  is
         the conclusion to be made from a consideration of the determination
         as a whole. True it is that the reasoning in the final  section  of
         the judgment is somewhat bare.  It would have  been  preferable  if
         the Judge had exposed his reasoning more fully and, secondly,  made
         clear the nexus which he  recognised  between  the  claims  of  the
         parents and the claim of the child.  However, we are satisfied that
         the nexus is unmistakable and must have been present to the Judge's
         mind. Further, and that the kind of impermissible  isolation  which
         Dabare has identified as a vitiating factor did not  occur  in  the
         event.

      5. For these reasons we conclude that the core  of  the  Secretary  of
         State's appeal is not sustained.  In the  alternative,  if  we  are
         wrong in that conclusion it is clear to us that any error which the
         Judge did commit is immaterial.  The reason  for  that  is  that  a
         properly arrived  at  conclusion  in  favour  of  the  child  under
         paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the rules would in our judgement have  been
         the  inevitable  outcome  in  any   event   and   would   also   be
         unchallengeable  in  law.  On  this   second   alternative   basis,
         accordingly, we consider that the appeal cannot be  allowed.   Thus
         our omnibus conclusion is that the  decision  of  the  FtT  is  not
         vitiated by error of law in the manner  asserted.   We  affirm  the
         decision of the FtT and we dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.




                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Date: 25 February 2016
