
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46396/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 October 2014                            |On 26 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             RITA OPOKU-AGYEMANG
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E  Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms G Thomas (of Counsel), instructed by Tower
                  Hamlets Law Centre


                      APPROVED EX TEMPORE DETERMINATION

   1. The framework of this appeal maybe summarised in  the  following  way.
      It is the Secretary of State's appeal and  arises  out  of  a  refusal
      decision made on behalf of the Secretary of  State  dated  26  October
      2013.  The decision refused the application of the Respondent to  this
      appeal Rita Opoku-Agyemang, who is a national of Ghana,  now  aged  38
      years, for a derivative residence card.

   2. The core of the decision appears in the following passage:

          "You have not provided evidence as to why the  child's  father  is
         not in a position to care for the British Citizen child if you were
         required to leave the United  Kingdom  and  there  is  insufficient
         evidence to show that the British Citizen child, (who will  not  be
         identified), would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom or the
         EEA if you were required to leave".

     This is repeated in the penultimate paragraph on page 2 of the  letter,
      with the following addition:

         "What is more  there  is  no  evidence  that  you  are  financially
         responsible for the child."

     This gave rise to the conclusion that the Respondent  did  not  satisfy
      the requirements of the statutory criteria for  derivative  rights  of
      residence  with  reference  to  the  various  provisions  of  the  EEA
      Regulations 2006.

   3. The decision letter then gave some brief consideration to Article 8 of
      the Human Rights Convention.  The key passage here is contained in the
      following sentence

         "Since you  have  not  made  a  valid  application  for  Article  8
         consideration, consideration has not been given as to whether  your
         removal from the UK would breach Article 8 of the ECHR".

     This part of the letter obliquely refers to the  possibility  that  the
      Respondent might make a quite separate Article 8  application  and  if
      she were to choose to do so this would be considered and determined.

   4. The third issue considered in the letter is Section 55 of the Borders,
      Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009.   This  is  addressed  in  the
      following passage:

          "The Home Office discharges its duty of  care  by  acting  on  any
         concerns it identifies regarding the welfare of children with  whom
         they come into contact and by conducting checks that are consistent
         with the impact  of  its  decision  making.   To  this  extent  the
         position of your children ... has been considered in light  of  the
         requirements incumbent on the Home Office as defined under  Section
         55 of the 2009 Act and Section 11 of the Children Act 2004 and also
         in the light of  the  Supreme  Court  ruling  in  the  case  of  ZH
         (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4".

     The decision letter contains nothing else of relevance.

   5. The Respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (the  "FtT")  which
      made two main conclusions.  In making these conclusions it articulated
      two specific findings.  First, in [20] of the determination, that  the
      Respondent is the primary carer of the child  concerned.   Second,  in
      [22] of the determination:

         " ... that the evidence points to the  child  being  able  to  live
         with the father in the UK, is not unsuitable and so she  would  not
         be required to leave the country if the Appellant were removed".

         These two specific findings were followed by the  first  conclusion
         in the judgment, namely, that as a matter of law the  Appellant  is
         not entitled to a derivative  right  of  residence  under  the  EEA
         Regulations as there is another parent who  could  look  after  the
         child concerned.

   6. The Judge then gave specific and separate consideration to  Article  8
      of the Human Rights Convention.  In  doing  so  she  referred  to  the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of MF Nigeria.  The  Judge
      reasoned in paragraph [29] as follows:

         "Lillian is a British child and cannot be compelled  to  leave  the
         UK.  Removal of the Appellant would mean the removal of her primary
         carer. There are two younger siblings who live with the  child  and
         the Appellant and their father is violent ....   If  the  Appellant
         were removed and the affected child stayed with her father then she
         would be separated from her younger half siblings.  Family life  as
         she knows it would necessarily be disrupted.  She would  be  living
         with the father who she does not  see  on  a  regular  basis.   His
         history does not show him to be the  most  dependable  of  parents.
         The Appellant is recognised as having gone through great strides to
         raise and care for her children as a single mother on very  limited
         means.  The Appellant has  suffered  domestic  violence,  financial
         hardship, been at risk of losing  her  home,  overcome  behavioural
         problems with her children, safety  concerned  for  the  children's
         well being and has managed to overcome many of  her  problems  with
         the extensive support she has required.  There is a "Child in Need"
         plan in place of the Protection  Plan  that  existed  before.   The
         Appellant has done tremendously well.  The intervention  of  social
         services  has  resulted  in  a  more  stable  environment  for  the
         Appellant and all three of her children.  All that work would go to
         waste if the Appellant is now required to leave the UK.  She  would
         face a return to Nigeria, a country she has not been in since 1999,
         with two young children or three, if it  is  decided  the  affected
         child should go with her,  and  would  not  have  the  support  she
         requires to provide herself and them with  the  stability  she  has
         achieved here.  It would  not  be  in  the  best  interest  of  the
         affected child or indeed the other two children if the family  were
         separated or if they all went to Nigeria"

     In [30] of the determination, the Judge continued:

         "When I consider all these  matters,  I  do  find  that  there  are
         exceptional  circumstances  in  this  case  that  warrant   further
         assessment under Article 8.  The first four tests  in  Razgar  have
         been met.  However, I  do  not  find  that  the  decision  made  is
         proportionate to the need to maintain a fair, but  firm  policy  of
         immigration control.  The balance in this case falls in  favour  of
         the Appellant".

   7. Against this background the Secretary of State  sought  permission  to
      appeal.  This resulted in the grant of permission  to  appeal  in  the
      following terms:

         "There is no obvious  assessment  and  findings  under  the  Razgar
         approach while the analysis of the facts contained at paragraph  29
         may arguably support the finding of disproportionality  and  it  is
         recognised that the child as a British Citizen cannot be  compelled
         to leave the United  Kingdom.  There  is  nevertheless  a  lack  of
         reasoning for the Judge's  apparent conclusion that it would not be
         in this seven year old child's best interests  for  her  mother  to
         choose to keep the family together and  take  the  child  with  her
         siblings to Nigeria".

     This was considered to give rise to  an  arguable  error  or  law.   In
      response to the grant of permission to  appeal  there  is  a  Rule  24
      Notice on behalf of the Respondent.  This seeks to  uphold,  first  of
      all, the correctness in law of the FtT's approach to Article 8 of  the
      Human Rights Convention and, secondly, the  adequacy  of  the  Judge's
      reasoning in concluding  that  there  were  exceptional  circumstances
      rendering  the  impugned  decision  disproportionate.   That  is   the
      framework of the appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

   8. The helpful arguments of both parties' representatives make clear that
      this appeal has two limbs. The first is whether  the  FtT  misdirected
      itself in law.  This could  also  be  rephrased  as  whether  the  FtT
      applied the correct test. The test to be applied is that determined by
      the Court of Appeal in the case of MF Nigeria.  I am  satisfied  that,
      in substance, the Judge was applying the correct test, namely, she was
      conducting an exercise designed to establish whether there  were  very
      compelling circumstances, sufficient to outweigh the  public  interest
      engaged.  Accordingly the first ground of appeal has no merit.

   9. The second ground of appeal raises the question of whether the Judge's
      conclusion in [30] of  the  determination  is  sufficiently  reasoned.
      Here the Judge concluded that there were exceptional circumstances and
      that the decision under challenge was not proportionate to the need to
      maintain fair but firm policy of immigration control.  The Judge  went
      on to say that the balance of the case was in the Appellant's favour..
       Paragraph [29] of the determination contains a series of findings.  I
      have already adverted to these.  The findings are extensive,  relevant
      and clearly articulated.  As Ms Thomas  has  emphasised  there  is  no
      challenge to any of them.  The question is whether,  as  a  matter  of
      law, the  reasoning  is  adequate  to  support  the  conclusion.   The
      principles relating to whether  a  court  or  tribunal's  reasons  are
      adequate are well established and  were  rehearsed  by  this  Tribunal
      recently in the reported judgment of MK.  In  determining  the  second
      ground of appeal, I must remind myself that this is not  a  rehearing.
      This is, rather, an error  of  law  appellate  court.   Applying  this
      approach I conclude that [29] contains a  series  of  findings  which,
      cumulatively, are sufficient to support the conclusion framed in [30].


  10. It follows from  this  that  the  determination  of  the  FtT  is  not
      erroneous in law in either of the respects advanced and,  accordingly,
      I uphold it.

  11. I would add that, in my view, FtT should have found the  Secretary  of
      State's decision to be not in accordance with the law on  the  further
      and free standing ground that it was not harmonious with  the  primary
      duty  enshrined  in  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
      Immigration Act 2009.  Related to this, there was no evidence,  direct
      or inferential, that the secondary, but nonetheless, important,  duty,
      namely to have regard to the statutory  guidance  has  been  performed
      either.  In my view it is abundantly clear that both of  these  duties
      were breached in this case with  the  result  that  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision was unlawful on those two further, separate grounds.

  12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is,  accordingly,  upheld.   I
      dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                       Date: 31 October 2014
