
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46103/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 28 October 2015                     |                On 5 November 2015   |
|Delivered orally                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  MRS N A K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bajwa, instructed by A Bajwa & Co Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant (hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of State) against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Seelhoff
    who, following a hearing at Hatton Cross  on  1  June  2015  and  in  a
    determination subsequently promulgated on 19  June  2015,  allowed  the
    appeal of the Respondent, a citizen of Ghana, born on  4  October  1978
    (hereinafter called the claimant) against the decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 31 October 2014, to refuse to vary her leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom and to remove the claimant by way  of  directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.      Permission to appeal that decision was granted to the  Secretary  of
    State by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 4 September 2015, when  he
    noted that the  appeal  was  allowed  to  the  limited  extent  of  the
    Secretary of State being required to reconsider the case, in  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, was satisfied that the decision  before  him
    was not in accordance with the law, because the Secretary of State  did
    not take account  of  all  the  relevant  circumstances  including  the
    existence of a British child.

3.     First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes  considered  that  it  was  arguable
    that, as set out in the grounds,  the  refusal  was  to  the  contrary,
    perfectly lawful because as the Judge recognised, the decision was made
    before the claimant's child was born "and so the (Secretary  of  State)
    could not possibly have considered the welfare of an unborn child".

4.    Indeed,  in  that  regard,  I  note  that  at  paragraph  11  of   the
    determination, the First-tier Tribunal Judge had stated, "although  the
    birth of a British child postdates  the  decision  and  the  Respondent
    could not have been aware of it at the  date  of  the  decision,  I  am
    satisfied that it is a material change  in  circumstances  which  I  am
    required to take into account".

5.   In that regard he was, with great respect to him,  entirely  wrong  and
    most fairly and  realistically,  Mr  Bajwa  for  the  claimant  readily
    accepted that the Judge's decision was in such circumstances  wrong  in
    law in a material way, such as would lead to the  conclusion  that  his
    determination could not stand and should be set aside.

6.     I am wholly satisfied, in common with Mr Bajwa  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did indeed materially err in law for the reasons set out
    in the Secretary of State's grounds and  identified  in  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal.  The Secretary  of  State  was  not  required  to
    consider the best interests of a child  yet  to  be  born  and  such  a
    consideration could not possibly form part of her consideration  as  to
    the proportionality of the removal of the claimant in terms of  Article
    8 of the ECHR.  I am therefore surprised that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge should have  allowed  the  appeal  notwithstanding  that  he  had
    already  unequivocally  recognised  in  the  determination,  that   the
    Secretary of State could not have  been  aware  of  the  birth  of  the
    British child at the date of decision.

 7.    For those reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  will
    be set aside as it does disclose a material error on a point of law and
    it follows that the appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed.

8.   There was common ground between myself  and  the  parties  ,  that  the
    proper course was thus to remit this case to be  heard  afresh  on  all
    issues at large (that would of course now include  the  fact  that  the
    child concerned  has  been  born  and  his  human  rights  have  to  be
    considered within the proportionality exercise).

9.   Whilst it may be that the claimant will consider other options  in  the
    meantime, the fact remains that there  otherwise  continues  to  be  an
    immigration appeal that must be considered afresh before a Judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Seelhoff.

10.    The appeal will therefore be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  at
    Hatton Cross in relation to which I am informed by Mr Bajwa that  there
    will be two witnesses including the claimant giving  evidence,  with  a
    suggested time estimate of two hours.  I am told  that  no  interpreter
    will be required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  Claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 30 October 2015



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

