
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/46537/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29th August 2017                       |On 11th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                       Mr Patrick Ankama Arthur-Badoo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a resumed hearing in relation to Mr Arthur-Badoo.  I originally
    heard this case on 20th June for the error of law Decision and I issued
    an error of law Decision on 23rd June.  In that Decision I  upheld  the
    First-tier Tribunal's finding that Mr  Arthur-Badoo  was  not  in  fact
    divorced from his EEA national spouse.   His  original  appeal  was  in
    relation to the revocation of his residence card.  It had been  revoked
    on the basis that he was divorced.  The First-tier  Tribunal  found  he
    was not divorced but then went on to find that he was not entitled to a
    residence card.  I found that to be an error of law in that it was  not
    a matter raised by the  Secretary  of  State  nor  dealt  with  at  the
    hearing.

 2. Having set aside the First-tier Tribunal's Decision and preserving  the
    finding about the divorce the question then was on  a  pragmatic  level
    whether he was in fact entitled to a residence  card.   If  I  had  not
    dealt with that then it would simply have been  refused  again  by  the
    Secretary of State.  I therefore preserved the  finding  and  adjourned
    the matter for a resumed hearing when I would decide whether or not  he
    was entitled to a residence card.

 3. The matter then came before me  on  Friday  25th  August  and  on  that
    occasion the Appellant said that his wife, from whom he  was  estranged
    but not divorced, had a permanent residence card and that that had been
    sent to the Secretary of State with his original  application  for  his
    residence card.  The Presenting Officer on 25th August  was  unable  to
    confirm that and  so  it  was  agreed  that  there  would  be  a  short
    adjournment while that was checked.  I  received  an  email  from  that
    Presenting  Officer  confirming  that  he  had  made  checks  and   the
    Appellant's wife was indeed issued with a permanent residence  card  on
    22nd November 2012. The Presenting Officer had  accepted  that  if  his
    wife had indeed  been  given  permanent  residence  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to a residence card.

 4. The Appellant still being married to his wife he is therefore  entitled
    under the EEA Regulations to reside in the UK as the family  member  of
    an EEA national and for that reason his appeal is allowed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  such  that  the  Appellant's
appeal against the revocation of his residence card succeeds.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 8th September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
for the  following  reason.   The  Secretary  of  State  acted  properly  on
information she received in revoking the residence card.  It was only  after
appeal and evidence adduced that the appeal that the decision proved  to  be
unjustified.


Signed                              Date 8th September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
