
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46981/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued on      |
|on 2nd December 2014                          |On 8th December 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                        KEHINDE ABIMBOLA JAMES-MIENE

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co.,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 19th February 1967.  She
    has two sons: Precious James-Miene, born on 13th August 1996, and Peter
    James-Miene,  born  on  21st  December  2001.   At  the  time  of   the
    respondent's decision and  at  the  time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing she was living with her  children  in  Glasgow.   Their  father
    (also of Nigerian origin) was living  in  Edinburgh,  the  relationship
    between the parents having broken down in 2005.  The appellant came  to
    the UK firstly without the children, who joined her in  November  2009.
    They have had only limited contact with their father in recent years.

 2. The appellant has a quite  involved  immigration  and  appeal  history,
    which it is not necessary to rehearse again here.  On 22nd October 2013
    the respondent refused  her  further  representations.   She  appealed,
    arguing her case under Article 8 of the ECHR, outwith the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Burns  dismissed
    her appeal by determination promulgated on 25th February 2014.

 3. The judge recorded at paragraph 20 that the questions posed were:

      (a) whether it was in  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  two
          children to be returned with their mother to Nigeria or to  remain
          with her in the UK and (b) was the decision to remove the family a
          proportionate one?

 4. The judge found at paragraph 43 that removal of the appellant  and  her
    children was proportionate.  However, at paragraph 44 he dealt with the
    specific question of Precious being due to sit school  examinations  in
    May or June.  The judge thought that it would  be  disproportionate  to
    remove him before he had the opportunity to  do  so,  and  allowed  the
    appeal to that limited extent.

 5. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on these grounds:

         3. The judge had before him the prior  decision  of  Judge  Clapham
             made in February 2013 ... to the main focus then was  ...  the
             Refugee Convention; the only mention of best interests of  the
             children in a 10 page determination is at paragraph 36 ... the
             evidence before the judge in the present appeal was of a  very
             different nature; see the detailed report of  Dr Susan  Baird
             which mentions  [Peter's]  symptoms  of  depression,  anxiety,
             anger and challenging behaviour.  The report states that Peter
             had become settled in Glasgow ... and had made  clear  he  did
             not want to return to Nigeria.  The judge also had before  him
             a detailed statement from Peter setting out his views ...  the
             arguable error in law is the failure to properly  engage  with
             that  new,   current   evidence   regarding   the   children's
             circumstances ... see paragraph 41 where Judge Burns refers to
             Judge Clapham's decision - "The  reports  before  me  appeared
             simply to indicate that matters were not as fraught  today  as
             they had been when Judge  Clapham  wrote  ..."   There  is  no
             consideration of  the  children's  views  contained  in  their
             statements ... it is incumbent on a judge to  apply  the  most
             anxious scrutiny to the current evidence before  him.   It  is
             not sufficient for a judge to rely on an earlier best interest
             assessment when a significant period of time  has  passed,  in
             this case twelve months.

         4. There is no clear finding on the best interests of the child  as
             distinct from proportionality ... other than the reference  at
             paragraph  42  that  the  children's  best  interests  lay  in
             remaining with their mum ... an arguable error of  failure  to
             provide clear written reasons.

         5. At paragraph 43 the judge's analysis of best interests  proceeds
             on the basis that the appellant had no leave to remain.   This
             is not the correct starting point ... see IE Petitioner [2013]
             CSOH 142, paragraph 14 ... it is not disputed that it is  open
             to decision makers to  state  their  conclusions  followed  by
             reasons, or vice versa (as was  pointed  out  in  the  Supreme
             Court decision of Zoumbas).  However ... the determination  in
             this case suggests that the judge treated  immigration  status
             as his logical starting point  in  assessing  best  interests,
             which was incorrect.

         6. The judge clearly placed reliance on  the  mother's  immigration
             history without considering that had nothing to  do  with  the
             children - it is trite law ... that children  cannot  be  held
             responsible for their parents'  behaviour/immigration  history
             ... the judge took into  account  an  irrelevant  matter  when
             assessing best interests.

         7. The judge's analysis  of  Article  8  and  whether  there  is  a
             distinct good arguable case is ... flawed ... this was a  case
             with compelling circumstances not recognised under  the  Rules
             and therefore a separate Article 8 assessment was required.

         8. As acknowledged by the judge, the route taken  under  Article  8
             was not crucial, however ... if he had assessed best interests
             separately then arguably the Article 8 proportionality outcome
             could  have  been  different  ...  both  children  had   spent
             considerable time in the UK after the age of 4 ...

 6. The SSHD also appeals to the Upper Tribunal, on  the  grounds  which  I
    summarise thus:

           Respect for private life does not  include  a  right  to  study;
           consideration of a child's rights through the prism of education
           is too narrow an approach; the  children  could  exercise  their
           right to education in Nigeria; their rights under Article 8 were
           not breached by a decision which refused them the opportunity to
           continue or conclude their studies.

 7. Mr Caskie submitted that paragraphs 42 and 43 of the determination  did
    not contain an analysis of whether it would be better for the  children
    to be in the United Kingdom or  in  Nigeria.   The  evidence  disclosed
    significant factors in favour of the children remaining in the UK.  The
    judge recited evidence of Peter finding the  transition  to  the  UK  a
    traumatic one.  He had telephone contact with his  father  and  visited
    him at least once in Edinburgh.  To remove him with  his  mother  would
    subject him to another possibly traumatic transition.  Telephone  calls
    over a distance of 40 miles would be a very different  matter  in  the
    mind of a child to telephone calls over a distance of 4,000 miles.  The
    judge referred to the evidence about the child being unsettled, but did
    not ask the question whether it was proportionate  to  subject  him  to
    another transition.  Both children had given oral as  well  as  written
    evidence.  Mr Caskie acknowledged my observation that such evidence was
    led  after  prompting  by  the  judge,  as  shown  at   paragraph   13.
    Nevertheless, he said that the judge failed to explain what  weight  he
    gave to that evidence.  While the weight to be given  to  any  item  of
    evidence was a matter for the judge, in this  case  the  weighting  was
    simply unknown.  Mr Caskie said that the grounds constituted in essence
    a reasons challenge.  The judge carried out  a  proper  best  interests
    analysis at paragraph 44 on the specific point of Precious sitting  his
    exams, and the Home Office grounds attacking that  were  simply  inept.
    At paragraph 43 the judge fell into the error illustrated by IE.   That
    case was in the bundles before the Supreme Court in  Zoumbas,  but  the
    Court overlooked it, and reached its decision  "per incuriam  of  IE".
    Although the appellant accepted that her case could not  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules, the scheme of  Appendix  FM  and  the  terms  of
    Section EX.1 showed that  this  case  must  have  amounted  to  a  good
    arguable one for consideration outwith  the  Rules.   The  case  of  MM
    (Lebanon) [to which Mr Caskie did not refer  directly]  suggested  that
    the question whether there is a good arguable case  is  an  unnecessary
    step.  Given the evidence and the judge's findings regarding a 12  year
    old boy, this case plainly had amounted to a good arguable  case.   The
    decision should be set aside and a further hearing ordered at which up-
    to-date evidence could be brought.  Although the older son  is  now  an
    adult, he is attending college and still living with  his  mother.   It
    might be appropriate for that further hearing to be in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 8. Further to the SSHD's grounds,  Mr  Mullen  said  that  the  child  had
    already gone beyond school leaving age and so there was an  element  of
    choice in his taking his exams.  There  was  no  right  to  complete  a
    course of studies.  It was not proportionate to allow an appeal on that
    basis even if the period involved was a limited one.  The judge in this
    respect had fallen into the error of taking the best interests  of  the
    child as the not a primary  consideration.   He  compartmentalised  the
    best interest consideration and took  it  out  of  the  proportionality
    context.  Although the error might be  thought  academic,  time  having
    gone by, the determination should not  be  allowed  to  stand  on  that
    point.

 9. Turning to the appellant's grounds, Mr Mullen submitted that  far  from
    failing to engage with the evidence regarding the children it  was  the
    judge who caused it to be brought out at length.  The judge  considered
    the report by Dr Baird and was entitled to conclude  that  it  did  not
    amount to a stronger case regarding the best interests of the  children
    than the one which had failed at an earlier date before another  judge.
    The judge considered the  evidence  relating  to  the  children's  best
    interests in particular at paragraphs 14,  18,  21,  24  and  27.   The
    conclusion at paragraph  41  was  that  Peter's  difficulties  had  not
    disappeared, but to some  extent  had  been  mitigated.   Although  the
    conclusions were briefly expressed  they  were  valid  and  proper  and
    betrayed no lack of consideration of the evidence.  The judge  said  at
    paragraph 42 that the best interests of the children lay in being  with
    their mother, which was common ground, and dealt with the parties as  a
    family unit.  He noted at paragraph 43  that  all  three  preferred  to
    remain here.  That was plainly the basis on which the interest  of  the
    children in being in the UK was approached, not an assumption that  the
    mother must be removed.  There was little  evidence  about  their  best
    interests  being  in  the  UK  other  than  general  benefits  such  as
    healthcare and education, which was similar to Zoumbas,  as  the  judge
    went on to say.  There was little to show  that  their  best  interests
    would be served by living closer to their  father,  there  having  been
    evidence of  only  one  visit,  a  few  telephone  calls  and  strained
    relationships.  There had been no evidence of the father's  immigration
    status.  Paragraph 43 was a sound answer to the question of whether the
    best interests of the children lay in the UK or Nigeria, followed by  a
    proper  resolution  of  proportionality.   Zoumbas  was   the   binding
    authority.  IE did not establish any binding principle and was  a  case
    which turned on its own facts.  The children in this case  are  not  UK
    citizens.  Insofar as Peter has been affected by trauma, the report  by
    Dr Baird says that he does not wish to return to Nigeria, but does  not
    suggest that he is receiving or requires any  treatment.   Any  ongoing
    uncertainty derives from his mother's continued opposition to a  series
    of immigration decisions and  appeals  which  have  gone  against  her.
    Uncertainty induced on that basis could do  little  to  strengthen  his
    claim to remain.  The determination did not err,  apart  from  allowing
    the appeal to the limited extent that  it  did,  and  should  otherwise
    stand.  Alternatively, if error were to be found,  the  appellants  had
    available some further written  evidence  with  a  view  to  having  it
    admitted if the case were to proceed to a fresh decision.  There was no
    reason for the case not to be resolved by admitting that  evidence  and
    hearing  final  submissions,  in  the  Upper   Tribunal   and   without
    adjournment.

10. Mr Caskie in reply dealt firstly with  the  question  of  disposal,  if
    error were to be found.  He said  he  had  just  been  advised  by  his
    instructing solicitor that within the last  two  weeks  they  have  had
    sight of the father's certificate of naturalisation as  a  UK  citizen.
    That would enable the younger son also to register  as  a  UK  citizen.
    While of course that could not bear on the error of law issue, it might
    suggest that the pragmatic course, if error were to be found, would  be
    not to conclude the hearing on the day.

11. As to the older child having attained school  leaving  age,  Mr  Caskie
    said that it was not apt to criticise a 17 year  old  for  choosing  to
    complete educational qualifications.  Rather that was  a  course  which
    the  respondent  should  encourage.   It  was  hardly  an  outrage   to
    immigration control to allow a short period of time for a pupil  to  do
    so.  The sentence, "The three of them would prefer to remain here", was
    an implied criticism of the children for the conduct of  their  mother.
    The best interest question  did  require  compartmentalisation  of  the
    issues.  The judge carried  that  out  on  the  limited  issue  of  the
    examinations, but failed to do so on a wider basis.  It might  be  said
    that the judge engaged in an holistic assessment, but in  so  doing  he
    failed to determine whether the best interests  of  the  children  were
    served by them returning to  Nigeria  or  remaining  in  the  UK.   The
    Presenting Officer argued that on any view the Article 8  result  would
    be the same, but that was to impose too low a test.  The  question  was
    not whether the judge would probably have reached the same decision but
    for the error made, but whether he inevitably would  have  reached  the
    same decision.  There was no such near-certainty in this case, and that
    justified a rehearing.

12. I reserved my determination.

13. IE is a judicial review case, in which Lord Tyre reduced the a decision
    of the SSHD on the view at paragraph 14 that she had erred by  treating
    the immigration status of the parent:

           ... and in particular her removal from the UK, as  a  factor  in
           answering the question  of  what  was  in  the  children's  best
           interests ... the respondent was not entitled to proceed upon  a
           factual assumption that the petitioner  would  be  removed  when
           assessing what was in the best interests of the children.

14. Zoumbas is now reported at [2014] Imm AR 479.  Lord  Hodge,  delivering
    the judgment of the court, said at paragraph 25:

         25.      Finally, we see no substance in  the  criticism  that  the
             assessment of the children's best interests was flawed because
             it assumed that their parents would be removed to the Republic
             of Congo.  It must be recalled that the  decision-maker  began
             by stating the conclusion and then set out the reasoning.   It
             was legitimate for the decision-maker  to  ask  herself  first
             whether it would have been proportionate to remove the parents
             if they had no children and  then,  in  considering  the  best
             interests of the children in the proportionality exercise, ask
             whether their well-being  altered  that  provisional  balance.
             When one has regard to the age of the children, the nature and
             extent of their integration into United Kingdom  society,  the
             close family unit in which  they  lived  and  their  Congolese
             citizenship, the matters on which Mr Lindsay  relied  did  not
             create such a strong case for the children that their interest
             in remaining in the United Kingdom could have  outweighed  the
             considerations on which the decision-maker relied in  striking
             the balance in the proportionality exercise (paras 17  and  18
             above).  The assessment of the children's best interests  must
             be read in the context of the decision letter as a whole.

15. I note on this issue also EV (Philippines) and Ors v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 874 (which was not referred  to  in  the  discussion  before  me).
    Christopher Clarke LJ observed at paragraph 33, "... the best interests
    of the child are to be determined  by  reference  to  the  child  alone
    without reference to  the  immigration  history  or  status  of  either
    parent".  He continued at paragraphs 34 to 37:

         34.      In determining whether or not,  in  a  case  such  as  the
             present, the need for immigration control outweighs  the  best
             interests of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the
             relative strength of the factors which make it in  their  best
             interests to remain here; and also  to  take  account  of  any
             factors that point the other way.

         35.      A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens.

         36.      In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain?  The longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance.  By contrast if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

         37.      In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken
             into account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to
             maintain immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-
             being of the country and the  fact  that,  ex  hypothesi,  the
             applicants have no entitlement  to  remain.   The  immigration
             history of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if  they  are
             overstayers, or have acted deceitfully.

16. Lewison LJ posed the issue thus at paragraph 50:

         50.      What, if  any,  assumptions  are  to  be  made  about  the
             immigration status of the parent?  If one takes the  facts  as
             they are in reality, then the first of the immigration judge's
             findings about the  best  interests  of  the  children  points
             towards removal.  If, on the other hand, one assumes that  the
             parent has the right to  remain,  then  one  is  assuming  the
             answer to the very question that the tribunal has  to  decide.
             Or is there a middle ground, in which one has  to  assess  the
             best  interests  of  the  children  without  regard   to   the
             immigration status of the parent?

17. Having considered the authorities he answered thus:
   1. In my judgment, therefore, the assessment of the best interests of the
      children must be made on the basis that the facts are as they  are  in
      the real world. If one parent has no right to remain,  but  the  other
      parent does, that is the background against which  the  assessment  is
      conducted. If neither parent has the right to remain, then that is the
      background  against  which  the  assessment  is  conducted.  Thus  the
      ultimate question will be: is it reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
      follow the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin?
   1. On the facts of ZH it was not reasonable to  expect  the  children  to
      follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because the family would be
      separated and the children would be deprived of the right to  grow  up
      in the country of which they were citizens.
   1. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case none of the
      family is a British citizen. None has the  right  to  remain  in  this
      country. If the mother is removed, the father has no independent right
      to remain. If the parents are removed, then it is entirely  reasonable
      to expect the children to go with them. As the immigration judge found
      it is obviously in their best interests to remain with their  parents.
      Although it is, of course a question  of  fact  for  the  tribunal,  I
      cannot see that the desirability of being educated at  public  expense
      in the UK can outweigh the benefit to the children of  remaining  with
      their parents. Just as we cannot provide  medical  treatment  for  the
      world, so we cannot educate the world.
   1. In fact the immigration  judge  weighed  the  best  interests  of  the
      children as a primary consideration, and set against it  the  economic
      well-being of the country.  As  Maurice  Kay  LJ  pointed  out  in  AE
      (Algeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ
      653 at [9] in conducting that exercise it would have been  appropriate
      to consider the cost to the public purse  in  providing  education  to
      these children. In fact that was not something  that  the  immigration
      judge explicitly considered. If anything, therefore,  the  immigration
      judge adopted an approach too favourable to the appellant.

18. In this case, it was the judge who took the  initiative  to  have  full
    evidence before him.  Mr Caskie suggested that he did no more  than  he
    had to, but I do not agree.  The Tribunal is not generally required  to
    seek out such evidence, especially where  appellants  are  represented.
    This judge went the extra mile.  He took great care over  the  specific
    point of the school examinations.   Looking at the history of the  case
    and at the determination as a whole, I am not persuaded  that  he  took
    anything less than full account of the evidence regarding the  children
    in general or the report about Peter in particular.

19. The statement that the appellant  and  her  children  would  prefer  to
    remain here is factually impeccable.  It is a strained reading  to  say
    that it blames the children for the mother's faults.

20. The judge's comparison is plainly between on the one hand the  children
    remaining here with their mother, and on the other  hand  leaving  with
    their mother.  There is no prior assumption that she must  be  removed,
    which  would  have  left   nothing   else   worth   considering.    The
    determination recognises that there might be advantages to the children
    in remaining.  It posed the questions correctly at paragraph 20.  I  do
    not think it falls into an error of  circular  reasoning  of  the  type
    possibly identified in IE.

21. Any sharper  separation  of  the  best  interests  and  proportionality
    questions would not have led  to  a  different  result.   Any  question
    whether Article 8 outside the Rules involves  a  one-step  or  two-step
    approach is similarly academic.  The judge said, "On any  analysis  one
    arrived at the same destination".

22. I find in the appellant's grounds no error of law which  would  entitle
    or require the Upper Tribunal to set aside the determination.

23. Nor do I find any such error in the Secretary of State's  grounds  (and
    the matter has been superseded by the passage of time  in  any  event).
    The judge did not think that the child's educational or other interests
    were an overriding consideration.  If he had, he would have allowed the
    appeal outright.  The outcome was within the scope of the Tribunal, and
    is supported by very specific reasons.

24. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

25. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            5 December 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




