

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/46379/2014

                                                    IA/46380/2014

                                                    IA/46381/2014

                                                    IA/46382/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 04 September 2017                  |         On 12 October 2017          |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN

                                   Between


                                  C E & M O
                         (AND TWO CHILD DEPENDENTS)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellants:          Ms S. Pinder, Counsel instructed by Universe
Solicitors
For the respondent:        Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves child welfare  issues.  I  find  that  it  is  appropriate  to
continue the order. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,
the appellants are granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellants and to the respondent.



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first and second appellants  are  the  parents  of  the  third  and
    fourth appellants who are children aged 10 years and 9 years old.  They
    appealed against the respondent's decision dated 04  November  2014  to
    refuse a human rights claim.

2.   First-tier Tribunal Judge A. Black ("the judge") dismissed  the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 29 December 2015. The appellants  appealed
    to the Upper Tribunal asserting that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    make clear and unambiguous findings relating to the best  interests  of
    the children. Some of the judge's findings indicated  that  their  best
    interests might lie in remaining in the UK, while others indicated that
    she thought their interests would lie in remaining in the  family  unit
    in Nigeria. The judge failed to make any clear findings relating to the
    best interests of both children and failed  to  consider  whether  they
    were capable of being outweighed by public interest considerations.

Decision and reasons

Error of law

3.   After having considered the First-tier Tribunal decision,  the  grounds
    of appeal and oral submissions I  was  satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of  an  error  of  law  and  gave
    summary reasons for setting aside the decision at the hearing.

4.   It was a finely balanced  decision,  because  the  judge  considered  a
    number of factors that were relevant to the assessment,  including  the
    fact that both children were born in the UK  and  were  doing  well  at
    school. She noted that the oldest child was nearly eligible to register
    as a British citizen and that it would be  in  her  best  interests  to
    register as a British citizen. She considered whether the parents would
    be able to care for the children in Nigeria and considered the  medical
    issues raised. However, what was lacking from the analysis  were  clear
    findings as to whether it was in the best interests of the children  to
    remain in the UK or to go to Nigeria with their parents. Some  findings
    indicated that the interests of the oldest child might be to remain  in
    the UK. In the end, the only reason given was  that  it  was  in  their
    interests to remain as a family unit and it was therefore reasonable to
    expect the children to leave the UK with their parents [47].

5.   The judge's analysis focussed  on  the  practicalities  of  the  family
    returning to  Nigeria,  but  the  decision  is  lacking  an  evaluative
    assessment of what weight  should  be  placed  on  the  ties  that  the
    children had established  in  the  UK  after  a  seven-year  period  of
    continuous residence. The Court of Appeal decision in MA  (Pakistan)  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 705 made clear that the fact that a child has been
    resident for seven years must be  given  "significant  weight"  in  the
    proportionality exercise. The decision was made  after  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing in this case, but the policy guidance referred  to  in
    the judgment was a published document at the  date  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.

6.   The judge considered whether it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
    oldest child to leave the UK with her family given that  she  had  been
    resident for a continuous period of seven years and considered  aspects
    of her position in the UK. She noted that the youngest  child  did  not
    have seven years' continuous residence at the date of  the  application
    [46]. At the date of the hearing he had been resident for a  continuous
    period of seven years. Paragraph GEN.1.9 of Appendix FM states that the
    requirement to make a valid application will not apply when the Article
    8 claim is raised in an appeal. By the date of the hearing  it  was  at
    least arguable that paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv)  applied  to  the  youngest
    child.  Although  the  judge  appeared  to  reject  the  argument  that
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) applied at the date of the hearing, she made an
    alternative finding that it would be reasonable to expect the  youngest
    child to leave the UK. Perhaps because it was an  alternative  finding,
    there was little  reasoning  or  assessment  of  the  youngest  child's
    circumstances to support the finding [39].

7.   Although the judge considered a number of factors  that  were  relevant
    to an assessment of  the  best  interests  of  the  children,  and  her
    conclusion was that they could  return  to  Nigeria  as  a  family,  an
    overall reading of the decision does not  disclose  particularly  clear
    findings as to where the best interests of the children lay. The  judge
    went on to refer to the House of Lords decision in R v  SSHD  ex  parte
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 and the Court of Appeal decision  in  SSHD  v  SS
    (Congo) and Others [2015] Imm AR 1036. These decisions might have  been
    relevant to the balancing exercise in cases that did  not  involve  the
    assessment of the best interests of children. At the date of the First-
    tier Tribunal decision the correct approach in cases involving children
    was to assess where the best interests of the child lay  and  to  treat
    them as a primary consideration. Assuming their best interests were  to
    remain in the UK,  it  was  then  necessary  to  consider  whether  the
    cumulative effect of public interest considerations outweighed the best
    interests of the children: see ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]  UKSC  4,
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV (Philippines) and  others  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

8.   I am satisfied that the lack of clarity in  the  findings  relating  to
    the best interests of the children and the absence of any  findings  to
    show that appropriate weight was placed on their length of residence in
    the UK are sufficient reasons to conclude that  the  decision  involved
    the making of an error of law.

Remaking the decision

9.   After a short  break,  I  heard  further  submission  relating  to  the
    substantive claim. Ms Ahmed said that she had checked the  Home  Office
    records and confirmed that the oldest child (the third  appellant)  was
    registered as a British citizen in March  2017.  At  the  date  of  the
    hearing the youngest child (the fourth appellant) had been continuously
    resident in the UK for a period of nine years.

10.  On behalf of the respondent, Ms Ahmed accepted that the best  interests
    of the children lay in remaining in the UK with their parents. This was
    an eminently sensible concession given the circumstances of  the  case.
    Both children were born in the UK and have known no  other  life.  They
    are settled and doing well at school. The  appellants  do  not  dispute
    that education and health care is available in Nigeria, but it  is  not
    at the same level and comes at greater cost. In principle, there is  no
    reason why the parents could not provide for their welfare  in  Nigeria
    by finding work to support the family, but the evidence indicates  that
    they might  struggle  to  do  so  initially  because  of  the  father's
    disability. He does not currently  have  a  prosthesis  to  assist  his
    mobility and is reliant on a wheelchair. Although it is  unlikely  that
    the parents have lost all connection with Nigeria, which is  after  all
    their country of nationality, they have not been there for a number  of
    years. It seems likely that the family might face some  hardship  while
    they try to re-establish  themselves.  The  children's  best  interests
    quite clearly lie in remaining in the UK, where they have stability and
    access to better quality education and healthcare. In the case  of  the
    oldest child she also has the benefits that citizenship will now bring.
    The children are only 10 years and 9 years old and are still reliant on
    their parents for support. As such, I conclude that their interests lie
    in remaining as a family unit with their parents in the UK.

11.  The first and second appellants do not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules and can only rely on an assessment  of  their  rights
    under Article 8 outside the rules. As a  result  of  her  status  as  a
    British citizen the oldest child can no longer be removed from the  UK.
    The respondent has no power to do so. To separate the parents  and  the
    youngest child would inevitably interfere with their  right  to  family
    life in a sufficiently grave way as to engage the operation of  Article
    8 (points (i) & (ii) of Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar  v
    SSHD [2004] INLR 349).

12.  The state can lawfully interfere with an appellant's family life if  it
    is pursuing a legitimate aim and it is necessary and  proportionate  in
    all the circumstances of the case.  In  cases  involving  human  rights
    issues under Article 8, the heart of  the  assessment  is  whether  the
    decision strikes a fair balance between the due weight to be  given  to
    the public interest in maintaining an effective system  of  immigration
    control and the impact of the decision on the individual's  private  or
    family life. In assessing whether the decision strikes a fair balance a
    court or tribunal should give appropriate weight  to  Parliament's  and
    the Secretary of State's assessment of  the  strength  of  the  general
    public interest as expressed in the relevant rules  and  statutes:  see
    Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.

13.  Section 117B of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    ("NIAA 2002") sets out a number of public interest considerations  that
    a court or tribunal must take into  account  in  assessing  whether  an
    interference with a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
    life is justified and proportionate.
14.  The first appellant entered the UK  clandestinely  and  has  never  had
    leave to remain. The second appellant entered the UK on visit visa  and
    knowingly overstayed. They began a family in the  full  knowledge  that
    they had no leave to remain in the UK and that their immigration status
    was precarious. There is no  evidence  to  show  that  they  have  been
    financially independent. If they  have  worked,  then  it  was  without
    permission. At the current time, the evidence is that they are  reliant
    on social services support and charitable  assistance  from  the  local
    community. There is evidence to show that both parents have had various
    health problems. They have struggled to establish a decent life in  the
    in the UK, largely because of their illegal status. Without seeking  to
    diminish the difficulties that they have faced, I must give  weight  to
    the fact that their health problems were  treated  at  a  cost  to  the
    taxpayer. The children were born in the UK and have been educated at  a
    cost to the taxpayer. There is no evidence to  show  that  the  parents
    have contributed anything positive to the UK.

15.  The parents remained in the  UK  unlawfully  but  there  is  no  direct
    evidence to show abuses at the more serious end of the scale  e.g.  use
    of fraud or deception. However, some inference could be made about  how
    the first appellant might have entered illegally, and given that he was
    already in the UK when the second appellant applied for a  visit  visa,
    whether she was truthful in the application for entry clearance. If the
    circumstances of the adult appellants were considered on  their  own  I
    would have  no  hesitation  in  concluding  that  the  public  interest
    considerations outlined in section  117B(1)-(5)  would  outweigh  their
    individual circumstances and that removal would be proportionate.

16.  However,  in  assessing  whether  public  interest  considerations  are
    sufficiently serious to outweigh the best interests of the  children  I
    have taken into account the statutory provisions contained  in  section
    117B(6), which states that the  public  interest  will  not  require  a
    person's removal if he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a
    'qualifying child' and it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child
    to leave the UK. I have also  considered  whether  the  youngest  child
    might satisfy the private  life  requirements  contained  in  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) of the immigration rules.  In  both  cases  the  test  is
    essentially the  same  i.e.  whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  a
    'qualifying child' to leave the UK.

17.  Both children are 'qualifying children'. The first  because  she  is  a
    British citizen  and  the  second  because  he  has  been  continuously
    resident for a period of seven years.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the
    parents have a genuine and subsisting relationship with both  children.
    The crux of  the  appeal  rests  very  much  on  whether  it  would  be
    'reasonable' to expect the children to leave the UK.

18.  In MA (Pakistan) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  the  Court  of  Appeal
    expressed some doubt as to whether  the  'reasonableness'  test  should
    include consideration of  public  interest  factors,  but  declined  to
    depart from the earlier decision in MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ
    450, which concluded that it did. In MA (Pakistan) Lord  Justice  Elias
    emphasised that  significant  weight  should  still  be  given  to  the
    interests of a child, especially with  reference  to  the  respondent's
    published  policy  guidance:   Immigration   Directorate   Instructions
    "Appendix FM Section 1.0b Family Life (as  a  Partner  or  Parent)  and
    Private Life: 10 Year Routes" (August 2015).

19.  The guidance makes a distinction between qualifying children  who  have
    been continuously resident in the UK for a period of  seven  years  and
    British children. This reflects the different rights that  might  arise
    from British  citizenship  in  terms  of  immigration  status,  and  in
    particular, under European law. The  relevant  section  of  the  policy
    guidance relating to British children is as follows:

         "11.2.3. Would it be unreasonable to expect a British Citizen child
         to leave the UK?
         Save in cases involving criminality, the decision  maker  must  not
         take a decision in relation to the parent or  primary  carer  of  a
         British Citizen child where the effect of that decision would be to
         force that British child to leave the EU, regardless of the age  of
         that child. This reflects the European Court of Justice judgment in
         Zambrano.


         ........
         Where a decision to refuse the application would require  a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer.
         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to  the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in  the  UK  with
         the child, provided  that  there  is  satisfactory  evidence  of  a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.
         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where  the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight  as  to  justify  separation,  if  the  child  could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer  in
         the UK or in the EU.
         The circumstances envisaged could cover amongst others:


         .    criminality falling below the thresholds set out in  paragraph
             398 of the Immigration Rules;
         .    a very poor immigration history, such as where the person  has
             repeatedly and deliberately breached the Immigration Rules.

         In considering whether refusal  may  be  appropriate  the  decision
         maker must consider the impact on the child of any  separation.  If
         the decision maker is minded  to  refuse,  in  circumstances  where
         separation would be the result, this decision  should  normally  be
         discussed with a senior caseworker and, where  appropriate,  advice
         may be sought from the Office of the  Children's  Champion  on  the
         implications for the welfare of the child, in order to  inform  the
         decision."


20.  The respondent's policy must be given due weight in  assessing  whether
    a decision strikes a fair balance between the competing interests.  The
    respondent's policy accepts that it is unreasonable to expect a British
    child to be required to leave the UK, but in certain  circumstances  it
    might be proportionate to expect a family to be separated if the public
    policy considerations are sufficiently compelling and there is evidence
    to show that the child could stay with another parent or  primary  care
    giver in the UK or EU.

21.  The respondent has no power to remove the oldest child because  she  is
    now a British citizen. Although the immigration history  of  the  adult
    appellants is poor, in my assessment, it does not disclose the kind  of
    behaviour that the policy envisages might justify removal of a  primary
    care giver. The main difficulty for the respondent in this case is that
    there is no evidence to suggest that  there  is  another  primary  care
    giver who could look after the British child if the rest of the  family
    were to be removed from the UK. Regardless  of  the  adult  appellants'
    immigration history, the respondent's own  policy  shows  that  removal
    would be unreasonable in this case and that section 117B(6) applies  in
    relation to the adult appellants.

22.  In relation to a non-British child who  has  lived  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of at least seven years the policy states [11.2.4]:

         "The requirement that a non-British Citizen child has lived in  the
         UK for a continuous period of at  least  the  7  years  immediately
         preceding the  date  of  application,  recognises  that  over  time
         children start to put down roots and integrate into life in the UK,
         to  the  extent  that  being  required  to  leave  the  UK  may  be
         unreasonable. The longer the child has resided in the UK, the  more
         the balance will begin to swing in terms of it  being  unreasonable
         to expect the child to leave the UK, and  strong  reasons  will  be
         required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK residence  of
         more than 7 years."


23.  Although the policy goes on to outline a number of other  factors  that
    might be relevant to the assessment, I find that it is not necessary to
    go through each and every one of them in view of my  findings  relating
    to the other appellants. The youngest child has been resident in the UK
    for a period of nine years and strong reasons will be needed to justify
    his removal. His sister is now a British citizen and the  fate  of  her
    parents is tied  to  that  status.  If  the  family  circumstances  are
    considered as part of a 'real world' assessment, I find that  it  would
    be unreasonable to expect the fourth  appellant  to  leave  the  UK  if
    removal  of  other  family  members   is   either   not   possible   or
    disproportionate. At the date of the hearing, I conclude that he  meets
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) of the  immigration  rules,
    which is said to reflect the respondent's  view  as  to  where  a  fair
    balance is struck.

24.  I conclude that  removal  of  the  appellants  in  consequence  of  the
    decision would not strike a fair balance between the weight to be given
    to the public interest (as expressed in the  relevant  rules,  statutes
    and policy) and the impact on the individuals  involved  in  this  case
    (points (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar).

Conclusions

25.  In relation to the first and second appellants,  I  conclude  that  the
    decision is unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998  so
    long as the parents continue to be the primary carers for the children.
    If at some point in the future the children form independent  lives  it
    might be appropriate to review the situation of the parents.

26.  In relation to the third appellant, the  respondent  has  no  power  to
    remove the child and the decision is unlawful under section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.

27.  In relation to the fourth appellant  the  decision  is  unlawful  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 because it would be unreasonable
    to expect him to leave the UK.


DECISION

The appeals are ALLOWED on human rights grounds.



Signed   [pic]                      Date 11 October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

