
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46884/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 October 2015                   |On 6 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey
                      and Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


                                   Between

                        FABIEN RICHARDO ARTERO BROWN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant:    Ms Vastisk, of Counsel, instructed by Eagle Solicitors
Respondent:   Ms A Vijiwala, Senior Home Office presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant has been granted permission to appeal against a  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") promulgated on 28 May 2015.

 2. The essence of the application for permission to appeal was unfairness.
     More closely examined, the error or law complained of was the  failure
    of the FtT to adjourn the hearing.  Permission to  appeal  was  granted
    accordingly.  The Respondent has,  by  its  Rule  24  Notice  dated  14
    September 2015, stated that it does not oppose the appeal in the  sense
    and to the extent that an error of law of the kind  identified  in  the
    grant of permission is now conceded.  It seems  to  us  that  that  the
    principles that are engaged by this appeal are those contained  in  the
    decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).  In short the overarching test to  be  applied
    is whether the failure of  the  FtT  to  adjourn  the  hearing  in  the
    circumstances prevailing deprived  the  Appellant  of  his  inalienable
    right to a fair hearing.

 3. We had formed the provisional view that this test was  satisfied.  That
    view is now confirmed by the concession on behalf  of  the  Respondent.
    While such concession is not binding on this Tribunal we consider  that
    it is nonetheless properly made in the context of this appeal.

 4. Accordingly we set aside the decision of the FtT.  Having regard to the
    guidance on retention/remittal, the nature of the error of law which we
    have identified is such as to indicate  that  remittal  is  appropriate
    given that the Appellant did not, in our judgment, have a fair  hearing
    at first instance.  Accordingly we remit.

 5. This case is crying out for case management directions.  We  are  going
    to exercise our  power  to  include  directions  in  our  order,  those
    directions will be notified  to  both  parties  in  early  course.   We
    emphasise  the   critical   importance   of   the   Appellant's   legal
    representatives complying fully  with  the  directions  which  will  be
    given.  This case has an unfortunate history and we do not wish  either
    the FtT or this Tribunal, on further appeal,  to  form  the  impression
    that the system of the Tribunal is in  some  way  being  misused.  Such
    impression which could conceivably be formed, given  the  history.   If
    there are any further omissions or defaults  of  the  kind  which  have
    occurred in this case, which include  the  last  minute  withdrawal  of
    representation at first instance and the  eleventh hour  engagement  of
    Counsel,  who  was  not  instructed  until  yesterday  evening   (quite
    unacceptable   professional   practice),   there   could   be   serious
    repercussions.

                               DIRECTIONS

 6. These are as follows:

      i)  The  Appellant's  bundle,  to  contain  all  relevant  documentary
         materials, witness statements and everything else upon which he  is
         relying, will be prepared in indexed and paginated form.

     ii) The Appellant's bundle will be filed with the  First-tier  Tribunal
         at  Taylor  House,  London   and   served   on   the   Respondent's
         representative by 01 December 2015 at  latest.

    iii) The First-tier Tribunal will  convene  a  case  management  hearing
         thereafter, on notice to both parties.


                                                                       [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                       Date: 30 October 2015
