

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46793/2013
      IA/48107/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7th August 2014                            |On 08th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                 IMRAN AHMED
                          MUHAMMAD SHAHID ALI KHAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr C Mannan, counsel, instructed by Abbott
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Mr Ahmed and Mr Ali Khan applied to vary  their  leave  to  remain  as
      Entrepreneurs in a joint application to run a firm Heaven Business Ltd
      identifying themselves as management  consultants.  Their  application
      was refused in a decision dated 29th October 2019 and  a  decision  to
      remove them in accordance with s47 Immigration Asylum and  Nationality
      Act 2006 was made concurrently. Their appeal against  those  decisions
      was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 16th May 2014 and dismissed.


   2. Permission to appeal that determination was granted on 18th June  2014
      on the grounds that there had been no decision on the pleaded  Article
      8 ground. Although permission to appeal on the grounds that First-tier
      Tribunal judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  finding  the
      appellants had not established a genuine business was not refused  the
      judge commented that it appeared this was merely  an  attempt  to  re-
      argue the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

   3. The respondent opposed the appeal firstly on the basis that the  judge
      had considered  the  evidence  and  given  adequate  reasons  for  the
      conclusions reached and secondly that even if the judge had gone on to
      consider Article 8 the outcome would have been the same.

      Error of law - Article 8

   4. In so far as Article 8 is concerned, the only reference in the grounds
      of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in the grounds relating to Mr Ali
      Khan is:

                  "[10] The decision is unlawful because it is  incompatible
                  with the Appellant's rights under the European  Convention
                  on Human Rights. The Appellant  ahs  developed  a  private
                  life in the UK. The Respondent's  decision  infringes  the
                  Appellant's Rights under the European Convention on  Human
                  Rights." in  seeking  permission     do  not  identify  an
                  error of law in the First-tier Tribunal but rather  assert
                  that the respondent Secretary of State erred  in  refusing
                  to grant the appellant's leave to remain in the UK as Tier
                  1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrants.  There  is  one  reference  to
                  private life in paragraph 23 of the grounds in which it is
                  asserted that the appellant has "developed private life in
                  the UK and the respondent  has  not  considered  it  while
                  deciding the application.
                  [23] In addition to whatever stated  above  the  Appellant
                  has developed Private life in the United Kingdom  and  the
                  respondent  ahs  not  considered  it  while  deciding  the
                  application, hence committed error of law
                  [25] .....and this appeal may kindly be allowed under  the
                  Immigration Rules as well as under Article 8."


   5. In so far as Mr Ahmed is  concerned  there  is  no  reference  in  the
      grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to Article 8.


   6. The grounds seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  assert
      that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to make  any  findings  with
      regard to Article 8 private life. Reference is made to the appellants'
      legitimate expectation that having been granted  leave  to  remain  as
      Tier 1 (Post Study) Migrants, they had built up  economic  and  social
      ties with the UK and acquired a legitimate expectation  to  remain  in
      the UK. Reliance is placed upon CDS (Brazil) [2010]  UKUT  305  (IAC).
      Neither appellant relied upon Article  8  in  their  applications  for
      variation of leave to remain; Mr Ahmed did not rely upon Article 8  in
      his grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  reliance
      placed by Mr Ali Khan was minimal  to  the  extreme  in  that  he  was
      relying upon his length of residence.  Whilst  clearly  the  two  have
      established a private life in the UK there was no documentary or other
      evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  could  or  would  have
      resulted in a decision in favour of the  appellants  under  Article  8
      where their appeal in relation to the purpose of their application for
      leave to remain had been dismissed. In so far as the  submission  that
      the appellants had developed a legitimate expectation that they  would
      be able to remain and the reliance on CDS (Brazil) is concerned, there
      is no legitimate expectation that  they  would  be  granted  leave  to
      remain in a category where they do not meet the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules. Nor is there any legitimate expectation  that  they
      would in any event be granted leave to remain on an unspecified  basis
      merely because they have previously been granted leave to remain.


   7. Although the First-tier Tribunal determination does  not  engage  with
      the very limited ground put forward  to  it  by  Mr  Ali  Khan  it  is
      inconceivable on the basis of the documentary and oral evidence before
      the Judge that he would have reached a decision other than to  dismiss
      the appeals on human rights grounds as well.


    Error of law - Immigration Rules

   8. The grounds seeking permission to appeal assert  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal judge erred in failing to give any or  any  proper  reasoning
      for  the  conclusions  reached;  that  the  appellants  had   produced
      sufficient evidence to demonstrate that their business intentions were
      genuine; that the judge's findings were speculative, inconsistent  and
      unfounded.


   9. The judge sets out the evidence before him and  gives  the  appellants
      credit for matters that would otherwise have reflected adversely  upon
      their assertions. The judge focussed on the issue at the heart of  the
      appeal namely the genuineness of the business. His findings were based
      upon the evidence before him, taking account of  the  documentary  and
      oral evidence. Mr Mannan very creditably drew attention  to  documents
      that were in the appellants' bundle that  had  not  been  specifically
      referred to by the First-tier Tribunal judge. He submitted that  there
      was no requirement under the  Rules  for  the  appellants  to  provide
      evidence of the nature suggested by the judge for example transfer  of
      some limited funds from the third party prior to their  being  granted
      leave to remain. Although correct in as  much  as  there  is  no  such
      requirement under the Immigration Rules, the  judge  was  not  setting
      additional requirements but was identifying elements of evidence  that
      would or could have  made  a  difference  to  his  assessment  of  the
      evidence overall. The judge clearly had in mind the  documents  before
      him; he comments specifically upon the nature of the documents.


  10. In reaching his decision the judge draws attention to  the  burden  of
      proof being upon the appellants; he gives adequate reasons for finding
      they had not discharged the burden of proof  and  for  dismissing  the
      appeal. His reasons are neither perverse nor irrational. The challenge
      to the findings, although eloquently argued by Mr  Mannan,  is  little
      more than an attempt to re-argue matters  that  have  been  adequately
      heard and determined by the First-tier Tribunal.




          Conclusions:

    There is no error  of  law  in  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal such that it is set aside to be remade.

     The appeal is dismissed.


                                    Date 7th August 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
