
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46881/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 7 January 2015                 |On 13 January 2015                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                              Amber Rose Arnold
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Seeholf, A Seeholf Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of the United  States  of  America  and  her
    date of birth is 14 April 1993.  She made an application for indefinite
    leave to remain on 18 December 2012  on  the  basis  that  she  is  her
    mother's carer.  The application was made outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The application was refused by the  Secretary  of  State  in  a
    decision of 8 October 2013. The appellant did not meet the requirements
    of the Rules  and  according  to  the  decision  maker  there  were  no
    compelling or compassionate circumstances outside of the Rules.

2.   The decision maker was of the view that the  appellant's  mother,  Lady
    Robben could use her disability living allowance and employment support
    allowance to obtain adequate care and  she  could  use  the  facilities
    provided by the NHS and the local authority.  It was the  view  of  the
    decision maker that the appellant's mother was able to obtain such care
    prior to the appellant's arrival in the UK.

3.   The decision  maker's  view  is  that  care  and  assistance  could  be
    provided by  the  appellant's  stepfather  and  brother  and  that  the
    appellant's presence here was not essential for the care of her mother.
     It was concluded that the appellant's mother's medical  condition  was
    not sufficiently compelling for  the  appellant  to  be  granted  leave
    outside the Rules.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the secretary  of  state
    and her appeal was dismissed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Beg
    under Article 8 of the 1950 Convention on Human Rights  in  a  decision
    that was promulgated on 11 July 2014 after a hearing on  3  July  2014.
    Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Warr in a decision of 27
    November 2014.  Thus the matter came before me.

5.   Lady Robben is a citizen of the United States and  she  has  indefinite
    leave to remain here as a result of her marriage to a British  citizen,
    the appellant's stepfather,  Michael  Penny.   The  appellant's  mother
    lives with her husband, the  appellant  and  the  appellant's  brother,
    Remington Wade Arnold-Penny, who like his mother has  indefinite  leave
    to remain here.

The Hearing Before the FtT

6.   The  appellant  came  to  the  UK  in  May  2011.  She  graduated  from
    university in the United States on 13 May 2011.   Since  arriving  here
    she has cared for her mother.  Prior to this she came to  the  UK  most
    summers since the age of 10.  Her father  lives  in  the  USA  and  has
    remarried and the appellant does not get along with her new stepmother.
    The appellant cares for her mother and this was the basis of  her  case
    although she accepted in the grounds of appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that her presence was not essential for the care of her mother
    but it was essential for the enrichment of her mother's life.

7.   Lady Robben  has  arthritis,  fibromyalgia,  high  blood  pressure  and
    asthma.  She had a knee replacement in January 2011.  She suffered from
    serious gynaecological problems in October 2011  and  in  January  2012
    underwent a hysterectomy.  The  evidence  relating  to  her  health  is
    documented by her GP Dr Kopitzko in a letter of 10 March 2014 which was
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   The Judge found that the appellant arrived in the UK on  19  July  2012
    as a visitor and that she had arrived  for  settlement  despite  having
    applied for a visit visa.  She found the evidence of Lady  Robben  that
    she did not know whether her daughter had come to settle in the UK as a
    carer to be lacking in credibility and found that she  was  well  aware
    that her daughter came here on 19 July 2012 to look after  her  and  to
    settle and that she expected her daughter to be her carer when she came
    to the UK.

9.   At [14] the Judge found that the appellant had not spent  twenty  years
    in the UK and that she retains social,  cultural  and  family  ties  to
    America where her father  and  his  family  live  as  do  her  maternal
    grandmother, cousins and aunt.  The Judge found that the appellant  was
    in contact with some relatives.

10.  At [14] and [15]  the  Judge  decided  to  consider  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 outside of the Rules on the basis that the  appellant  is  an
    adult child carer.  The appellant's case is that  her  mother  requires
    supervision and has a high level of dependency and the  issue  was  the
    quality  of  her  mother's  life.   Removal  would  have   a   knock-on
    detrimental effect upon the appellant's stepfather and her  brother  as
    they would have to give up work and in these circumstances there  would
    be no private healthcare for the appellant's mother.

11.  At [17] and [18] of the determination the  Judge  directed  herself  in
    relation to Razgar [2004] UKHL 27, Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and VW (Uganda)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 5.  At [18] the Judge found that the family provided no
    documentary evidence from the Social  Services  to  confirm  that  they
    would not be able to provide a carer.  The  Judge  made  the  following
    findings;

         "18. ...  Mr Penny in his evidence said that some years ago  before
             the appellant came to the United Kingdom the  family  enquired
             from Social Services about the possibility  of  carers.   They
             were told that care can be provided in the daytime.   However,
             he admitted that to his knowledge no  further  enquiries  have
             been made of Social Services since the appellant's arrival  in
             the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  herself  said  in  cross-
             examination that she believes  that  Social  Services  do  not
             provide 24 hour care but can provide carers in the daytime.  I
             find that the family have  provided  no  documentary  evidence
             from Social Services to confirm that Social Services would not
             be able to provide a carer for Mrs Penny.  I find that even if
             carers are provided during the daytime only,  that  in  itself
             would help Mrs Penny with assistance in cooking, dressing  and
             mobility during the daytime while her husband is at work.   Mr
             Penny is at home in the evenings.


         19.  The appellant said that in the  evenings  she  will  give  her
             mother food with her medicine  at  9pm.   If  her  mother  has
             forgotten something downstairs during the night then she  will
             fetch it.  She also helps her go to the  bathroom  if  she  is
             required.  I find that all of these tasks could be done by  Mr
             Penny who lives with his wife and is  home  in  the  evenings.
             The appellant's brother provides limited  assistance  such  as
             doing the gardening and helping his mother move  around  which
             sometimes requires lifting her which the appellant cannot  do.
             I take into account that he works full-time.  I also take into
             account that Mr Penny works full-time.  However  I  find  that
             there is no medical evidence before me  to  suggest  that  Mrs
             Penny requires 24 hour care.  A letter from  Dr  Kopitzko  Mrs
             Penny's registrar is dated 10 March 2014.  It states that  Mrs
             Penny has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia, arthritis, asthma.
              Fibromyalgia generally causes pain  and  tenderness  in  many
             parts of the body and tiredness.  The report states  that  she
             needs extra help on her bad  days.   This  would  occur  about
             three days in the week when she would need help to get out  of
             bed, washing and dressing.  The report states:

                  'On her good days which would appear about  four  days  of
                  the week, she needs minimal input of help which means that
                  she  needs  help  with  her  blister  packs  to  get   her
                  medication and needs some help in  getting  dressed.   She
                  manages on a good day to wash herself, is able to walk and
                  mobilises independently but would need help with cooking.'


             The report also states that she has some memory  problems  and
             reports falling about once a week when she is trying  to  push
             herself to do things."

12.  The Judge accepted at [20] that Lady Robben  has  some  bad  days.  She
    accepted the evidence of Dr Kopitzko.  However,  the  Judge  took  into
    account that Lady Robben is often well enough to  make  sandwiches  for
    the village cricket team and is also able to distribute food  at  these
    events with her daughter.  The Judge found that  whilst  the  appellant
    provides admirable care for her mother, nonetheless there is no medical
    evidence that Lady Robben requires care 24 hours a  day  seven  days  a
    week.  The Judge noted that she is receiving  disability  benefits  and
    that there is no evidence that she would not be entitled to  some  form
    of daytime care if her health warrants it. The Judge accepted that  the
    care from the appellant gives her mother a better quality of life  (see
    [21]).  However, she went onto find that; "that does not translate into
    the appellant being the only  person  who  can  provide  care  for  her
    mother".

14.  The Judge went on to find that there was family life  in  the  Kugathas
    sense (Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31)  and  that  there  was  dependency
    between the appellant and her mother going beyond normal emotional ties
    but  that  the  appellant's  removal  would  be  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim.

15.  The Judge took into account that the appellant has  good  friends  here
    but found that she could keep in contact with them should she return to
    the United States and they could visit her there.  The Judge found that
    the appellant has a home in America and there are family members.

16.  The Judge  found  that  the  medical  evidence  does  not  support  the
    contention that Lady Robben requires 24 hour care.  She found that  the
    appellant has only been here since 2012 and her mother was looked after
    before she came here by her husband and son.  The Judge did not  accept
    the  evidence  of  the  family  that  removal   would   be   "massively
    detrimental".

17.  The Judge found that Lady Robben's husband and son  would  be  able  to
    provide some level of care for her in addition to care provided by  the
    Social Services and/or local authority and that it does not necessarily
    follow that Mr Penny would have to give up his employment as  a  result
    of the decision to remove the appellant.

The Grounds Seeking Permission and the Oral Submissions

18.  The first ground argues that the Judge did not take  into  account  the
    full history and misdirected herself at [13].  She made a factual error
    in relation to the date of the appellant's arrival.

19.  The second ground of appeal argues that there is no way  of  predicting
    what days would be good and what  days  would  be  bad  days  for  Lady
    Robben.  The medical evidence was that  she  is  at  constant  risk  of
    falling.  The Judge failed to make findings  whether  carers  would  be
    provided instantly on the NHS in order to cover such a situation.

20.  The third ground argues that the Judge did not take  into  account  the
    appellant's stepfather's evidence that he frequently travels  with  his
    work and can be away for seven nights or up  to  three  weeks  at  very
    short notice.  The  Judge  did  not  take  into  account  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's brother's shift work pattern. The  evidence
    was that their work could not be adjusted to accommodate Lady  Robben's
    needs.  The Judge failed to engage with the practical difficulties.

21.  The fourth ground argues that the Judge failed to consider  whether  it
    was appropriate for Lady Robben's husband and her son  to  provide  the
    intimate care that is required.  Their evidence is that  they  are  not
    comfortable with this.  There was no reference by  the  Judge  for  the
    need for assistance with washing and  whether  it  was  appropriate  to
    expect them to help her with such intimate needs.

22.  The fifth ground argues that the Judge erred  in  a  finding  that  the
    appellant's stepfather and  brother  could  care  for  the  appellant's
    mother because this was based on an erroneous misunderstanding  of  the
    evidence that they had cared for her prior to the appellant's  arrival.
    This did not take into account the evidence of the deterioration in the
    appellant's mother's health to which there was no reference made by the
    Judge.

23.  Ground 6 argues that the Judge failed to consider that the  appellant's
    presence would save public expense.  In the appellant's  absence  there
    will be a need for daytime care for which the state would have to pay.

24.  Ground 7 argues that all of the witnesses' evidence  was  that  removal
    of the appellant would be detrimental to their lives and there  was  no
    suggestion by the Secretary  of  State  that  their  evidence  was  not
    credible and it was not open to the Tribunal to make such a finding.

25.  Mr Seeholf  made  oral  submissions  in  which  he  conceded  that  the
    appellant's strongest point is that the Judge erred in relation to  the
    chronology ( when it was the appellant arrived here),  but in his  view
    this was a major factual error which  infected  the  overall  decision.
    The Judge did not have regard to the evidence. Indeed she has given the
    impression that she has not had regard to the evidence and justice must
    be seen to be done.  The appellant does not consider  that  she  had  a
    fair hearing in light of this and that her case  has  been  dealt  with
    fairly.

26.  The error impacts on the assessment of  the  appellant's  private  life
    here as she has been in the UK for a year longer than  acknowledged  by
    the Judge during which time two serious medical issues have  arisen  in
    relation mother (in October 2011 and January 2012).

27.  The decision is not fully reasoned.  The appellant's  mother  needs  24
    hour supervision.  The appellant has had difficulty  finding  out  what
    care is available as the Social Services will not assess when  care  is
    already in place.  There is little scope for  planning  and  predicting
    because of the nature of the illness and she needs 24 hour care on  bad
    days and she is at risk of falling at any time.

28.  The Judge anticipated a level of family care is  necessary  and  it  is
    not apparent that she took into account issues relating to the intimate
    care needed by Lady Robben. It   was not explained how her husband  and
    son could provide care and the decision of the Judge was  not  rational
    in the light of the evidence relating to their working hours and  shift
    patterns.  The decision was based on them having historically  provided
    care but the Judge  did  not  take  into  account  that  Lady  Robben's
    condition had deteriorated.   In  this  context  Mr  Seeholf  raised  a
    further fairness point.

29.  Mr Tarlow made oral submissions relying on the Rule  24  response.   He
    accepted that the Judge made  an  error  of  law  in  relation  to  the
    chronology.  However, in his view this was  not  material  because  the
    Judge was aware  of  the  level  of  care  needed  and  the  allowances
    available to Lady Robben.

30.  Mr Seeholf responded and submitted that it  was  difficult  to  extract
    the error from the final analysis made  by  the  Judge.   Both  parties
    agreed that should there be a material error I could go  on  to  remake
    the decision on  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   No
    further evidence had been submitted by either party.

Conclusions

31.  The Judge made a mistake of fact.  The appellant came to the UK in  May
    2011 and not 19 June 2012 as thought by Judge Beg.  Judge Beg  confused
    the chronology.  In addition it was never suggested by  the  respondent
    that there was any challenge to the date  of  the  entry  or  that  the
    appellant had in any way misled the Secretary of State in  relation  to
    the reasons for her visit here. I must consider the materiality of  the
    error.

32.  It was open to the Judge to find that the appellant's  mother  had  not
    established that she was in need of 24 hour care  or  supervision.   It
    was not incumbent on the Judge to make a finding about  the  care  that
    would be available by the  Social  Services  or  the  local  authority.
    There is no challenge to the Judge's treatment of the medical  evidence
    and in any event  the  Judge  accepted  the  evidence  of  Dr  Kopitzko
    contained in his letter of  10  March  2014.   However,  there  was  no
    evidence adduced by the appellant about the level of care available  to
    her mother from  the  Social  Services  and  there  was  no  reasonable
    explanation for this before the First-tier Tribunal.   It  was  not  Dr
    Kopitzko  evidence that that the appellant's mother was in need  of  24
    care or supervision and that the  appellant  was  the  only  individual
    available to provide this.

33.  The Judge in my view was aware of the evidence of  good  and  bad  days
    and it is clear in my view that the Judge understood that there  is  an
    unpredictable element to her  illness  and  that  she  is  at  risk  of
    falling. However, the Judge found that there was no evidence  that  the
    Social  Services  would  not  provide  a  carer   notwithstanding   the
    unpredictable nature of her needs.

34.  Mr Penny's evidence was that he has to go on business  trips  often  at
    short notice.  It was also the evidence that his stepson  works  shifts
    (four nights on and two nights off).  This evidence was not  challenged
    by the Secretary of State.  The assertion in the ground three  is  that
    the Judge did not take this evidence into account but I  do  not  agree
    with this.  The Judge recorded the evidence at [10], [11] and  [12]  of
    the determination.

35.  The Judge found that there was no evidence that the appellant's  mother
    was not entitled to daytime care as provided by the Social Services  or
    the local authority and that she does not require 24  hour  supervision
    or care seven days a week.  What the Judge found is that Lady  Robben's
    husband and son between them can provide a  sufficient  level  of  care
    during  the  evenings  and  this  in  my  view  was  a  reasonable  and
    sustainable finding in the light of  the  evidence  before  the  Judge.
    Indeed, the evidence of both Mr Penny and that of his stepson was  that
    they do assist with Lady Robben's care.

36.  The evidence of the family was that the appellant's mother,  stepfather
    and brother are not comfortable about providing the intimate  level  of
    care required.  In my view there is nothing to substantiate  the  claim
    that the Judge  did  not  take  this  into  account  in  the  balancing
    exercise.  The Judge found that it was of benefit  to  Lady  Robben  to
    have her daughter care for she accepted  that  the  appellant  provided
    good  care  and  there  was  a  close  relationship  between  them  and
    ultimately that the appellant gave her mother a better quality of life.


37.  At [8] the Judge recorded the evidence of the appellant's  mother  that
    prior to her daughter coming  here  she  was  in  a  reasonable  state.
    (However, I note that she had knee surgery in January 2011,  which  was
    five months prior to the appellant's arrival here).  The  evidence  was
    that her health had deteriorated and in my view this  was  accepted  by
    the Judge who accurately recorded the chronology in  relation  to  Lady
    Robben's health condition. The Judge's finding that Lady  Robben's  son
    and husband could provide adequate care is  not  simply  based  on  the
    Judge finding that they did so historically.  It was  the  evidence  of
    both Mr Penny and Wade Arnold-Penny that they attend to  Lady  Robben's
    care needs.  Although I note that Lady Robben's evidence was  that  her
    husband's caring abilities were "utter nonsense" (see [8]), Mr  Penny's
    evidence at [11] was that he has private medical insurance which covers
    the cost of carers after an operation, that he had taken time off  work
    to look after his wife after her recent hysterectomy, which  was  about
    two years ago, and he drives his wife around and helps her to  get  out
    of bed.  In addition he gets her food in the evenings  when  he  is  at
    home and he reminds her to take her medication.  He stated  (see  [10])
    that his wife is able to dress for herself but a lot of the time either
    he or the appellant will help her and she has trouble  with  socks  and
    shoes.  His evidence was that his stepson helps out when he can but  he
    works on a shift system.  Mr Wade Arnold-Penny's evidence was that when
    he is required he will help his mother get in and out of bed and  fetch
    her toiletries and he said that he was  generally  useful  on  mobility
    issues, for example lifting her, and that he works four nights  on  and
    two nights off in a shift pattern with two early starts  and  two  late
    starts.

38.  The Judge found that care and supervision needs were not  as  great  as
    asserted by the appellant and her mother and that daytime care would be
    provided by the social services and or local authority and that between
    them Mr Penny and her son could attend to night time care.

39.  The appellant's presence in the UK may  in  the  short  term  save  the
    state extra money but it is not reasonable to expect a Judge to make  a
    crude financial analysis of the cost of the appellant's  mother's  care
    to the state  and  what  cost  would  be  saved  as  a  result  of  the
    appellant's presence here.  In any event it  is  the  appellant's  case
    that her mother is in receipt of both DLA and ESA.  Any  cost  analysis
    depends on a whole host of factors.

40.  It was open to the Judge to find that there was  insufficient  evidence
    to  establish  that  the  appellant's  removal  would   be   "massively
    detrimental" to the lives of her other family members (see [23]).   The
    Judge in my view did not make as adverse credibility finding,  but  she
    found that objectively the evidence was insufficient to establish  that
    removal would have the impact suggested by the parties.

41.  The determination of the First-tier Tribunal in my view  is  adequately
    reasoned  and  the  decision  is  lawful  and  sustainable.  The  Judge
    erroneously assessed proportionality in the context  of  the  appellant
    having been here since 2012 and not 2011. This error made  no  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal. The Judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had private and family life here and the determinative  issue
    was that of proportionality. It is clear in my view  that  the  Judge's
    decision in relation to proportionality did not turn on her having been
    here since 2012 (as opposed to 2011). The findings in relation  to  the
    mother's care needs are not infected by the error. The Judge took  into
    account the appellant's private life here outside caring for her mother
    (see  [22]).  Unfairness  was  not  raised  in  the   grounds   seeking
    permission, but for the first time in oral submissions.  The  appellant
    has not been deprived of a fair hearing.  It is clear  to  the  parties
    why the appellant lost her appeal.  The Judge gave adequate reasons for
    findings on the central issues in  this  appeal  and  the  fact-finding
    process cannot in my view be legitimately criticised.

42.  The appeal of the appellant is dismissed and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is maintained.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 12 January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

