

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46893/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               VICKY RUIZ FAMA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                       NOTICE OF STATUTORY ABANDONMENT

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal in  relation  to  this
         matter was set aside on 22nd May 2014. A number of  directions  and
         interims hearing have occurred since in relation to the evidence.

      2. On 5th January  2015  the  Respondent  requested  further  time  to
         consider the additional  evidence  following  which  a  letter  was
         written to the Appellants solicitors. A copy of the material  parts
         of the letter is set out below.

      3. As a period of leave as been granted the appeal must be treated  as
         abandoned. Section 104 (4A) Nationally, Immigration and Asylum  Act
         2002 stating:

              " An appeal under section 82(1) brought by a person whilst he
             is in the United Kingdom shall be treated as abandoned if  the
             appellant is granted leave to enter or remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom."




      4. As the appeal must be treated as abandoned by  the  effect  of  the
         statutory provisions there  is  no  longer  an  outstanding  matter
         before the Upper Tribunal upon which a decision can or needs to  be
         made. The matter is concluded.



[pic]

Decision

      5. The appeal is abandoned. There remains no extant matter upon which
         the Upper Tribunal is required to make a decision.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 18th March 2015
