
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46975/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 May 2015                          |On 19 May 2015                       |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MS YIDAN CHEN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimant: Mr C Lam (Counsel instructed by Christine Lee & Co
Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  in  this  matter  is  the  Secretary  of  State.   For
    convenience I shall refer to  the  parties  in  this  decision  as  the
    Secretary of State and the Claimant.

2.   This is an appeal  against  the  decision  and  reasons  of  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Beach) who allowed  the  Claimant's  appeal  against  a
    refusal of leave to remain under Article 8 outside of the Rules  and  a
    decision to remove  her  under  paragraph  10  of  Schedule  2  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971, in a  determination  promulgated  on  13  January
    2015.

3.   The Claimant is a citizen of  China.   She  is  married  to  a  Chinese
    national. They have a daughter born in or around  2012.   The  Claimant
    has lived in the UK since 12 July 2002 continuously and lawfully for  a
    period of nearly thirteen years.  She was absent from the UK  over  the
    last period of ten years for 502 days for  holiday  and  for  153  days
    pursuing an internship.

4.   The Secretary of State refused  the  Claimant's  application  for  long
    residence under paragraph 276B Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended).
    The Secretary of State decided that discretion was not  exercisable  as
    to the periods of absence from the UK.  The  Secretary  of  State  also
    refused the application on the basis of private and family  life  under
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE, which it concluded did not apply. The
    Secretary of State found no exceptional circumstances for consideration
    of Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

5.   The Tribunal  concluded  that  the  claimant  did  not  meet  the  long
    residence Rules on the grounds that the periods of absence exceeded the
    allowed number of days (22).

6.   The Tribunal agreed that the Claimant could not  come  within  Appendix
    FM - family life and or under paragraph  276ADE.   The  Tribunal  found
    insufficient evidence to show the Claimant had lost ties with China and
    or that she would face significant obstacles in re-establishing herself
    in China (24).

7.    In  considering  Article  8  ECHR  the  Tribunal   found   exceptional
    circumstances in the length of  residence  and  the  Claimant's  strong
    private life in the UK (25).

8.   The critical issue for the Tribunal was proportionality.  The  Tribunal
    pursued the step-by-step process as set out in Razgar and  in  addition
    had regard to public interest considerations under Section 117  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (as  amended)(2002  Act).
    The Tribunal found no factors that weighed  in  favour  of  the  public
    interest in removal of the Claimant.  The Claimant spoke  English,  was
    integrated and established in the UK  and  she  and  her  husband  were
    financially  self-sufficient.    There   was   no   evidence   of   any
    countervailing factors.

9.   At [32] the Tribunal weighed up the factors and conducted  a  balancing
    exercise concluding that the decision made was  disproportionate.   The
    Tribunal relied in particular on the length of residence and the strong
    family life which was evidenced in oral  evidence  and  in  letters  of
    support and references submitted to  the  Tribunal.   The  Tribunal  in
    considering proportionality at [32] stated

         "There is no principle of 'near-miss' in respect of  the  ten  year
         lawful residence Rule (or indeed any other Immigration Rule) but  I
         must still take account of the spirit of the law and the basis  for
         it when assessing the length of time that the appellant  has  lived
         in the UK.  ... the spirit of the ten year  Rule  is  to  recognise
         that people who have lived lawfully  in  the  UK  have  established
         themselves in the UK to a degree."

Grounds of Application

10.  In her grounds the Secretary of State argued that the Tribunal  had  in
    fact relied on the near-miss principle in reaching its decision at [32]
    quoted above.  Further it was asserted  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    follow the Nagre threshold of unjustifiably harsh consequences.

Permission to Appeal

11.  Permission to appeal was granted on 24 February  2015  on  the  grounds
    that it was arguable that the Tribunal allowed the appeal  on  a  near-
    miss basis by reference to "the spirit of the  ten  year  Rule"  whilst
    acknowledging that the Claimant did not meet the Immigration Rules  for
    long residence.

Error of Law Hearing

12.  I heard submissions from both parties.  Mr Nath relied on  the  grounds
    submitted in the application and expanded on the same.  Mr Lam produced
    and relied on a skeleton argument.  In  short  he  submitted  that  the
    grounds relied on amounted to a disagreement with the decision made  by
    the Tribunal.  He relied on the Court of Appeal  judgment  in  Mukarkar
    [2006] EWCA Civ 1045 at paragraph 40

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis.  It is of the nature of  such  judgments  that  different
         Tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same case.  The mere fact that one Tribunal  has
         reached what may seem an unusually generous view of the facts of  a
         particular case does not mean that it has made an error of law,  so
         as to justify an appeal under the old system or for  an  order  for
         reconsideration under the new."

Discussion and Decision

13.  In my view the  arguments  before  me  are  finally  balanced.   It  is
    unfortunate that the First-Tier  Tribunal  referred  to  and  used  the
    language quoted from paragraph 32 of the determination  with  reference
    to "the spirit  of  the  law".   This  appears  to  form  part  of  the
    Tribunal's reasoning  for  allowing  the  appeal  and  which  certainly
    initially gave the impression that the Tribunal viewed  the  matter  in
    the near-miss category.  However, having regard to the  decision  as  a
    whole, I am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal  clearly  considered  those
    principles and specifically discounted the application of a "near-miss"
    as the basis for her Article  8  decision.   What  is  clear  from  the
    determination is that the  Tribunal  placed  weight  on  not  only  the
    considerable length of residence (nearly fifteen years)  but  also  the
    evidence of a strong private life that was adduced before the  Tribunal
    and which the Tribunal took into account as weighing in favour  of  the
    Claimant.  In the event that the reference to "the spirit of  the  law"
    could be perceived as an error of law, I am nevertheless satisfied that
    it was not a material error.  This was a carefully considered  decision
    in which the Tribunal in particular had regard to the  absence  of  any
    public interest factors under Section 117 (2002 Act) and placed  weight
    on the Claimant's private life which it found to  be  of  significance.
    The Tribunal did not solely rely on the  fact  that  the  Claimant  was
    unable to meet  the  requirements  of  the  long  residence  Rule,  the
    Tribunal  looked  at  the  totality  of   the   Claimant's   particular
    circumstances.  Following Patel and Others 2013 UKSC  72  the  Tribunal
    must consider under Article 8 the degree to which an appellant fails to
    meet the Rules, and this will amount to a proper consideration relevant
    to proportionality.  I accept the submission made by Mr Lam relying  on
    Mukarkar.  I find no material error of law in the Tribunal's  decision.
    The only failing was the Tribunal's approach to discussion of the near-
    miss principle and the reference to the spirit of the law.  However, in
    the context of the decision as a whole and the evidence that was before
    the Tribunal, I find that this does not amount to any material error of
    law.  The decision was sustainable on the evidence before the  Tribunal
    whose approach to the law overall was sound.

Notice of Decision

I find no material error of law in the determination.

The decision shall stand.

No anonymity order made.



Signed   Date 14.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award made.



Signed   Date 14.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

