
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/46461/2014
                                                               IA/46462/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 15 December 2015                  |
|Delivered Orally                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                         Mr Chirag Mansukhbhal Patel
                           Mrs Mohini Chirag Patel
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a  citizen  of  India  born  on  22
    March 1985, his wife  being  a  dependant  to  his  appeal,  against  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge D Ross, who, sitting at  Richmond
    on 27 April 2015 and in a determination subsequently promulgated  on  8
    May 2015, dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated  5  November  2014  refusing  his  application  for  a
    variation of his leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  under  the  points-based  system  and  for   a
    biometric residence permit and to remove the Appellant and his wife  by
    way of directions under Section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The Appellant had successfully obtained permission  to  appeal  against
    that decision, First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth having been
    satisfied  that  an  arguable  error  of  law  had  occurred   in   the
    interpretation of the relevant Rules.  In that regard it  would  be  as
    well in light of the Home Office concession  were  I  to  set  out  the
    relevant passages from the grounds as follows:

         "(i) The SSHD rejection letter specifically relied  on  Appendix  A
             paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) only, as it was accepted  that  A  had
             met the requirements of (i), (ii) and  (iii)  of  provision  d
             under Table 4 (see pages 2 and 3 of the refusal letter).

         (ii) Therefore the reason the  SSHD  refused  A's  application  was
             because she was not satisfied A had met requirement (iv) which
             requires certain specified  documents  to  be  provided  under
             paragraph 41-SD(e).  It is  clear  that  the  FTJ  erroneously
             failed to direct himself to this paragraph  given  that  there
             was no mention of 41-SD(e) subparagraphs (i) and (ii).

         (iii)    It is submitted  that  a  properly  directed  Judge  would
             address the actual Rules referred  to  and  state  whether  by
             failing to refer to 41-SD(e)(i) and (ii) it could  be  assumed
             that A actually met those paragraphs,  or  alternatively  that
             the decision maker had erred in law  by  failing  to  properly
             address herself to the Rules.

         (iv) This is important as the basis of the refusal,  paragraph  41-
             SD(e)(iii) was not properly  set  out  as  the  basis  of  the
             refusal, paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) was not properly set  out  in
             the refusal letter and erroneously the FTJ  failed  to  notice
             the material error.   The  actual  Rule  as  at  the  date  of
             decision stated:

                  '(iii)   One or more of the following specified  documents
                      covering  (either   together   or   individually)   a
                      continuous period commencing before 11 July  2014  up
                      to no earlier than three months before  the  date  of
                      his application.'"

3.   I would observe more particularly that the Rule was clear that  one  or
    more of the "specified documents listed" covered  a  continuous  period
    commencing before 11 July 2014 up  to  no  earlier  than  three  months
    before the date of the application.  Whilst (1), (2) and (3) related to
    such matters as advertising or marketing material, articles  or  online
    links to  articles  in  a  newspaper  etc.  most  importantly  (4)  was
    expressed as "or" personal registration with a UK trade body linked  to
    the applicant's occupation.

4.    Thus,  following  the  basis  of  the  Respondent's  refusal,  if  the
    Appellant could show that at the time of his  application  he  met  the
    requirements of (4) then his appeal would be likely to succeed.

5.   The Appellant claimed that he was a member of a trade  body  sufficient
    to meet that requirement, namely the ACCA.  The Judge made no  findings
    on whether he actually was a member as claimed and at paragraph  12  of
    his determination he erroneously continued (omitting to notice that the
    requirement at (4) was clearly in the alternative) by stating  even  if
    it was the case that he was a member the Appellant had failed to submit
    with his application any evidence relating to other requirements.

6.   As the grounds pleaded:

         "In short the Judge failed to direct his attention to the fact that
         the Appellant only had to provide one document under this provision
         and contrary to his assertion there was no need to look any further
         within this provision if the Appellant had made out his trade  body
         membership".

7.   It has been noted that most fairly and realistically the Respondent  in
    her Rule 24 response dated 14 September 2015 made it clear that she did
    not oppose the Appellant's application  and  invited  the  Tribunal  to
    determine the appeal afresh.  For the avoidance of doubt at the  outset
    of the hearing before me Ms Sreeraman confirmed that that was the case.

8.   When this matter came before me on 26 November 2015 my first  task  was
    to decide whether the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.  For the reasons set out
    in the grounds and accepted by the Respondent and for like reason, I am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did indeed materially  err
    in law and that in such circumstances his decision must  be  set  aside
    with none of his findings preserved.

9.   We considered how the decision  should  be  remade.   After  discussion
    with both parties it was agreed that the case ought to be heard  afresh
    having regard to the error of law found,  the  length  of  the  hearing
    (estimated at two hours)  and  there  were  highly  compelling  reasons
    falling within paragraph 7.2(b)  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement as to why the decision should not be remade by the  Tribunal.
    It was clearly in the interests of  justice  that  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

10.  For the reasons I have above given and by agreement with  the  parties,
    I conclude therefore that the appeal should be remitted to a First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge D Ross to determine
    the appeal afresh at Hatton Cross Hearing Centre on the first available
    date.  I am informed that for  this  purpose  no  interpreter  will  be
    required.

11.  I was informed by the parties' representatives  that  there  had  since
    been a further development in that it was claimed  that  the  Appellant
    had now achieved ten year's lawful residence.  This of course was not a
    matter for the Tribunal to decide.  It formed no part  of  the  present
    appeal but the question arose as to whether in  the  circumstances  the
    Appellant was entitled to indefinite leave to remain.  This  of  course
    was a matter  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  determine.   I  would
    anticipate that it will, however, form part of the remitted  appeal  in
    all the circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be  set
aside and none of its findings preserved.  I allow  the  Appellant's  appeal
to the extent that I remit the  making  of  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal at Hatton Cross before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  the
Judge to whom I have above referred.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 9 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

