
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46082/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2016                |On 5th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MOIZ ALI SIDDIQUI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison, Counsel instructed by Farani-Javid-
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  and,
    to avoid confusion, I shall refer to her as being, "the claimant".

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  31st  October,  1988.
    The respondent made application to the claimant on 27th August, 2014 to
    switch  from  being  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study)  Migrant  to  a  Tier   1
    Entrepreneur.  At the time of his application he had leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant until 28th  August,
    2014, having first entered the United Kingdom on 10th  May,  2008  with
    entry clearance conferring leave  until  30th  September,  2009,  as  a
    student.  On 12th October, 2009 he was subsequently  granted  leave  to
    remain until 16th April, 2012 as a Tier 4 Student and on  28th  August,
    2012 he was granted leave to remain until 28th August, 2014 as a Tier 1
    (Post-Study) Migrant.

3.    According  to  a  letter  from  his  solicitors,  enclosed  with   his
    application were, amongst other things, leaflets,  business  cards,  an
    advertising  feature  published  on  craigslist.co.uk,  an  advertising
    feature published  on  halo.co.uk,  advertising  feature  published  on
    Yell.com, website printouts, print screen of company  website  position
    on google.co.uk and two invoices, one dated  16th  June,  2014  and  an
    invoice of 2nd June, 2014.

4.   The purpose of the invoices appears to be to demonstrate that  on  16th
    June, 2014 the respondent purchased 1,000 business cards.  He  actually
    purchased them from a printer in Karachi to save money.  The purpose in
    providing the invoice of 2nd June, 2014, from MA Printers  Limited  was
    to prove that leaflets for Mass IT Limited  had  been  printed  on  2nd
    June, 2014.  Unfortunately, there is no indication in the invoice  what
    it relates to, other than, "A5 leaflets".  There does not appear to  be
    any evidence at all to show when the advertising features published  on
    the four websites were published, or to show when the print  screen  of
    the company website  position  on  google.co.uk  was  first  published.
    There is however in the respondent's bundle a document which appears to
    be a  craigslist  website  posting,  but  it  is  headed  "this  is  an
    unpublished draft".

5.   The Secretary of State  considered  the  respondent's  application  and
    issued her decision on 19th November, 2014.   The  respondent  was  not
    awarded 25 points for the "access to funds".  It was considered by  the
    claimant that the respondent had  not  demonstrated  that  he  met  the
    criteria relating to advertising.   The  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that there was evidence to show that the advertising  covered
    a continuous period, commencing on 11th July, 2014 up to  the  date  of
    the  application  as  stated  in  the  Immigration  Rules  and  so  the
    respondent was not awarded any points under any other  provisions.   To
    that extent, the application still remains to be fully decided  by  the
    claimant.

6.   The  respondent  appealed  and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mitchell, sitting at Taylor House on  3rd  March,  2016.
    The hearing proceeded by way of submissions only and in paragraph 9  of
    his determination the judge said this:

         "As has been stated the hearing proceeded  by  way  of  submissions
         only.  Mr Dasgupta  said  that  the  decision  of  the  immigration
         officer was a proper decision although it was surprising  that  the
         officer had not  considered  the  whole  of  the  application.   Mr
         Davison  submitted  that  the   advertising   information/documents
         supplied  with  the  application  met  the  rules.   There  was  no
         requirement  in  the  immigration  rules  to  have  dates  on   the
         advertising  provisions.   Having   heard   the   submissions   and
         considered the matter, it does appear that there is no  requirement
         that the advertising have any dates on them.  It is  only  required
         that the appropriate  advertising  be  provided.   I  was  able  to
         indicate during the course of the hearing that I was satisfied that
         the advertising material met the requirements  of  the  immigration
         rules.  The decision of the [claimant] is not  in  accordance  with
         the rules.  Both representatives as a  consequence  asked  for  the
         appeal to be allowed and the matter returned to  the  Secretary  of
         State for consideration of all the application.  There was a debate
         as to whether the Tribunal had authority to do this.  In  light  of
         the fact that both parties wished the matter to be reconsidered  by
         the Secretary of State it appears to be only  fair  and  reasonable
         that  the  matter  be  returned  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
         consideration of the whole of the application." [My emphasis]

7.   The claimant challenged the decision of the judge  on  the  basis  that
    the judge had not applied paragraph 41-SDE(3).  In paragraph 9  of  the
    determination, the judge found that there was no  requirement  for  the
    advertising material to have "dates on them"  and  while  this  may  be
    true, if one  reads  the  requirements  of  paragraph  41-SDE(3)(i)  in
    isolation the Immigration Rules must be read sensibly according to  the
    natural and ordinary meaning of the word "used".  It  is  not  possible
    for the material, which does not bear dates, to evidence  a  continuous
    period.

8.   Before me today Mr Avery submitted that the  judge's  reasons  for  his
    findings were wholly inadequate.  One cannot  tell  on  what  basis  he
    allowed the appeal.  It is not clear whether he found that the material
    met the requirements of the Rules or not.

9.   For the respondent Mr Davison submitted that the Rules were  clear  and
    there was no requirement for the advertising material to have any dates
    on it.  If the judge was satisfied that the  advertising  material  met
    the requirements of the Rules the matter needed only to go back to  the
    Secretary of State.  In fairness, Mr Davison accepted  that  the  judge
    had not set out a full analysis.  At paragraph 9 he appears to  believe
    that the only issue is whether or not advertising material  have  dates
    on them as opposed to the period  when  the  advertising  material  was
    published.

10.  The judge appears to have only concerned himself with  whether  or  not
    the actual advertising material was dated and decided that it  did  not
    need to be.  That is correct, but an applicant  must  prove  the  dates
    when the material was published in order to meet  the  requirements  of
    the rule.  If the  advertisements  do  not  appear  in  published  (and
    therefore, dated, newspapers or magazines) material then the  applicant
    must prove, in some other manner,  that  the  advertising  covered  the
    continuous period.

11.  The judge erred in his determination which I set aside.  I  remit  this
    appeal to the First Tier Tribunal to be heard afresh de novo by a judge
    other that First Tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell.   If I  were  to  retain
    the matter in the Upper Tier Tribunal it could take many months  before
    the matter  were  to  be  re-listed  before  me.   It  is  respectfully
    suggested that one hour be allowed for the hearing.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the Frist Tier Tribunal  to  be  heard  afresh  de
novo by a judge other than first Tier Tribunal Judge Mitchell.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
