
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46829/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 2 June 2015                        |                   On 5 June 2015     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                             HOQUE A K M NAZMUL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against decisions to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him from the United Kingdom was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Petherbridge ("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on
    29 July 2014.   The appellant was given leave  as  a  student  in  June
    2009, valid until 28 October 20112.  Shortly before expiry, he  applied
    to vary his leave, seeking to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    ("the rules").

2.   At the hearing before the  judge,  the  appellant  was  represented  by
    counsel.  The judge was  told  that  a  friend  of  the  appellant  had
    telephoned to say that the appellant  was  in  hospital  and  would  be
    unable to attend the hearing.  In due course, a note was obtained  from
    St Bartholomew's NHS Trust stating that the appellant had  attended  an
    emergency department with "abdominal pain" and received advice  to  "go
    to local hospital if pain worsens".  The  appellant's  counsel  applied
    for an adjournment, which was  opposed  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
    representative.  The judge  refused  the  application,  observing  that
    there was nothing in the note suggesting that the appellant  was  unfit
    to attend the hearing and that he had been able to travel from his home
    to the hospital in Whitechapel.  The appellant's  counsel  then  stated
    that the appeal might proceed and be determined on  the  basis  of  the
    documentary evidence before the judge.

3.   The judge took into account a witness statement made by  the  appellant
    shortly  before  the  hearing  and  medical  evidence,  which  included
    evidence showing that the appellant had  been  assaulted  in  September
    2009 and received a sum in  compensation  from  the  Criminal  Injuries
    Compensation Authority.  The appellant returned to Bangladesh some five
    months after the incident, obtained medical  evidence  there  regarding
    his injury and then returned to the United  Kingdom.   In  his  witness
    statement, the appellant referred to ongoing treatment for his  injured
    shoulder and stated that he needed leave to  remain  here  so  that  he
    could continue with  his studies although he was  not  well  enough  at
    present to do so.

4.   The judge accepted that the appellant had suffered  a  shoulder  injury
    but found that there was no up-to-date evidence regarding the extent of
    it.  He also found that  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  appellant
    suffered from mental health problems or that  he  would  be  unable  to
    receive treatment  in  this  context  on  return  to  Bangladesh.   The
    appellant's future  plans  appeared  unclear.   He  accepted  that  the
    appellant had established a private life in the  United  Kingdom  since
    his arrival in 2005 and that he had  spent  some  time  since  then  in
    Bangladesh.  There was nothing to suggest that  the  appellant  had  no
    ties to the country of his nationality  and  his  parents  still  lived
    there.

5.   The judge found that the requirements of the rules, including those  in
    paragraph 276ADE, were simply not met.  In a brief  assessment  of  the
    merits of an Article 8 claim outside the rules, the judge drew  on  his
    earlier findings regarding the limited leave the appellant has  had  in
    the United Kingdom, the uncertainty of the evidence regarding his plans
    and the extent of his remaining ties to Bangladesh. He  concluded  that
    removal of the appellant would not be disproportionate.

6.   An application for permission to appeal was made,  on  the  basis  that
    the judge erred in failing to  adjourn  the  hearing.   Permission  was
    granted on 13 April 2015.  The judge granting permission found that the
    decision made  no  mention  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005, which were in  force  in  July  2014  when  the
    appeal was heard, including rule 21, dealing with adjournments. Refusal
    of the adjournment in spite of the note sent by fax from  the  hospital
    and an apparent  failure  to  consider  the  requirements  of  rule  21
    amounted to arguable errors of law.

7.   In a response, the Secretary of State opposed the appeal on  the  basis
    that the judge had directed himself appropriately and that the evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal was insufficient to  show  success.   Mr
    Melvin provided written submissions developing that  case.   The  judge
    was entitled to find that there  was  insufficient  evidence  that  the
    appellant was unwell and unable to attend the hearing.  In  any  event,
    the judge considered the  evidence  before  him.  He  was  entitled  to
    dismiss the appeal, for the reasons he gave.

The Hearing

8.   There was no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.   The  appeal
    was listed for hearing at 10 am. It was called on  forty  five  minutes
    later.   Enquiries revealed that no messages had  been  left  with  the
    administrative staff at Field House.  The case management  file  showed
    that notice of the hearing  was  sent  to  the  appellant  and  to  his
    solicitors on 7 May 2015 at the addresses provided by them  at  earlier
    stages  in  the  proceedings,  including  the  recent  application  for
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   There  was  nothing  to
    indicate any failure of service at all.

9.   I had regard to rule 38 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  I was satisfied that the appellant and his solicitors  had
    each been notified of the hearing by means of postal service  in  early
    May 2015.  It was also apparent  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  taken
    reasonable steps to notify both.  I  considered  that  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed  with  the  hearing  as  there  was  no
    conceivable merit in further delay.

10.  Mr Melvin adopted the rule 24 response  and  his  written  submissions.
    The documentary evidence before the judge  showed  that  the  appellant
    wished to study and work here but had  apparently  not  done  so  since
    2009.  It was difficult to see what other evidence he might have wished
    to adduce, had he been present, beyond the detailed  witness  statement
    made only four days before the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  The  judge
    properly considered the adjournment application and the appellant could
    not have hoped to succeed under the private life  requirements  of  the
    rules. There was insufficient medical evidence before the  Tribunal  to
    show that treatment for his shoulder injury and any  other  ill  health
    would not be available in Bangladesh.  Indeed, some of the evidence  he
    relied upon came from Bangladesh. The decision  contained  no  material
    error of law.




Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  I am grateful to Mr Melvin for his submissions.   I  conclude  that  no
    material error of law has been  shown and  that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12.  The decision is clearly reasoned and shows that  the  judge  considered
    the adjournment application very carefully indeed.  In the grounds,  it
    is contended but he erred in several respects,  the  author  indicating
    that the appellant's friend had sent a text rather than telephoning and
    that the judge had asked  for  evidence  from  the  hospital  that  the
    appellant was actually there rather than indicating that he would  need
    evidence that the appellant was so ill as to be unable  to  attend  the
    hearing.  The "note" referred to by the judge was in  fact  a  document
    sent by fax.  Where the  judge  indicated  in  the  decision  that  the
    appellant's representative  asked  that  the  appeal  proceed  "on  the
    papers", the submission in fact made was that  if  the  judge  was  not
    willing to adjourn then he was "at liberty to deal with the  appeal  on
    the present  evidence".   The  appellant  had  a  history  of  "medical
    condition (sic) and stress related problems".

13.  With respect to the author  of  the  grounds,  none  of  this  shows  a
    material error of law on the judge's part.  Paragraphs 7 to 13  of  the
    decision record events on the morning of the hearing and  there  is  no
    material difference, I  find,  between  the  judge's  summary  and  the
    account which appears in the grounds seeking permission to appeal.   In
    the event, the evidence which emerged from the hospital was very slight
    and simply recorded that if the abdominal pain the appellant complained
    of on presentation  worsened, he should go to a  local  hospital.   The
    judge was entitled to find that this evidence  fell  short  of  showing
    that the appellant was unable to attend the hearing and to observe that
    he had been well enough to travel from his home to a hospital which, it
    seems, was not his local one.

14.  The judge  granting  permission  drew  attention  to  rule  21  of  the
    procedure rules in force when the appeal was heard.  Although the judge
    makes no express mention of it, the substance  of  the  decision  shows
    that he had in mind rule 21(2), which provides that the  Tribunal  must
    not adjourn a hearing on the application of a  party  unless  satisfied
    that the appeal cannot otherwise be justly determined.

15.  The judge made a careful assessment and clearly found that  the  appeal
    could justly be determined on the  day  listed  for  hearing.   He  had
    before him a bundle of documents prepared by the appellant's solicitors
    shortly beforehand, which included a witness statement setting out  the
    appellant's circumstances.  On any sensible view, his case was  a  very
    weak one.  He has had only limited leave, as a student.  He suffered an
    injury in September 2009 and received treatment  for  it  here  and  in
    Bangladesh.  He was unable to complete his studies because of  illness,
    stress and related problems.  Refusal of his  application  for  further
    leave apparently caused him further stress. There was  nothing  in  the
    evidence before the judge remotely suggesting that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to leave under the rules and nothing  to  suggest  any  family
    life here or substantial private life ties.

16.  Overall, the decision shows that the judge made a  careful  and  proper
    assessment of the application for an adjournment and he was entitled to
    refuse it and to proceed with the hearing.  He did not err  in  law  in
    doing so.

17.  No material error of law has been shown  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    decision  on  the  adjournment  application  or  in  relation  to   his
    assessment of the  evidence  before  him.   He  has  given  cogent  and
    sustainable reasons for concluding that the appeal fell to be dismissed
    as the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the  rules  and  had
    failed to show that the adverse decisions and his removal to Bangladesh
    would breach any of his human rights.

Notice of Decision

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no  material  error
    of law, shall stand.




No anonymity direction has been applied for and none is made.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell














