
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46661/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 April 2014                                |On 28 April 2014           |
|                                                |                           |
|Approved extempore decision                     |                           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           KAITHIRY PARANEETHARAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Walker, S. Satha & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    For the sake of convenience I shall refer herein to Ms Paraneetharan as
    the claimant.

 2. The claimant is a national of Sri Lanka born 5 August 1983. She arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 10 September 2008 with leave  to  enter  as  a
    student conferred until 31 October 2010.  That leave  was  subsequently
    extended until 24 September 2013.  On 20 September  2013  the  claimant
    applied for leave to remain on the grounds of  her  marriage  to  a  Mr
    Parameswaran. The Secretary of State  refused  that  application  in  a
    decision of the 21 October 2013 and on the same  date  a  decision  was
    made to remove the claimant from the United Kingdom pursuant to section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2007.

 3. In relation to the Immigration Rules the Secretary  of  State  observed
    that the claimant's husband had neither settled or  refugee  status  in
    the  United  Kingdom  nor  was  he  the  beneficiary  of   humanitarian
    protection. As a consequence it was concluded that she did not meet the
    requirements of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules, a conclusion that
    is not in dispute.

 4. The Secretary of State then, albeit in  the  briefest  of  terms,  gave
    consideration to whether to grant the claimant leave to remain  outside
    of the Immigration Rules, with particular reference to Article 8 of the
    Human Rights Convention; deciding not to do so.

 5. The claimant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   That  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Clarke  on  12  February  2014  and
    allowed on human rights grounds, with reference to  Article  8  of  the
    Convention, in a determination promulgated on 19 February 2014.

 6. It is prudent for me to set out in full the four relevant paragraphs of
    Judge Clarke's determination:

         "10. I  prefer  the  submissions  advanced  by  Ms  Walker  [and  I
             interpose here to note that those submissions are not set  out
             in the determination]. In essence the respondent  saw  fit  to
             grant the husband  discretionary  leave  arising  out  of  his
             application for asylum based upon his fear to  return  to  Sri
             Lanka.  Whilst there are no findings of fact as to whether  or
             not it is not safe for the husband to return there, the  grant
             of discretionary leave until 2016 is to allow him to remain in
             the UK until that time.

         11.  I accept that the appellant has accommodation with her parents
             who still live in Sri Lanka and that she  works  there  as  an
             assistant in an IT shop or following her studies  in  accounts
             she could find work in that field as well.  I  find  that  she
             could communicate with her husband using Skype, the  telephone
             and other methods of communication, but this is not enough for
             a married couple to continue their relationship.

         12.  They currently  live  and  work  together  and  have  a  close
             marriage.  The respondent never challenged the subsistence  of
             the marriage, and they clearly are married  and  enjoy  family
             life together.  I cannot  expect  the  husband  to  visit  the
             appellant  in  Sri  Lanka,  and   therefore,   it   would   be
             unjustifiably harsh for these two  parties  not  to  recognise
             that   human   rights   are   engaged,   and   it   would   be
             disproportionate for them if the appellant  were  not  granted
             leave in line with that of the husband, to  end  at  the  same
             time.

         13.  There are compelling circumstances in this case which is  that
             the respondent saw fit  to  grant  the  husband  discretionary
             leave arising out of  his  asylum  claim,  and  therefore,  he
             cannot be expected to return to Sri Lanka up to the end of his
             leave in 2016."

 7. The Secretary of State  was  granted  permission  to  appeal  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Deans in a decision  of  the  10  March  2014.   It  was
    submitted in the grounds of application, and maintained by Mr  Saunders
    before the Upper Tribunal today, that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in reaching a conclusion that the claimant's husband could not be
    expected to return to Sri Lanka and, as a consequence, the judge  erred
    in her conclusion at paragraph 13 of the  determination,  when  stating
    that there were compelling circumstances in this case for allowing  the
    appeal where the claimant could not meet the terms of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The grounds also assert that the judge erred  in  conflating  a
    grant of discretionary leave to the claimant's husband with a grant  of
    refugee status.

 8. In response Ms Walker settled  a  detailed  Rule  24  notice  and  made
    lengthy oral submissions, the effect of which were as follows:

      i) The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  conflate  the  grant  of
         discretionary leave  with  the  grant  of  refugee  status,  as  is
         evidenced by the terms of paragraph 10 of the determination.

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  the
         claimant's husband could not reasonably be expected  to  return  to
         Sri Lanka, at least until the expiration of his discretionary leave
         to remain.  That was partly a consequence of the respondent "having
         already decided that it would not be proportionate  to  remove  the
         claimant's husband hence the  three  year  grant  of  discretionary
         leave until 2016".

 9. I accept that the judge did not conflate the grant  of  refugee  status
    with the grant of discretionary  leave  to  remain  to  the  claimant's
    husband. This clearly follows, in my view, from the terms of  paragraph
    10 of the determination.

10. However, I do not accept  that  the  determination  discloses  adequate
    reasons for the judge's conclusion that it is not reasonable to  expect
    the claimant's husband to either visit, or to live in, Sri  Lanka.  The
    fact that the claimant's husband has been granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain cannot, of itself, make it unreasonable for him to return  to
    his homeland. This is so even if the claimant's husband's assertion  is
    correct, and he was granted discretionary leave to  remain  because  it
    was found that it would not be proportionate to require him  to  return
    to Sri Lanka permanently.

11. Each case must be determined on its own facts and the  judge  ought  to
    have, but did  not,  give  detailed  consideration  to  the  claimant's
    husband's current circumstances. A  historic  grant  of  leave  may  be
    relevant to such considerations but it is not to be taken as matter  of
    determinative weight. That is highlighted well by the circumstances  of
    the instant case, in which the historic grant to the claimant's husband
    was, it is said, based partially on the fact of the claimant living  in
    the United Kingdom.

12. In my conclusion Judge Clarke failed to provide an adequately  reasoned
    analysis of how she  reached  her  conclusion  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for the claimant's husband to  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  even
    temporarily.

13. There was one further point raised during the course of argument by  Ms
    Walker in reference to paragraph 12  of  the  determination  where  the
    judge stated:

         "I cannot expect the husband to visit the husband in Sri Lanka, and
         therefore, it would be unjustifiably harsh for  these  two  parties
         not to recognise their human rights are engaged."

14. Ms Walker submits that when paragraph 12 is read  as  a  whole,  it  is
    plain that the judge is saying that the husband cannot be  expected  to
    return to visit Sri Lanka, not because it is not reasonable for him  to
    do so but because even if he does so this would still not  be  adequate
    to maintain the family life between him and the  claimant.   I  do  not
    read paragraph 12 of the determination in this way.  In  my  conclusion
    what the  judge  was  saying  in  paragraph  12  was  simply  that  the
    claimant's husband could not reasonably be expected to make  visits  to
    see the claimant in Sri Lanka.

15. If it is right that paragraph 12 can be read in two divergent ways then
    it is difficult to understand how it can also be  maintained  that  the
    determination contains sufficient reasoning for the Secretary of  State
    to understand why she lost this appeal.  If paragraph 12 is to be  read
    in the way in which I find it should be,  then  in  my  conclusion  the
    judge has given wholly inadequate reasons for his findings therein.

16. In summary, looking at the determination as a whole  I  do  not  accept
    that it can be said that the losing party, here the Secretary of State,
    can properly understand why she lost, given  the  dearth  of  reasoning
    which appears therein. For this  reason  I  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.

17. I announced my conclusions at the hearing. Having done so both  parties
    agree that in the circumstances of  this  case  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to remake the decision afresh and I
    take that course, having first considered paragraph 12  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 17 April 2014



