
[pic]
IAC-AH-LR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46241/2013
                                                               IA/46242/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 June 2015                          |On 10 July 2015                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                Mrs veronica rondon londono (first CLAIMANt)
               Mr edwin javier torrez cossio (second CLAIMANt)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Claimants:     Mr S Rungasamy (Lawrence & Associates Solicitors)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing. For convenience I shall refer  to  the
    parties as the Secretary of State, who is the appellant in this matter,
    and to the Claimants. The Secretary of State appeals a decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Andonian)  (FTT)  who,  in   a   decision
    promulgated on 3 November 2014  allowed  the  Claimants  appeals  under
    Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.

2.   The first Claimant, whose date of birth is 25 June 1986, is  a  citizen
    of Venezuela.  She is married to the second Claimant, who is a Bolivian
    national and whose date of birth is 11 May 1976.  They  have  a  child,
    Hayley, born on 4 November 2007.  The first Claimant entered the UK  as
    a visitor in 2002 and thereafter she was granted leave to remain  as  a
    student.  On 24 November 2005 she was granted  approval  to  marry  the
    second Claimant.  Their lawful leave continued on the basis of  student
    and dependent leave until 13 September 2014. The first Claimant's leave
    was curtailed on 23 October  2012  and  expired  on  22  December  2012
    because her Tier 4 sponsor's licence was revoked.   She  submitted  her
    present application for leave to  remain  outside  of  the  Immigration
    Rules on 22 December 2012.

Reasons for refusal

3.   The Secretary of State decided that the Claimants could  not  meet  the
    requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  long  residence  rules.
    Consideration was given to the child Hayley but she was not  a  British
    citizen and had not lived continuously in the UK for seven years at the
    date of hearing in September 2014.  Reliance was also placed on a break
    of four months in the Claimant's period of lawful residence in  the  UK
    notwithstanding that she and her husband  lived  in  the  UK  for  some
    twelve years.

First-tier Tribunal

4.   The FTT found  exceptional  circumstances  for  considering  Article  8
    outside of the Rules; there was only a four month break  in  continuous
    lawful residence by the main Claimant, out of a residence period of ten
    years  [10].   Further,  it  found  that  the  Claimants  were   in   a
    relationship in the UK for twelve years [11].  The FTT considered where
    the best interests of the child lay and concluded that this was met  by
    remaining in the UK with her parents, and extended family members  with
    whom she had close relationships.  It was acknowledged that  the  child
    at the time of the hearing was just under 7 years of age and was not  a
    qualifying child, but in 2 months time, by November 2014 she would have
    attained that age [13/14].   The  FTT  took  into  account  the  public
    interest factors under Section 117B of the 2002 Act (as amended).

Grounds of Application for Permission

5.   The Secretary of State argued that the FTT failed to apply  the  proper
    test in considering Article 8 outside of the Rules as per Gulshan/Nagre
    - whether there were circumstances that would be considered  as  unduly
    harsh.  The Secretary of State argued that

    (1)  The FTT's findings failed to show undue harshness,  compelling  or
         exceptional circumstances.

    (2)  The findings regarding the child were not supported by evidence.

    (3)  The public interest in providing State education for the child had
         not been taken into account.



Permission to appeal

6.   Permission  was  initially  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted on renewal by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic.  She  found  that  it
    was arguable that the four months unlawful residence did in fact amount
    to a compelling circumstance, and further that the FTT failed  to  take
    into  account  conflicting  evidence  as  to  ties  in  Bolivia  and/or
    Venezuela.

Error of Law Hearing

Submissions

7.   Mr Whitwell submitted that the two factors relied  on  by  the  FTT  to
    justify consideration of Article 8 outside of the Rules were  the  four
    month gap and family  residence  in  the  UK  for  twelve  years,  were
    inadequate.  The fact that there was a break in the lawful  period  was
    material, and essentially the decision made by the  FTT  equated  to  a
    "near miss" argument.  The Claimants failed to establish twenty  years'
    residence in the UK, albeit that the twelve year residence was lengthy.
     Reliance was placed on SSHD v SS (Congo) & others [2015]  EWCA  (para.
    48) that public interest factors had not been taken into  consideration
    under Section 117B or as per AM (S117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC).



8.   Mr Whitwell conceded the main point in the grounds as to the  necessity
    of an intermediary test as Gulshan was no longer good law.

9.   Mr S Rungasamy relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  There were compelling circumstances including the length  of
    residence, best interests of the child and the short gap in  residence.
    The FTT heard credible oral evidence from  the  Claimants  about  their
    child. The Secretary of State never considered nor addressed the  issue
    of where the best interests of the child lie which was an error of law.
     This appeal was distinguished from EV (Philippines) save  for  factors
    set out in paragraph 35 including age, length of residence in  the  UK,
    education, etc.

10.  The FTT referred to Section 117B at [15] and took into  account  public
    interest considerations.

Discussion and Decision

11.  It  was  common  ground  that  the  point  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    application regarding Gulshan/Nagre was no longer relevant in  view  of
    the recent decision Sunassee [2015] EWHC 1604  (Admin).   It  was  also
    common ground that the Secretary of State had not met  her  obligations
    under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009,
    although it was acknowledged that this was a matter the Tribunal  could
    deal with (Jo).  It was agreed that the correct approach to  Article  8
    outside of the Rules  was  to  identify  compelling  circumstances  not
    recognized by the Rules and which would lead to an unjustifiably  harsh
    outcome.

12.  I am satisfied that the FTT followed  the  correct  legal  approach  in
    identifying compelling circumstances to justify  consideration  outside
    of  the  Rules.   The  FTT  considered  the  length  of  residence  and
    relationship in the UK of twelve years, the four months' gap in  a  ten
    year lawful residence and the best interests  of  the  child  born  and
    brought up in the UK and whose close  relationships  included  extended
    family members living in the UK. On all of the evidence before the FTT,
    which included credible oral evidence from the Claimants, the FTT found
    that Article 8 outside the Rules was engaged and that the  interference
    was disproportionate.  This approach  is  compatible  with  SS  (Congo)
    (which in the main focuses on leave to enter cases) at [44] and  as  to
    near miss [56].

13.  It is submitted that FTT failed to respond to  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence between the  Claimants  as  to  family  ties  in  Bolivia  and
    Venezuela. I find that this is of little significance given  the  FTT's
    clear finding that the Claimants evidence was entirely credible.  I  am
    satisfied that it was open to the FTT to rely on the oral  evidence  of
    the child's parents in its assessment under Section 55 (2009  Act).  In
    the event that there were inconsistencies in the  evidence,  I  am  not
    persuaded that any such inconsistencies would  be  material  given  the
    weight placed by the FTT on the life in  the  UK.  The  FTT  took  into
    account that evidence and the fact that the child was not a  qualifying
    child at the date of hearing but nevertheless found that her  interests
    lay in remaining in the UK with her parents and extended family members
    including her grandparents. It is clear from the decision that the  FTT
    heard detailed evidence as to the life of the child, her  inability  to
    speak Spanish,  her  education,  social  and  family  connections,  her
    independent life and the lack of ties in either  Bolivia  or  Venezuela
    [12 & 13].  The FTT emphasised the focus  of  this  particular  child's
    life aside from her parents [14]. It concluded that taken together with
    the other factors that her interests were such that they  were  capable
    of outweighing any public interest factors.  Whilst acknowledging  that
    the FTT did not specifically consider the  issue  of  public  funds  as
    regards  to  education,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  FTT  did   engage
    sufficiently with Section 117B and regard was had  to  public  interest
    considerations (AM Malawi)[37].  The decision and reason must  be  read
    as a whole.

14.  I am satisfied that the grounds of the application simply amount  to  a
    disagreement with the decision made  by  the  FTT.  The  assessment  of
    weight and credibility are properly the functions of the FTT who  heard
    the appeal, and whilst another  Tribunal  may  have  made  a  different
    decision, I find no material error on  a  point  of  a  law.   The  FTT
    considered all the relevant  factors  and  made  an  assessment  as  to
    whether or  not  these  amounted  to  compelling  reasons  and/or  were
    proportionate having found that Article 8  was  engaged.   The  factors
    taken cumulatively are capable  of  amounting  to  unjustifiable  harsh
    consequences.  The grounds relied on reveal no material  error  in  law
    that requires the decision to be set  aside  and  remade.  The  reasons
    given by the FTT  were  adequate  and  established  that  the  relevant
    statutory provisions has been considered and applied.

Notice of Decision

I find no material error of law.  The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date 10.7.2015

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as a hearing was necessary.



Signed   Date 10.7.2015
GA Black

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

