
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/46198/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 October 2015                    |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        miss ecaterina marilena goran
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    No representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  (the  appellant)  against
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Easterman who, on 20 May 2015, allowed
    the respondent's appeal against a decision by the Secretary of State to
    remove her pursuant to regulation 19(3) of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).



Background

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Romania. Her date of  birth  is  27  May
    1989. After entering the United Kingdom the respondent married  a  non-
    EEA national. An application was made by the  non-EEA  national  for  a
    residence card but appellant considered the marriage to be a sham.  The
    respondent's husband had already been removed from the  United  Kingdom
    at the date of her appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   The appellant considered  that  the  respondent  herself  ought  to  be
    removed from the United Kingdom on the basis of public  policy  grounds
    in accordance with regulation 21 of the 2006 regulations.

4.   The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal  on  15  May  2015.   No
    documentation had been served by the appellant prior to the date of the
    hearing.  At the hearing the Presenting Officer indicated that  he  had
    copies of an interview with the respondent and her spouse and sought to
    rely on that interview  record.  The  Presenting  Officer  additionally
    indicated that he was in possession of notes from Immigration  Officers
    that could assist the First-tier Tribunal in determining whether it was
    a marriage of convenience and therefore whether the respondent could be
    removed under the EEA Regulations. The Presenting Officer was unable to
    explain why the documents  were  only  provided  on  the  date  of  the
    hearing, in breach of directions. The First-tier  Judge  indicated  his
    awareness that appeals were  being  listed  in  October  owing  to  the
    pressure of work. The First-tier Judge concluded that,  as  no  reasons
    whatsoever had been given by the appellant for the late service of  the
    interview record and the Immigration Officers notes, he would not admit
    that evidence. The appeal thereafter proceeded. The Judge  found  there
    was no evidence before him indicating that the respondent entered  into
    a marriage of convenience. There was therefore no evidence  to  support
    the appellant's claimed basis  for  removing  the  respondent  and  the
    appeal was allowed.

The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

5.   The Secretary of State  sought  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision on the basis that the Judge acted unfairly  in  not  admitting
    the documentation.  It was contended that the better  option  available
    to the Judge would have been to adjourn the  proceedings.   This  would
    have been the fair option having  regard  to  the  seriousness  of  the
    issues before the Tribunal.  Permission was granted on that basis.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

6.   I have heard brief submissions  today  from  Mr  Duffy  supporting  the
    grounds  of  appeal  and  I  heard  from  the   respondent,   who   was
    unrepresented. She invited me to find that the Judge acted  in  a  fair
    way in not admitting the documentation and in allowing the appeal.



Discussion

7.   The allegation made against the respondent is  a  serious  one.  It  is
    alleged that she abused Treaty rights by entering into a sham marriage.
    It is clear from Regulation 2 of the 2006  Regulations  that  the  term
    'spouse' does not  include  a  party  to  a  marriage  of  convenience.
    Regulation 19(3)(c) of the 2006 Regulations  enables  a  person  to  be
    removed from the United Kingdom if the appellant has decided that  that
    person's removal is justified  on  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
    security or public health and is in accordance with Rule 21.   Rule  21
    indicates that any decision taken to remove an  EEA  national  must  be
    taken, inter alia, in compliance with the principle of proportionality,
    must be based on the personal conduct of the person concerned, and that
    the personal conduct must represent a genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    Regulation 20(4)(2) of the 2006  Regulations  indicates  that,  when  a
    decision is taken under Regulation  19(3)(c),  that  person  is  to  be
    treated as if they were a person to whom Section 10 of the  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999 applies.

8.   The issue that I have to consider is whether the First-tier  Judge  was
    justified in refusing to  admit  the  documentation  available  to  him
    despite the breach of directions by the  appellant.  In  assessing  the
    lawfulness of the First-tier's decision I have considered  firstly  the
    nature of the documentation the Home Office Presenting  Officer  sought
    to adduce.  This consisted of an extemporaneous note  of  the  marriage
    interview between the respondent and her husband as well as notes  from
    Immigration Officers.  I  am  satisfied  that  this  documentation  was
    probative and relevant to  the  central  issue  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Another factor that I must consider is the seriousness of the
    issue at stake. I am satisfied  that  the  potential  abuse  of  Treaty
    rights by entering into a marriage of convenience is a  serious  issue,
    one that required full and careful consideration.

9.   I note that no satisfactory explanation has been provided for the  late
    provision of that documentation and Mr Duffy did not seek to defend the
    appellant's conduct.  I must however also consider whether  there  were
    other options available to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  other  than  not
    admitting the evidence that would have ensured a  fair  hearing.  I  am
    satisfied that one option would have been to adjourn  the  hearing,  as
    the First-tier Tribunal itself considered, to enable the respondent  to
    consider the documentation and, if she considered  it  appropriate,  to
    seek legal representation.

10.  The overriding objective of the 2014 Procedure Rules is to  enable  the
    Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly. The First-tier  Tribunal
    has case management powers listed in Rule 4 to  enable  it  to  adjourn
    hearings.  Rule 6 of the 2014 Procedure  Rules  deals  with  situations
    where there has been a failure to comply with the Rules.  I  note  that
    one of  the  powers  available  to  the  First-tier  is  to  waive  the
    requirement or to require the failure  to  be  remedied.  I  have  also
    considered the decision in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT
    00418 (IAC). The head-note of this case recognises  that  the  question
    for the Upper Tribunal is not whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  acted
    reasonably, but whether  the  decision  deprived  a  party  to  a  fair
    hearing.

11.  Applying the principles enunciated above I am satisfied that the First-
    tier Tribunal did act in an unfair manner thus depriving the  Secretary
    of State of a fair hearing.  On the one hand  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was fully entitled to take issue with the breach  of  directions.  This
    had cost implications, both to the public at large and  in  respect  of
    the respondent. The requirement for  an  adjournment  also  wasted  the
    Tribunal's time and resources. I am however satisfied that,  given  the
    seriousness of the subject matter of the appeal and  the  relevance  of
    the documents immediately available at the hearing,  fairness  required
    the admittance of the interview record and  the  immigration  officers'
    notes. I additionally note that there was no assessment by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as to whether the sponsor would have been  prejudiced  in
    any significant manner if an adjournment had been granted.

12.  Given the failure to consider relevant documentation and  to  make  any
    primary factual findings in respect of that  evidence  I  am  satisfied
    that the appeal should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    decided by a judge other than Judge Easterman and for the Secretary  of
    State to serve on the appellant and the Tribunal any  further  evidence
    upon which she intends to rely at least 14 days prior to  the  remitted
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a  material
error of law.

Directions

The appeal will be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo
hearing, all  issues  open,  to  be  heard  by  a  Judge  other  than  Judge
Easterman.

The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  is  to  serve  on  the
Respondent (Ms Goran) and the First-tier  Tribunal  any  documentation  upon
which she intends to rely no later  than  14  days  prior  to  the  remitted
hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
