
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46537/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 18 December 2015                  |
|Delivered Orally                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         patrick ankama arthur-badoo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  appeals  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge K W Brown who, sitting at  Taylor
    House on 15 June 2015 and in a determination  subsequently  promulgated
    on 19 June 2015, allowed the  appeal  of  the  Respondent  (hereinafter
    called the claimant) a citizen  of  Ghana  born  on  15  December  1977
    against the decision of the Secretary of State to revoke his  residence
    card and to refuse him admission to the United  Kingdom  in  accordance
    with  Regulation  19  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006.

2.   The claimant had sought admission to the United Kingdom  under  EC  law
    in accordance with Regulation 11 of the 2006 Regulations on the grounds
    that he was a family member of a French national.  He held a  residence
    card issued by the Home Office on 2 July 2013 valid until 2 July  2018.
    However the Secretary of State was  satisfied  that  the  claimant  was
    divorced from the French national on 1 August  2014  and  there  was  a
    declaration to that effect dated 28 August 2014 and  that  he  was  not
    therefore the family member of an EEA  national  who  had  a  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom.

3.   In her letter of refusal the Secretary of State  pointed  out  that  in
    the letter sent to the claimant when he was  issued  with  a  residence
    card it was stated "The Directorate should be notified  immediately  if
    your family member decides to leave the United  Kingdom  or  ceases  to
    exercise treaty rights here or if you cease to  be  a  family  member".
    Whilst it was noted that the claimant married his spouse on 10 November
    2012 it subsequently came to the Secretary of  State's  attention  that
    the claimant and his French national wife were now divorced.   Thus  as
    he was no longer deemed to be  a  family  member  under  the  2006  EEA
    Regulations  the  Secretary  of   State   considered   the   claimant's
    application to see if he qualified for a Retention of Rights  following
    divorce under Regulation 10(5).

4.   It was the view of the First-tier Tribunal Judge that as the  Secretary
    of State asserted that the claimant was now divorced from his wife  the
    burden rested with her to show that the claimant and his wife  were  in
    fact divorced, and if that could not be shown then the judge must allow
    the appeal following the decision in Diatta (1985) ECJ 267/83.  Further
    and even if the judge  found  that  the  claimant  and  his  wife  were
    estranged, the case of Diatta supported the claimant's  case  that  the
    Secretary of State was wrong in law to make the decisions that were the
    subject to the appeal.

5.   The judge concluded the Secretary  of  State  had  previously  accepted
    that the claimant was validly married to  an  EEA  national  exercising
    Community rights in the UK but in order to take action  to  revoke  the
    claimant's Resident Permit and to remove him to Ghana,  it  had  to  be
    shown by the Secretary of State, that the claimant and his wife were in
    fact divorced.  Accordingly applying the case of  Diatta  he  found  in
    favour of the claimant and allowed the appeal.

6.   In successfully seeking permission to appeal the Secretary of State  in
    her grounds had this to say:-

         "The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had made a material error  of
         law in the determination.

         This  was  a  hearing  in  which  neither  the  Appellant  nor  the
         Respondent was represented. It is acknowledged at the  outset  that
         there were case working errors made by the Home Office in  that  it
         appears that  firstly,  relevant  documents,  namely  the  marriage
         dissolution papers from Ghana, were omitted from the  appeal  file.
         Secondly, it appears that a copy of the appeal file was either  not
         served on the IAC or not available to FtTJ Brown at the hearing.

         That said, it is clear from the determination that the Home  Office
         appeal file had been served upon the Appellant since he was able to
         produce his copy at the hearing and this was copied for use by  the
         Tribunal.

         It is submitted that the FtTJ has erred in the following ways.

         Having been made aware as is clear from the determination that  the
         marriage dissolution documents had been sent to the Home Office  by
         the legal representatives of the Appellant's former  wife,  it  was
         incorrect for the FtTJ to say at paragraph 13 that  the  Respondent
         had 'manifestly' to show that the Appellant was divorced."

7.   I pause there because as Miss Sreeraman pointed out in  the  course  of
    her submissions to me, at paragraph 9 of the determination,  the  judge
    had stated as follows:

         "9.  The  IO  referred  to  the  fact  that  it  is  noted  on  the
             Respondent's files that the Appellant's wife had informed  the
             Home Office on 10 September 2014 that  she  had  divorced  the
             Appellant and that she would be sending proof of  the  divorce
             to the Home Office.  It was also noted that  on  16  September
             2014 a letter was received from her legal representatives that
             included a copy of the divorce certificate.  The IO noted that
             notes attached to the  file  relating  to  the  correspondence
             stated that the Appellant's wife did not want  the  fact  that
             she had informed the  Home  Office  of  the  divorce  and  had
             provided proof to  be  disclosed  to  the  Appellant.  The  IO
             telephoned the Appellant's wife who stated  that  he  had  not
             lived with her since 18 September 2014 when  she  had  changed
             the locks on her fault  because  she  had  been  subjected  to
             emotional abuse from the Appellant. she had  stated  that  she
             had called her family in Ghana to  organise  the  divorce  and
             that the certificate had been  sent to the Home  Office.   She
             had said that she was still living with the Appellant  at  the
             time of the divorce but she was scared to tell  the  Appellant
             that he had threatened her that if she divorced she would live
             to regret it.  A copy of  the  telephone  interview  was  made
             available in the bundle."   (Emphasis added)

8.   In such circumstances Miss Sreeraman submitted that for  the  judge  at
    paragraph 13 to state that "the Respondent  has  manifestly  failed  to
    show that they are divorced" flew in the face of the  evidence  to  the
    contrary, indeed acknowledged by the judge at paragraph 9.

9.   The grounds continue as follows:-

         "It was clear that the documents existed and who had  them.  It  is
         submitted that the correct course of action would have been to have
         afforded the same courtesy to the unrepresented Respondent as would
         have inevitably have been afforded to an unrepresented Appellant in
         that he would have been given the opportunity by way of recess  or,
         if necessary, adjournment of the case in order for the documents to
         be produced.

         It is submitted that failing  to  adjourn  in  these  circumstances
         unfairly disadvantaged the Respondent notwithstanding her  admitted
         case working errors.

         It is further submitted that the FtTJ has failed to have regard  to
         the provisions of there relevant case law in this case, in that the
         matter of the continuance of a claimed marriage was at  the  centre
         of things.

         The FtTJ had had no regard whatsoever to Kareem (Proxy marriages  -
         EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 or to TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana
         [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC) in deciding on the original validity  of  the
         claimed marriage and subsequently whether  a  claimed  divorce  was
         either valid or not needed.  The  Appellant's  former  wife  was  a
         French national and  TA  requires  the  Tribunal  to  look  at  the
         validity of the marriage in the context of  the  laws  of  the  EEA
         national's home country.

         It is submitted that failure to engage  relevant  case  law  is  an
         error of law."

10.  Indeed, in granting permission to the Respondent on 7  September  2015,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies stated as follows:

         "The  judge  finds  at  paragraph  13  of  his  decision  that  the
         Respondent had 'manifestly failed' to show that the  Appellant  and
         his wife were divorced. It is arguable that such a  finding  is  in
         direct conflict with the acknowledgement by the judge in  paragraph
         9 of his decision that such evidence existed."

11.  FtTJ Davies proceeded to grant permission in  respect  of  all  of  the
    grounds having been satisfied that they disclosed  arguable  errors  of
    law.

12.  Thus the appeal came before me on 26 November 2015 when my  first  task
    was to decide whether the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge disclosed an error or errors on a point of law such as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

13.  I was aware of the fact that the claimant was not  legally  represented
    and therefore I both carefully explained  to  him  the  nature  of  the
    hearing and also ensured that he was provided with a  further  copy  of
    the Tribunal bundle in relation to  which  by  way  of  refreshing  his
    memory, I read over to him the Respondent's  grounds  of  challenge  to
    which I have above referred. He confirmed  to  me  that  he  understood
    clearly what the position was and indeed told me that  he  had  himself
    carefully considered the decision of the Tribunal in Kareem. I afforded
    him the opportunity to take notes of Miss Sreeraman's submissions which
    he did and having heard her submissions I  listened  carefully  to  the
    submissions of the claimant. Interestingly  he  told  me  that  he  had
    himself "not been given the chance to see the certificate" although  he
    did not accept that it was genuine.

14.  The claimant further  submitted  that  having  himself  considered  the
    guidance in Kareem he believed that even if the judge had followed that
    guidance, in the claimant's opinion, the judge was to come to the  same
    decision.

15.  Miss Sreeraman relied on the grounds and  submitted  that  although  no
    application for an adjournment was made by the Secretary of State prior
    to the hearing, the fact remained that the Secretary of State  was  not
    represented at the hearing and that the judge's failure to  adjourn  of
    his own motion in circumstances when it was within his  knowledge  that
    the divorce document did exist, unfairly disadvantaged the Secretary of
    State and effective deprived her of a fair hearing.

16.  Further and in any event, the determination was  materially  flawed  by
    virtue of the fact that the judge failed to have regard to  Kareem  and
    TA in his consideration of whether or not there continued to be a valid
    marriage or indeed a valid divorce. He had then allowed the appeal when
    it conflicted with the evidence of the wife that a  divorce  had  taken
    place.  Miss Sreeraman maintained therefore  that  such  reasoning  was
    perverse and irrational "at the very least".

17.  At the conclusion of the parties' respective  submissions,  I  informed
    them that I was satisfied that the judge had materially  erred  in  law
    such that his decision should be set aside.

18.  It is well to remind  ourselves  that  the  important  case  of  Kareem
    confirmed  that  the  starting  point  was  whether  the  marriage  was
    contracted in accordance with the national law of the Member  State  of
    the qualifying person. Indeed at head note (g) it is stated inter alia

         "It  should  be  assumed  that  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage and the laws of  the
         EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place  the
         Tribunal is likely to be unable to  find  sufficient  evidence  has
         been provided to discharge the burden of proof."

19.  This reflected paragraph 14 of Kareem where the following was stated:

         "14. Whilst considering the  issue  of  evidence  of  marriage,  we
             remind ourselves that the proof of the law of another  country
             is by evidence, including proof of private  international  law
             of that other country. Such evidence will  not  only  have  to
             identify relevant legal provisions in the  other  country  but
             identify how they apply in practice. A  lack  of  evidence  of
             relevant foreign law will normally mean that  the  party  with
             the burden of proving it will fail."

20.  This decision was reinforced by the Tribunal in TA and  Others  (above)
    in which the head note stated inter alia as follows:

         "Following the decision in Kareem ... the determination of  whether
         there  was  a  marital  relationship  for  the  purposes   of   the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006  must  always  be  examined  in
         accordance with the laws of the Member State from which  the  Union
         citizen obtained nationality."  [My underlining]

21.  It would also be as well to point out that at paragraph  8  of  Kareem,
    it was noted that the CJEU found that whether a person was married  was
    a  matter that fell within the  competence  of  the  individual  member
    states. In that regard and whilst on the subject of relevant case  law,
    it  was  well  to  take  account  of  the  following  cases.    In   SH
    (Afghanistan) [2011]  Civ  1284  it  was  held  inter  alia  that  when
    considering whether the judge ought to have granted an adjournment  the
    test was not whether his decision was  properly  open  to  him  or  was
    Wednesbury unreasonable or perverse. The test and  the  only  test  was
    whether it was unfair. In Nwaige (Adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT
    00418, a decision of the President, the guidance in SH was endorsed and
    it was thus further stated that the question to ask was "was there  any
    depravation of the affected party's right  to  a  fair  hearing".   The
    President further referred to the fact that the provisions of the Rules
    had to  be  construed  and  applied  by  reference  to  the  overriding
    objective enshrined in Rule 4, namely:

         "... to secure the  proceeding  before  the  Tribunal  are  handled
         fairly,  quickly  and  as  efficiently  as  possible;   and   where
         appropriate, that members of the Tribunal have  responsibility  for
         ensuring this in the interests of the parties  to  the  proceedings
         and in the wider public interest."

22.  In that regard I am mindful that no application  in  the  present  case
    for an adjournment was made by the Secretary  of  State  prior  to  the
    hearing but as  the  grounds  submit,  give  that  it  was  clear  that
    documents were said to exist to show that the claimant was divorced and
    mindful that the Secretary of State was as much a party to this  appeal
    as was the claimant and thus entitled to the same sensitivity and  duty
    of fairness, the judge could on his own  volition  have  adjourned  the
    appeal.  He could for example have required the Secretary of  State  to
    adduce supporting documentary evidence and for the claimant to have the
    opportunity to comment upon such evidence. As held in MM (Fairness E&R)
    Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) where there is a defect or impropriety of
    a procedural nature in the proceedings  at  first  instance,  this  may
    amount to a material error of law requiring a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to be set aside.

23.  I am mindful that as submitted by the Secretary  of  State  there  were
    case working errors made by the Home Office in that relevant documents,
    namely the marriage certificate and marriage  dissolution  papers  from
    Ghana were omitted from the appeal file. Again MM further held that  an
    error of law might be found to have  occurred  in  circumstances  where
    some material evidence through no fault of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    not considered,  with  resulting  unfairness  and  so  I  find  in  the
    circumstances of this case.

24.  It is necessary for judges to identify and  resolve  key  conflicts  in
    the evidence and explain in clear and in brief terms their  reasons  so
    that the  parties  can  understand  why  they  had  won  or  lost.  See
    Budhathoki (Reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00340.  I find that this
    has not happened in  the  present  case.   Further  the  decisions  and
    guidance in Kareem and TA significantly predated the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge, yet there is nothing in his reasoning to
    suggest that he was mindful or even aware of  their  guidance.  As  the
    former Immigration Appeal Tribunal (IAT) made clear in the past, it was
    always unfortunate when an Immigration Judge appeared to operate  in  a
    vacuum as if reported decisions of  the  Tribunal  did  not  exist  for
    guidance and consideration.

25.  For the above reasons I have concluded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge materially erred in law and as a consequence his decision  should
    be set aside.  I have considered how the decision should be remade  and
    after discussion with both parties I have agreed with their  submission
    that the case should be heard afresh. I agree.

26.  We further agreed having regard to the  error  of  law  found  and  the
    likely length of the hearing that there were highly compelling  reasons
    falling within paragraph 7.2(b)  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement as to why the decision should not  be  remade  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal to determine in the interest of judge and that the  appeal  of
    the claimant should be heard afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

27.  For the reasons that I  have  above  given  and  by  agreement  of  the
    parties I conclude therefore that the appeal should be  remitted  to  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  K  W
    Brown to determine the appeal afresh  at  Taylor  House  on  the  first
    available date with a time estimate of 3 hours. In  this  regard  I  am
    told by the claimant that there are likely to be three witnesses giving
    oral evidence  including  himself  and  that  no  interpreter  will  be
    required.

28.  I was most helpfully  advised  by  Miss  Sreeraman  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the divorce documents concerned  in  this  case
    are contained in the claimant's  former  partner's  file  and  she  has
    undertaken to ensure that it  is  made  available  in  advance  of  the
    remitted hearing in that copies will be served upon  the  claimant  and
    the Tribunal comfortably in time.

Notice of Decision

29.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside and none of their findings preserved.

30.  I allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the extent that I remit  the
    making of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House  before
    a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than the judge to whom I  have  above
    referred.

31.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
