
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46227/2013
                                                               IA/46214/2013
                                                               IA/46222/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                          |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20 August 2014                               |On 3 September 2014        |
|Signed 21st August, 2014                        |                           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RICHARD CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                      DR. CHRISTOPHER CHINEDU OBIAJUNWA
                                                               1st Appellant
                     MRS ANN-PRINCESS CHETACHI OBIAJUNWA
                                                              2nd  Appellant
                          PRYLLA CHIDINMA OBIAJUNWA
                                                               3rd Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: No Appearance
For the Respondent: Mr C Dewison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The first named Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and is  the  husband
      of the Second named Appellant  and  the  father  of  the  Third  named
      Appellant.  The Second and Third named Appellants are also citizens of
      Nigeria and the Third named Appellant is the daughter  of  the  Second
      named  Appellant.   They  were  born  on  the  27  October,  1964,  24
      September, 1982, and the 11 April, 2002 respectively.  The  First  and
      Second  named  Appellants  have  two  other  children  who   are   not
      appellants, because they were born  to  the  First  and  Second  named
      Appellants after their arrival in the United Kingdom.

   2. On the 27 February, 2013 the First named  Appellant  made  application
      for further leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  2
      (General)  Migrant  and  for  a  Bio  Metric  Residence  Permit.   The
      Secretary of  State  refused  the  application  on  24  October  2013,
      asserting that the Appellant had relied on false documentation for the
      purpose of obtaining a previous variation of leave.  On the 29  March,
      2014, the First named Appellant had  submitted  documents  from  Abuja
      State of Nigeria which the Respondent believed were  not  be  genuine.
      In the light of this, the Secretary of State deemed  that  refusal  of
      the Appellant's application was appropriate under Paragraph 322(2)  of
      Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HC  395,  as  amended  ("the
      Immigration Rules") and was not prepared to exercise her discretion in
      his favour.  The Second and Third Appellants' appeals are dependant on
      the First named Appellant and their applications were likewise refused
      by the Secretary of State.

   3. The Appellants appealed the Respondent's decisions and  their  appeals
      were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox  at  a  hearing  in  North
      Shields on the 2 February 2014.  In his determination, promulgated  on
      the 20 January, 2014, the judge said at Paragraph 6 that the burden on
      proof was on the Appellant and that the standard of  proof  was  on  a
      balance of probabilities.  He noted that the Respondent's officers had
      conducted a further enquiry in relation to the  income  tax  clearance
      certificates provided by the First named Appellant in support  of  his
      original application  of  29  March,  2011.   The  Chairman  or  Chief
      Executive of a State Board of Internal Revenue had  confirmed  to  the
      Respondent in an email that the documents in question were false.  The
      judge indicated at Paragraph 13  of  his  determination  that  he  was
      satisfied that the documents used by the Appellant  were  not  genuine
      and that the Respondent  was  correct  in  refusing  the  First  named
      Appellant's leave.

   4. Grounds  of  appeal  were  submitted  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants,
      challenging the judge's decision and asserting that he had  failed  to
      make proper findings in respect of facts that were material  and  that
      he had introduced grounds which were not raised by  the  Secretary  of
      State.  In relation to that challenge, he noted that the  First  named
      Appellant had failed to provide any evidence to show that he  met  the
      maintenance requirements of the Immigration Rules, but he did  not  go
      on to consider the substantive appeal in any event,  having  concluded
      that it was sufficient having found that the First named Appellant had
      relied on false documents, simply to dismiss the appeal.  There was  a
      second challenge raised by the Appellant in respect of the Appellants'
      Article 8 claim.  In granting permission,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Page suggested that the grounds were arguable and that they  allege  a
      number  of  factual  errors.   At  Paragraph   12   of   the   judge's
      determination the judge said incorrectly that the  Appellants'  bundle
      of documents contained  no  formal  certification  from  the  Nigerian
      Government that the First Appellant's tax documents  could  be  relied
      upon.  At Pages 16 and 17 of the First named Appellant's documents are
      letters dated the  23  February  2011  and  the  14  September,  2011,
      purporting  to  have  been  issued   by   the   Nigerian   Government,
      authenticating the First named Appellant's tax documents.   These  are
      documents which the Respondent sought to verify.

   5. At a hearing before me on the 31 March 2014 I was satisfied  that  the
      judge had materially erred in law by failing to take account of  these
      documents.  During the course of that hearing I pointed out  that  the
      judge appeared to have made a second error on a point in law  in  that
      he had  indicated  that  the  standard  of  proof  was  a  balance  of
      probabilities and that the burden fell on the Appellant.  No where had
      he  properly  directed  himself  in  law  in  recognising  that  where
      allegations of forgery are made by the Respondent, the burden of proof
      shifts to the Respondent to prove such allegation.  I found a  further
      error of law and set aside the determination.

   6. My reasons for finding an error of law are re-produced in the appendix
      to this determination.

Hearing on the 20 August 2014

   7. Notice giving the  date,  time  and  place  for  the  hearing  of  the
      Appellants' adjourned appeal were sent to the three Appellants and  to
      their solicitors by first class pre-paid post on  the  11  July  2014.
      This morning at 10.15a.m. there was no appearance by or on  behalf  of
      either the Appellants or their solicitors.

   8. My usher telephoned the Appellants' solicitors  and  was  subsequently
      called back and told that the solicitors had not  had  notice  of  the
      hearing.

   9. Perusal of the file shows that notice of the hearing was sent not only
      to the Appellants' solicitors but also to each of the Appellants.   No
      explanation for the Appellants failure to attend the hearing has  been
      given.

  10. I commenced the hearing at 10.30 am.   I  am  satisfied  that  in  the
      circumstances I am required to proceed with the hearing of the  appeal
      in the absence of any satisfactory explanation for the  non-appearance
      of the Appellants.

  11. For the Secretary of State, Mr Dewison reminded  me  that  I  directed
      that the Respondent reviews her reasonable endeavours to  provide  any
      up to date verification report to the Appellants'  solicitors  at  the
      earliest opportunity and that in any  event  no  later  than  14  days
      before the hearing which would not be before the 10 June 2014.  The up
      to date verification report was in respect of the tax documents relied
      on by the Appellant.  Mr Dewison told me that he now had an up to date
      verification report, a copy of which he gave to  me.   He  advised  me
      that it had been sent to the Appellants' solicitors  by  facsimile  on
      the 9 May 2014.  He told me that according  to  a  facsimile  delivery
      report on his file it was successfully delivered  to  the  Appellants'
      solicitors on the 9 May 2014.

  12. The evidence comprised in the up to date verification report consisted
      of a copy of an email sent by a member of the Verification Unit of the
      Visa Section at the British High Commission, Lagos to the Abuja  State
      Board of Internal Review.  It explained that as part of the  officer's
      daily duties he  requested  to  verify  the  authenticity  of  various
      documents submitted in applications for UK visas.  He attached scanned
      copied of the   income  tax  clearance  certificate,  the  income  tax
      receipt and the  references issued  in  respect  of  the  First  named
      Appellant and relied upon by him as being genuine.  He asked that  the
      attached documents be confirmed as genuine.

  13. The reply, signed by the Executive Chairman, confirms that not only is
      the income tax receipt and income tax certificate not genuine, but the
      clearance confirmation letter of the 23 February 2013, is not  genuine
      and the letter of September 14, 2011 is also false.  The  letter  goes
      on to confirm that none of the documents were issued  by  or  emanated
      from any tax office in Abuja state.

  14. Ordinarily, in immigration appeals, the burden  of  proof  is  on  the
      Appellant and the standard of proof is on a balance of  probabilities.
      However, where, such as in this case, the Secretary of  State  asserts
      that the documents relied upon by an Appellant are false the burden of
      proof shifts and is with the Respondent.

  15. I am satisfied on the evidence before me that documents relied upon by
      the First named Appellant in connection with his visa  application  on
      the 29 March 2011, are false.  I find that the Secretary of State  has
      satisfied  me  that  she  was  entitled  to  refuse  the  First  named
      Appellant's application made on the 22 February, 2013, under Paragraph
      322(2).

  16. First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox appears to have assumed  that  in  their
      notices of appeal, the Appellants had raised a  human  rights  appeal.
      Unfortunately I can find no record anywhere or them ever having raised
      a human rights appeal.

  17. Nonetheless the judge considered their rights under Article 8  of  the
      European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
      Freedoms and it seems to me only fair that I should do the same.

  18. I considered Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellants are
      a family unit and if one of them were to be removed  from  the  United
      Kingdom they would all be removed as a unit.  None of  the  appellants
      would appear to qualify  under  paragraph  276ADE.   Applying  Gulshan
      (Article 8 - New Rules - Correct  Approach)  [2013]  UK  UT00640(IAC),
      KABIA (MF Para 398 - Exceptional Circumstances Gambia [2013]  UK  UT59
      and Nagray v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC
      720 (Admin) I can find no exceptional circumstances which would permit
      me to consider the matter outside the rules.

  19. I therefore dismiss the Appellants' Article 8 human rights appeal.

  20.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox  materially  erred  in  law  in  his
      determination of the appellants'  immigration  appeals,  which  I  set
      aside.  I remake the decision myself.   The  Appellants'  appeals  are
      dismissed.  The Appellants' Article 8 Human Rights  Appeals  are  also
      dismissed.

Signed[pic]
Judge Chalkley
Judge of the Upper Tribunal









                       The appendix above referred to

APPELLANTS: Christopher Chinedu Obiajunwa (first Appellant)
              Ann-Princess Chetachi Obiajunwa (second Appellant)
              Prylla Chidinma Obiajunwa  (third Appellant)


RESPONDENT: SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

CASE NOS:        IA/46227/2013
      IA/46222/2013
      IA/46214/2013


DATE OF INITIAL HEARING IN UPPER TRIBUNAL: 31st March, 2014


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Ms B Asigo
For the Respondent:    Mr P Mangion, Home Office Presenting Officer


REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT ITS
DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE


1.    The first named appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and is  the  husband
    of the second named appellant and father of the third named  appellant.
    The second and third named appellants are also citizens of Nigeria  and
    the third named appellant is the daughter of the second appellant.  The
    first named appellant was born on 27th October, 1964 and his  wife  was
    born on 24th September, 1982 and his daughter was born on  11th  April,
    2002.  The first and second named appellants have  two  other  children
    who are not appellants because they were born to the first  and  second
    named appellants after their arrival in the United Kingdom.

2.    On 22nd February, 2013 the first named appellant made application  for
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  2  (General)
    Migrant and for a biometric residence permit.  The Secretary  of  State
    refused that application asserting that the  appellant  had  relied  on
    false documentations for the purpose of obtaining a previous  variation
    of leave.  On 29th March, 2011 the first named appellant had  submitted
    documents from Abia State of Nigeria that the respondent believed  were
    not to be genuine.  In the light of this she deemed  that  refusal  was
    appropriate under paragraph 322(2) and was  not  prepared  to  exercise
    discretion in his favour.  The second and third appellants' appeals are
    dependent on the first named appellant.

3.    The appellants appealed the respondent's  decision  and  their  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fox  at  a  hearing  in  North
    Shields on 2nd January, 2014.  In his determination  of  20th  January,
    2014 the judge said at paragraph 6 of his determination that the burden
    of proof was on the appellant and the standard of proof required  is  a
    balance of probabilities.  He noted that the respondent's officers  had
    conducted a further enquiry in relation to  the  income  tax  clearance
    certificates provided by the appellant in support of  his  application.
    The chairman or chief executive of the State Board of Internal  Revenue
    had confirmed to the respondent in an email  that  the  documents  were
    false.  The judge indicated at paragraph 13 of his  determination  that
    he is satisfied that the documents  used  by  the  appellant  were  not
    genuine and that the respondent was  correct  in  reviewing  the  first
    named appellant's leave.

4.    Grounds of appeal were submitted on behalf  of  appellant  challenging
    the judge's decision asserting  that  he  had  failed  to  make  proper
    findings in respect of  facts  that  were  material  and  that  he  had
    introduced grounds which were not raised by the Secretary of State.  In
    relation to that challenge he noted that the appellant  had  failed  to
    provide any evidence at  all  to  show  that  he  met  the  maintenance
    requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  but  as  pointed  out  by  the
    appellant's representative Ms Asigo today that was not  something  that
    was in issue because it seems the respondent did not go on and consider
    the substantive appeal but concluded  that  it  was  sufficient  having
    found that the appellant relied on false documents  simply  to  dismiss
    it.

5.    There was another challenge raised by the appellant in respect of  the
    appellant's  Article  8  claim.   In  granting  permission   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page suggested that the grounds were arguable  and  that
    they allege a number of factual errors.  At paragraph 12 of the judge's
    determination the judge said incorrectly that the appellant's bundle of
    documents  contained  no  formal  certification   from   the   Nigerian
    government that the first appellant's tax  documents  could  be  relied
    upon.  At pages 16 and 17 of  the  appellant's  documents  are  letters
    dated 23rd February, 2011 and 14th September, 2011 purporting  to  have
    been  issued  by  the  Nigerian  government  authenticating  the  first
    appellant's tax documents.  They are  documents  which  apparently  the
    respondent again  sought  to  verify.   I  am  satisfied  having  heard
    argument from both representatives that the judge has erred  and  there
    clearly are letters at pages 16 and 17 of the appellant's bundle  which
    the judge appears not to have taken account of.

6.    In reading the determination it appeared to  me  that  the  judge  had
    erred in relation to what he said concerning the burden of  proof.   He
    identified  the  correct  burden  of  proof  at  paragraph  6  of   his
    determination and identified that generally it was for the appellant to
    prove issues relied upon and that the standard of proof was  a  balance
    of probabilities.  Very fairly in my view Mr Mangion accepted that  the
    Immigration Judge had not anywhere in  his  determination  demonstrated
    that he had properly directed himself on the law  in  recognising  that
    where allegations of forgery are made by the respondent the  burden  of
    proof shifts to the respondent.

7.    Again, very fairly in my view, Mr Mangion accepted that he  could  not
    argue that this was a Robinson obvious point not having been identified
    by the appellant's solicitors but having been identified by me from the
    determination.  I am satisfied that there are errors  of  law  in  this
    determination  such  that  it  cannot   stand.    I   set   aside   the
    determination.  None of the findings of fact are preserved.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

