

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46139/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 3rd November 2015                         | On 12th November 2015        |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                              mr roland Okunhon
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Osung - Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr J Harrison - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Roland Okunhon, a  citizen  of  Nigeria  born  6th
    October 1984.  He  appeals  against  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimes issued on 21st May  2015  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent made on  4th  November  2014  to
    grant a Residence Card on the basis of his claimed  retained  right  of
    residence in the UK.

 2. On 26th August 2015  Designated  Judge  Zucker  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  He said:

         "The grounds submit that the Judge imposed too  high  a  burden  of
         proof.  Given the guidance  in  HS  (EEA:  revocation  of  retained
         rights) Syria [2011] UKUT 00165 para 59, the grounds are arguable."

 3. The  Appellant  had  entered  the  UK  in  August  2006  as  a  working
    holidaymaker.  He married a Portuguese national on 18th July  2008  and
    on 30th July 2010 was issued with a Residence Card as the family member
    of an EEA national, valid until 24th August 2014.  He and his wife then
    divorced.  The Decree Absolute is dated 17th June 2014.

 4. Judge Grimes determined this case on the papers  as  requested  by  the
    Appellant.  According to the written submissions the  Appellant's  wife
    had been employed on a part-time basis and was also self-employed as  a
    domestic worker throughout the marriage.  Judge  Grimes  dismissed  the
    appeal because she was not satisfied that the Appellant had established
    to the standard of proof required that his ex-wife had been  exercising
    Treaty Rights in the UK.  She noted in the determination the  documents
    that she had before her.  There were payslips from 2009; a  tax  return
    calculation from HMRC for  2012/13  reflecting  an  income  from  self-
    employment for that tax year; a letter from  HMRC  dated  31st  January
    2014;  payment  requests  for   HMRC   national   insurance   class   2
    contributions for the periods October 2013 to April 2014 and 6th  April
    to 11th October 2014.

 5. Judge Grimes noted that there was no evidence of any  working  activity
    in 2008 and evidence only of employment for two months in 2009.   There
    was no evidence of activity in 2010 or 2011 and the partial tax  return
    for 2012/13 did not show that  the  Appellant's  ex-wife  was  employed
    throughout that period.  The letter from HMRC dated 31st  January  2014
    indicates that the Appellant's wife had  had  no  tax  liability  since
    2012/13 and the national insurance demands do not establish  continuous
    employment or self-employment as they are standard  demands  for  small
    amounts and are not based on evidence of self-employment.  Judge Grimes
    said that the Appellant had to show that his wife was exercising Treaty
    Rights as at the date of the termination of the marriage i.e. 17th June
    2014 and had failed to do that.

 6. I am not entirely sure why Designated Judge Zucker said that the  wrong
    standard of proof had been applied  and  this  was  not  clear  to  the
    representatives before me either.  What is submitted in the Grounds  of
    Appeal is that it is unreasonable to expect an Appellant to  provide  a
    complete set  of  documents  relative  to  his  ex-spouse's  employment
    spanning the entire period of their marriage and  the  Judge  erred  in
    discounting evidence that was properly before her.  She ought  to  have
    taken into account the documents which in totality  are  sufficient  to
    show that the Sponsor was exercising Treaty Rights.   It  is  submitted
    that registration with HMRC and payment of  NI  contributions  are  the
    requested and accepted proof of self-employment by the  Respondent  and
    once these have been provided the burden shifts to the Respondent if he
    wishes to challenge their validity.  It is stated that  the  Judge  was
    erroneously placing upon the Appellant the burden of proving "actuality
    of self-employment" and this is an error of law.

 7. In oral submissions Ms Osung said that she was relying  essentially  on
    the demands for national insurance contributions since it is these that
    cover the relevant period.  I  explained to her that following    HS  I
    had taken into account, as had  Judge Grimes,   the  earlier  documents
    and the fact that presumably when the Residence Card was granted in the
    first  place  the  Respondent  was  satisfied  that  the  Sponsor   was
    exercising Treaty Rights at that time.  This did not mean however  that
    she was necessarily exercising Treaty Rights at the time of the  second
    application and decision.

 8. Mr Harrison pointed out indeed that the demand for  national  insurance
    contributions dated 4th October 2014 was sent to  the  Sponsor  at  the
    address at which she had been living with the Appellant.  She had  been
    for some time away from that address.  I had earlier confirmed with the
    Appellant that she had left him in the home in which they shared and he
    continues to live there.  Mr Harrison reasonably pointed out that  this
    would indicate that the Sponsor had not told HMRC about her  change  of
    address which gave some support to his  submission  that  she  was  not
    working at all.

 9. I have given careful consideration to the terms of the determination of
    Judge Grimes and to the submissions made.  The burden is of  course  on
    the Appellant to provide sufficient evidence to show that his wife  was
    exercising Treaty Rights at the relevant date.  I do  acknowledge  that
    there are difficulties when a couple has divorced.  The Appellant  said
    that his wife had refused to give him any documents and the  ones  that
    he had submitted he had found in the house. It seems to me however that
    the evidence before the Judge did not establish that the Sponsor was at
    the date of the termination of the marriage exercising Treaty Rights in
    the UK and indeed the information that she did have, such as  the  fact
    that HMRC apparently did not have the  Sponsor's  current  address,  to
    some extent indicated that she was not working. There was no  basis  on
    which the Respondent was required to  challenge  the  validity  of  the
    documents. The issue was the extent to which the documents provided the
    required information. The demands for National Insurance  confirm  only
    that the Appellant's ex-wife was registered with HMRC for  the  payment
    of National Insurance contributions and on their own do not even  raise
    a presumption sufficient to require rebuttal by the Respondent.   Judge
    Grimes gave reasons at paragraph 10 for her decision.  She was entitled
    to reach the conclusions she did on the evidence  before  her.   It  is
    also the case of course that the Appellant chose not to  appear  before
    the Tribunal so she was unable to take any oral evidence from him.

10. There was a rather belated submission  made  that  the  Respondent  was
    under a duty to  try  to  get  the  necessary  evidence  from  HMRC.  I
    understand that the Home Office have a policy, for reasons  of  privacy
    and data protection, to do this only very rarely if certain  conditions
    are satisfied but in any event there was no basis in this case for such
    an enquiry as no request or application had been made to the Respondent
    or indeed to the Tribunal for the release of  evidence  or  information
    relating to the Sponsor.

Notice of Decision

In all the circumstances I find that there is no material error  of  law  in
the determination of the First-tier Tribunal and that decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction made.

Signed
Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  N  A  Baird                               10
November 2015
