
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46169/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Thursday 10 August 2016                    |On Wednesday 24 August 2016  |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   MR MOHAMMED SHIPLU (AKA ASHRAFUZ ZAMAN)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Coleman, Counsel instructed by S Satha & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


      1. This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State.   For  ease  of
         reference, we refer below to the parties as they were in the First-
         Tier Tribunal albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the
         Appellant in  this  particular  appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State
         appeals against a decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  H  Clark
         promulgated on  2  February  2016  ("the  Decision")  allowing  the
         Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  dated
         28 October 2014 refusing him leave to remain on the  basis  of  his
         family and private life outside the Rules and directing his removal
         to Bangladesh.    Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Mark Davies on 28 June 2016 on the  basis  that  the
         Judge  had  failed  to  have  regard   to   the   public   interest
         considerations set out in section 117B Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002 ("section 117B").  The matter comes  before  us  to
         determine whether the Decision contains a material error of law and
         if we so find, to either re-make the decision  ourselves  or  remit
         the appeal for re-determination by the First-tier Tribunal.


      2. The Appellant came to the UK as a visitor on 6 September 1996, then
         aged fifteen years, and has overstayed.  He admits that he  entered
         the UK under a false name but the point is made that he was only  a
         child at the time. He was refused leave to remain in relation to an
         earlier application and unsuccessfully appealed  that  decision  in
         2009. As  the  Judge  rightly  directed  herself  at  [12]  of  the
         Decision, the first Judge's findings are a starting point  for  her
         findings.  The Appellant also previously sought leave to remain  as
         the spouse of  a  settled  person  but  that  application  too  was
         refused, this time with no right of appeal.


      3. The Appellant  has  family  in  Bangladesh  with  whom  he  retains
         contact. He has other family in the UK.  However, the main plank of
         his human rights claim is that he is  married  to  Mrs  Begum  who,
         whilst born in  Bangladesh,  grew  up  with  her  parents  and  six
         siblings in the UK.   All  remain  here.   She  is  now  a  British
         citizen.  She was aware when she married the Appellant that he  did
         not have status in the UK and is also aware that the Appellant  had
         used another identity.


      4. The couple have a son who was born on 27 April 2014 and  who  is  a
         British citizen due to his mother's status.   The  Appellant  looks
         after the child whilst his wife works as  he  is  not  entitled  to
         work.


      5. It was accepted that the Appellant's wife can speak Bengali but she
         says that she cannot read or write it.  Return to Bangladesh  would
         also entail her leaving her job and her family in the UK.


      6. Judge Clark accepted that the relationship  between  the  Appellant
         and his wife is genuine.  She found that the Appellant and his wife
         would  be  able  to  meet  the  Rules  in  relation  to   financial
         requirements but could not satisfy the Rules as the  Appellant  has
         no leave to be in the UK.  The couple did not  rely  on  EX1(b)  of
         Appendix FM to the Rules.   Judge Clark  therefore  considered  the
         case outside the Rules.  She  did  not  accept  that  it  would  be
         proportionate for the Appellant to return to Bangladesh either with
         or without his family in order  to  obtain  entry  clearance,  even
         though the period  for  obtaining  a  visa  in  Bangladesh  is  not
         particularly lengthy.  She also made a finding that  separation  of
         the Appellant from his son even during that short period would  not
         be in the child's best interests.  She allowed the appeal on  human
         rights grounds outside the Rules for those reasons.


    Discussion and conclusions


      7.  Mr Melvin relied on the Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal.   Those
         grounds submit that the Judge failed to  provide  adequate  reasons
         why the requirement to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules  involved  in
         applying  for  entry  clearance  from  outside  the  UK  would   be
         disproportionate or why the facts  are  such  as  to  outweigh  the
         public interest of immigration control, having particular regard to
         the Appellant's adverse immigration history. Mr Melvin directed  us
         to the case of R (on the application of Chen) v Secretary of  State
         for the Home Department)  (Appendix  FM  -  Chikwamba  -  temporary
         separation - proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT 189 (IAC).


      8. The second ground concerns the Judge's approach  to  an  Article  8
         claim firstly under the Rules and then identifying  any  additional
         compelling  circumstances  outside  the  Rules.    The   Respondent
         asserted that the  Judge  failed  to  consider  section  117B.   It
         appears that this is the  ground  which  found  favour  with  Judge
         Davies (although the grant of permission is not limited).


      9. We enquired of Mr Melvin in the course of his  submissions  whether
         it could be said that the Appellant would be able to return to  the
         UK with entry clearance if he departed,  given  in  particular  his
         adverse immigration  history  and  that  he  would  be  subject  to
         removal.  Mr Melvin pointed to the IDIs in relation to rule 320 and
         submitted that the application would have to  be  assessed  on  its
         facts  but  rule  320  would  probably  be  waived  in   a   spouse
         application.


     10. Mr Coleman submitted that the Respondent's ground  amounted  to  an
         unwarranted perversity challenge.  The Judge dealt with  the  issue
         of entry clearance at [43] of the Decision as follows:-

             "[43]     The respondent's information about the processing of
             settlement applications in the  British  High  Commissions  in
             Dhaka or Sylhet suggests that it would take between 30 and  60
             days for such  an  application  to  be  processed  should  the
             appellant be required to return to apply to join his wife  and
             child in the United Kingdom.  His wife has a job in the United
             Kingdom and could not, therefore, travel to Bangladesh for any
             significant period of time without jeopardising  her  family's
             financial  security.   The  appellant  could,  therefore,   be
             separated from his wife and child for more than two months.  I
             accept that the appellant plays an important role in his son's
             life, in particular because he looks after him whilst his wife
             is at work.  Whilst alternative child care could  be  arranged
             (whether  commercially  or  within   the   extended   family),
             continuity is generally in a child's best interests and  I  am
             satisfied that requiring the appellant  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom for two months or so would disrupt [Y's]  family  unit
             and care arrangements, such that it would be incompatible with
             his best interests.


             [44]      I recognise the  significant  weight  which  I  must
             attach  to  the  public  interest  in  effective   immigration
             control.  I also weigh in the balance that the appellant  will
             not otherwise be an economic burden on the state.   I  do  not
             regard his length of residence here as a reason why he  should
             not return to Bangladesh on a temporary basis to obtain  entry
             clearance,  particularly  since  he  has   close   family   in
             Bangladesh.  Although it can be said that the appellant has  a
             long period of leave to establish  ties  here,  that  was  his
             choice and he had no expectation of leave to  remain  when  he
             formed ties.  However, given the  disruption  which  would  be
             caused to [Y] and the stability of his family  unit  in  being
             separated from  his  father  whilst  the  latter  returned  to
             Bangladesh to  apply  to  re-join  Mrs  Begum  in  the  United
             Kingdom, I am satisfied that requiring  him  to  do  so  would
             amount to a disproportionate interference with his established
             family life with his wife and child."

     11. In response to a question from us, Mr Coleman  submitted  that  the
         word "disruption" can be read in a number of ways and is capable of
         incorporating a level of  interference  with,  in  particular,  the
         child's human rights which would render removal  of  the  Appellant
         disproportionate.  It could  not  be  said  that  the  Judge  acted
         perversely in giving  weight  to  the  disruption  which  would  be
         occasioned to the Appellant's child  by  separation  -  even  on  a
         temporary basis - from his father.


     12. In the course of argument, a further point  arose  in  relation  to
         whether the Appellant could meet  the  Rules  in  relation  to  his
         family and private life.  Mr Melvin asserted  that  he  could  not.
         The Appellant's representatives similarly asserted that the  appeal
         stood or fell  outside  the  Rules  (see  [14]  of  the  Decision).
         However, it seemed to us that this may identify a potential flaw in
         the Decision.  The Judge appears to have simply accepted  that  the
         Appellant could not meet the Rules rather  than  engaging  with  an
         application of the Rules to this case.  If the Judge  had  followed
         that process, it seemed to us that she would be bound  to  consider
         the application of paragraph EX1 of Appendix FM to the Rules  which
         would require her to consider whether it would  be  reasonable  for
         the Appellant's wife and child to accompany him to Bangladesh,  not
         simply whilst entry clearance is obtained but on a  more  permanent
         basis.  Given the Judge's approach  to  the  question  whether  the
         Appellant's family could accompany him even on a  temporary  basis,
         we have no doubt that she would have found it unreasonable for them
         to do so.  However, it is a point which is not addressed because of
         the way in which the Judge approached the case.


     13. We heard argument on this point from Mr Coleman who submitted  that
         it could never be said to be reasonable to expect a British citizen
         to leave the UK unless the case involves deportation.   We  do  not
         accept that submission.  A British  citizen  cannot  of  course  be
         required to leave the UK.  He or she  though  can  leave  with  the
         person subject to immigration control if  he  or  she  so  chooses.
         That is therefore relevant to the question whether family life  can
         reasonably be expected to continue  outside  the  UK.    Similarly,
         based on Zambrano, removal of a parent of a British  citizen  child
         could not be required if that would  entail  the  child  having  to
         leave the UK.  However, if, as here, there is  another  parent  who
         can care for the child, that issue does not arise.  Again,  if  the
         parents make a choice to leave with the child rather than  for  one
         parent to remain with the child, that is their choice.


     14. Ultimately, though, we do not find in the  Respondent's  favour  on
         this basis for two reasons.  The first is, as  Mr  Coleman  pointed
         out, that the Respondent's grounds do not raise this  issue.   True
         it is that the Respondent makes the point that a family and private
         life claim should be viewed through the lens of the Rules and  only
         if there are  additional,  compelling  factors  outside  the  Rules
         should it succeed on that basis.  However, the Respondent does  not
         say that the Appellant's case should have been  considered  on  the
         basis that it might meet the Rules (if EX1 were satisfied) and that
         a failure to consider this is an error of law. The second ground is
         targeted at the allowing of the appeal outside  the  Rules  on  the
         basis that there were no compelling circumstances and that  section
         117B had not been applied properly in the proportionality balance.


     15. The second reason we do not find an error  of  law  on  this  basis
         concerns whether any error of  law  could  be  material.   We  were
         informed by Mr Coleman in his submissions that the Appellant's wife
         is now pregnant with his second  child.   Also,  and  perhaps  more
         importantly, the Appellant will have been  in  the  UK  for  twenty
         years on 6 September 2016.  As such, he would be entitled to have a
         claim based on his private life determined in his favour if we were
         to proceed to re-make the decision after that date.  As Mr  Coleman
         submitted  and   we   accept,   given   the   potentially   changed
         circumstances, it would be necessary to have a further  hearing  to
         consider updated evidence by which date  it  is  almost  inevitable
         that he would have passed the twenty years' threshold.


     16. For the sake of completeness,  we  consider  whether  the  Decision
         contains an error of law in relation to the application of  Section
         117B.  We are persuaded by Mr Coleman's submission that  the  Judge
         has in fact dealt with the section 117B issues.  In addition to the
         summary at [44] of the Decision which we set out at [10] above, the
         Judge cites section 117B expressly at [16] of  the  Decision.   She
         goes on to set out issues relevant to  that  section  at  [35]  and
         following:-

             "[35]     The aspect of  the  public  interest  on  which  the
             respondent  relies  in  this  case  is  the   maintenance   of
             immigration control, which is in the economic interests of the
             country.....


             [37]      The appellant has lived in the  United  Kingdom  for
             the majority of his life and speaks English.....


             [38]      The appellant's private and  family  life  has  been
             established  whilst  he  has  been  in  the   United   Kingdom
             unlawfully and, as such, I  am  required  to  give  it  little
             weight....Whilst the appellant has had the benefit of  medical
             treatment in the United Kingdom, he speaks English and is  not
             otherwise dependent on the state as he  is  supported  by  his
             wife."

         It cannot be said, therefore, that the Judge erred  in  failing  to
         have regard to section 117B.


     17. We emphasise that our decision is based as it must  be  on  whether
         there is an error of law in Judge Clark's decision and not  whether
         we  would  have  reached  the  same  decision.   The  Decision   is
         undoubtedly generous  to  the  Appellant,  particularly  given  his
         adverse immigration  history.   However,  for  the  reasons  stated
         above, we are satisfied that the  Decision  does  not  contain  any
         material error of law and we uphold it.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law. We uphold the decision  of  Judge  Clark  promulgated  on  2
February 2016.

Signed      [pic]      Date 23 August 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
