

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46640/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |   Determination Promulgated |
|on 19 August 2015                             |   On 22 December 2015       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            LEONARD ALVIN CENTENO
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:        Mr Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:     In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Somal, promulgated on the 19 March 2015 following a hearing a
        Nottingham, in which  the  judge  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
        against the refusal of leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
        Rules and direction for his removal made  pursuant  to  section  47
        Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.
     2. The Secretary of State  challenges  the  decision  asserting  Judge
        Somal failed to  consider  the  statutory  provisions  set  out  at
        section 117 Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  properly.
        The date of hearing was 9 March 2015 after the commencement date of
        28 July 2014. Dube [2015] UKUT 00090 refers. This  is  relevant  as
        the entirety of the decision relates to the appellants private life
        formed at a time his immigration status  was  precarious  to  which
        little  weight  should  be  given  according   to   the   statutory
        provisions.
     3. The decision also arguably fails to weigh in the balance the extent
        of the care  requirements  assessed  by  Social  Services  for  the
        appellant's mother  who  does  not  require  the  presence  of  the
        appellant, her son, all day. The decision also fails to mention the
        fact the report refers to the appellant's mother employing her  own
        carer.
     4. The determination is arguably flawed in that it fails  to  consider
        and make adequate findings on :


                    a. The Secretary of State's case.
                    b. Alternative care provisions.
                    c. Whether the Immigration Rules  provide  a  route  for
                       leave as a carer and, if so,  why  the  appellant  is
                       unable to succeed under the same.
                    d. A detailed analysis of the way in which the competing
                       interests  are  balanced  with  due  regard  to   the
                       statutory provisions.
                    e. The documentary evidence


     5. There does not appear to be any evidence of  the  impact  upon  the
        appellant's mother if he is removed from the  UK.  The  finding  at
        paragraph 20 that she would be living in  desperate  conditions  is
        not adequately reasoned in light of the Social Services report.  It
        is not adequately explained why her sons absence would have a grave
        impact upon the quality of  his  mother's  life  and  why  this  is
        sufficient for the appeal to be allowed. There is a  greater  focus
        on the case advanced by the appellant and littles  detail  of  that
        relied upon by the Secretary of State.
     6. It is not  clear  both  parties  received  a  proper  hearing.  The
        determination shall be set aside with no findings preserved.
     7. The appeal shall be remitted to Nottingham  Hearing  centre  to  be
        heard by a judge other than Judge Somal on 6 January 2016.


Decision

     8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the original Judge.  I  remit  the  appeal  to  the
        Nottingham Hearing Centre.


   Anonymity.


     9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.
        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
       Dated the 10 December 2015

