
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46013/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2016                             |On 4th May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        ms Esther Florida Jothimathew
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Kanwangara (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an  appeal  against  a  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Feeney, promulgated on 7th August 2015, following a hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 7th July 2015.  In the determination, the  judge  allowed  the
    appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of India who was born on  29th  March
    1989.  She appeals against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  13th
    November 2014 cancelling her leave to remain in the UK under  paragraph
    321A(1) of the Immigration Rules HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she first entered the UK  on  3rd  August
    2004 with entry clearance to study  on  a  student's  visa  until  30th
    September  2005.   This  was  extended  subsequently.   The   Appellant
    subsequently transferred onto a Tier 1 (Highly Skilled)  Migrant  visa.
    On 30th August 2012, the Appellant applied for a spouse's visa  on  the
    basis of being a settled person with a residence permit  and  this  was
    granted until 17th March 2015.  In April 2014, the Appellant left for a
    six-month visit to India,  but  upon  return  she  was  interviewed  at
    Heathrow Airport on 13th November 2014, and her leave was cancelled  on
    the basis that she had used false documents to  present  herself  as  a
    person who had sat the relevant English language  test,  which  it  was
    alleged she had not done, having used a proxy.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge did not accept the Respondent's case against  the  Appellant.
    He  did  not  find  the  evidence  on  the  Respondent's  side  to   be
    satisfactory, and not least because it had not been identified that the
    evidence could expressly be said to relate to  the  Appellant  herself.
    As against that, the judge held that  the  Appellant  had  provided  "a
    consistent account about how she arranged for and paid  for  her  test"
    (paragraph 19).

 5. The judge allowed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application  state  that  the  judge  misunderstood  the
    evidence before her and arguably failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    concluding that the Respondent had not discharged the burden of proving
    deception.

 7. On 17th February 2016, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that,

         "Whilst it may ultimately be found that the grounds  are  simply  a
         disagreement with the judge's decision, it  is  at  least  arguable
         that the judge misunderstood the evidence ...".

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 4th April 2016,  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  made
    the following submissions.  First that the conclusions reached  by  the
    judge at paragraph 16 namely that, "I can see  that  Appendix  E  shows
    that the test taken by this  particular  Appellant  was  deemed  to  be
    invalid", and that, "however I note that the appendix does not offer an
    explanation  as  to  why  the  test  was  designated   as   such"   was
    misconceived.  This was because the test scores had been  validated  by
    ETS.  Second, there were witness statements from Peter  Millington  and
    Rebecca Collins that an invalid test is so  marked  once  it  has  been
    shown that the test was taken  by  a  proxy  test  taker.   The  judge,
    accordingly, has misunderstood the evidence.  He said, she had gone  on
    to say that there was a paucity of evidence which  was  untrue.   Given
    that the judge had found the onus had now shifted on the  Appellant  to
    show why she could not be said to have procured this test result  as  a
    result of a proxy arrangement by her.  Accordingly, the judge failed to
    give proper weight to what was provided  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    There was simply a misunderstanding of the evidence produced on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State.

 9. For his part, Mr Kanwangara referred to  the  fact  that  recently  the
    president of the Tribunal had, in a specially convened  panel  hearing,
    heard and determined the case of Qadir  (IA/36319/2016),  and  although
    the judgment was not out, what the president had said had  been  widely
    reported in the press, and he himself had  a  press  release  from  the
    solicitors acting for Qadir.  In that case, the president had shown the
    system used by ETS to have been a discredited one.  Second, and in  any
    event, on the particular facts of this case, the judge had come to  the
    correct conclusion.  He had found that there was actually  no  evidence
    from the ETS at all.  The witness statements of  Peter  Millington  and
    Rebecca Collins did not explain why this  particular  Appellant's  test
    was considered to be invalid.  The Secretary of State had only  managed
    to get permission on the basis of what  Peter  Millington  and  Rebecca
    Collins said in their witness statements.  On the other hand, the judge
    had found the Appellant to be giving a "consistent account"  about  how
    she arranged for and paid for her  test.   If  the  burden  is  on  the
    Secretary of State to show a proxy was used, that burden had  not  been
    discharged.  The judge concluded (at paragraph 23)  that  there  was  a
    "lack of information regarding this particular Appellant's test  result
    ...".

10. In reply, Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted  that  if  I  were  to  make  a
    finding of an error of law,  then  I  should  adjourn  the  substantive
    determination of this appeal  until  such  time  that  the  president's
    decision in Qadir becomes available.

No Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

12. First, there is nothing to suggest that  the  judge  misunderstood  the
    test.  What he was referring to was the fact  that  the  statements  of
    Peter Millington and Rebecca Collins did not show why the test of  this
    particular Appellant was invalid.

13. Second, the judge was not satisfied at the hearing  about  the  further
    checks in relation to the "human verification process".

14. Third,  he  was  right  to  conclude  that  there  was  a  "paucity  of
    information regarding this particular Appellant to an extent that it is
    not clear even to Ms Southgate-Smith whether this Appellant's test  had
    to be assessed by individuals" (paragraph 17).

15. Fourth, Mr Peter Millington's statements refer to "other reasons as  to
    why test certificates are invalidated and that these include situations
    where there has been a test administration irregularity",  but  it  was
    not clear whether this case had been marked as one where there had been
    an administrative irregularity.

16. On the other hand, the Appellant was a person who had not even given "a
    consistent account" but had been able to talk about a test that she had
    sat two years earlier and, "she had  also  worked  in  customer  facing
    roles in well-known companies and this would have  meant  at  the  very
    least some ability to understand and communicate in English" (paragraph
    20).

17. Finally, it is significant that this is an Appellant who (see paragraph
    4 of the determination) had arrived in the UK in August  2004  and  had
    been given various extensions of leave to remain, following  her  entry
    as a student, in the capacity of a highly skilled migrant, and then  on
    the basis of marriage, and had only  been  apprehended  after  she  had
    returned back from India on a six-months' leave, and  told  that  there
    was a question mark about an English language test that she had sat two
    years previously.

18. All in all, the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that  she
    did.  There is no perversity in the decision that she reached.

Notice of Decision

19. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th April 2016

