

                                       [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46750/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated|
|On June 27, 2014                |On July 18, 2014         |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MISS TRUSTY AMOFAH AFRIYIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Siaw (Legal Representative)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department I will refer below to the parties as they were identified at
    the First-tier Hearing namely the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department will from hereon be referred to as the respondent  and  Miss
    Trusty Amofah Afriyie as the appellant.


 2. The appellant, born October 3, 1989, is a citizen of Ghana. On June 20,
    2013 she applied for a residence card as the spouse of an EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights. In support of her marriage she had  submitted
    a Ghanaian marriage certificate dated December 29, 2012 and a statutory
    declaration dated February 15, 2013 that stated the marriage took place
    by proxy.

 3. The respondent refused her application on October 26, 2013.

 4. On November 7, 2013 the appellant appealed under section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Regulation 26  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Cockrill
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  19,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on March 31, 2014 he allowed her appeal.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on April 4, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Heynes  on  May
    12, 2014 who found it was arguable that the FtTJ had erred  by  failing
    to have regard to the Tribunal decision of Kareem  (Proxy  Marriages-EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 00024.

 7. The matter was listed before me on the above date and the appellant was
    in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS


 8. Ms Everett relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that whilst no
    challenge was made to the documents submitted from Ghana she submitted,
    as found by the Tribunal in Kareem, that the appellant had to show that
    a proxy marriage was valid in France as this  was  the  sponsor's  home
    state. The skeleton argument provided  by  Mr  Siaw  misunderstood  the
    point that the Tribunal made  in  Kareem.  Whilst  she  understood  the
    submissions she  submitted  Mr  Siaw  had  failed  to  grasp  that  the
    appellant still had to show proxy marriages were accepted in France.


 9. Mr Siaw relied on his skeleton argument and the findings  made  by  the
    FtTJ. He submitted there was no error of law as the FtTJ had  concluded
    the documentation was correct athere was no need to prove the EEA state
    recognised the document. He referred me to paragraph [68] of Kareem.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

10. Before setting out my findings I would  say  it  was  regrettable  that
    neither representative brought the decision of  Kareem  to  the  FtTJ's
    attention despite it having been promulgated in January 2014.  If  this
    decision had been brought to the FtTJ's attention then I  am  satisfied
    this appeal would not be before me.

11. Paragraph [7] of Kareem states-

        "The Member States do not share a common definition of spouse, each
        state defining marital relationships for itself.  For  example,  in
        several Member States a person cannot be a spouse if  of  the  same
        sex as the partner whilst the laws of other Member States  describe
        such a person as a spouse.  Similarly, whilst  many  Member  States
        refuse to describe any person in a  polygamous  relationship  as  a
        spouse other than the person  first  married,  the  laws  of  other
        Member States may recognise all  partners  as  spouses  in  certain
        circumstances.  In terms of EU law, the law of marriage can be said
        to be within the competence of the Member States."

12. Paragraph [18] of Kareem states-

        " ... Within EU law, it is essential that Member States  facilitate
        the free movement and residence rights of Union citizens and  their
        spouses.  This would not be achieved if it  were  left  to  a  host
        Member State to decide whether a Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
        marriage.  Different Member States would be able to reach different
        conclusions about that Union citizen's marital status.  This  would
        leave Union citizens unclear as to whether their spouses could move
        freely with them; and might mean that the Union citizen could  move
        with greater freedom to one Member State (where the marriage  would
        be recognised) than to another  (where  it  might  not  be).   Such
        difficulties would be contrary to fundamental  EU  law  principles.
        Therefore, we perceive EU law as requiring  the  identification  of
        the legal  system  in  which  a  marriage  is  said  to  have  been
        contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the  Union  citizen's
        marital status is not at risk of being  differently  determined  by
        different  Member  States.   Given  the  intrinsic   link   between
        nationality of a Member State and free movement rights, we conclude
        that the legal system of the nationality of the Union citizen  must
        itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted."

13. Mr Siaw sought to persuade me that  as  the  marriage  certificate  and
    documents were accepted then there was no need  for  the  appellant  to
    show anything else. He referred me to  Kareem  and  in  particular  the
    general observations in paragraph [68].

14. Ms Everett effectively adopted the approach taken by  the  Tribunal  in
    Kareem.

15. It is important to note that paragraph [68] of  Kareem  is  not  merely
    dealing  with  proxy  marriages  but  dealing  with  foreign  marriages
    generally.

16. I am satisfied that the appellant has to show proxy marriages are valid
    in France. If the sponsor and appellant had married in Ghana in  person
    then there would be no issue.

17. The issue the FtTJ failed to address  was  that  the  parties  did  not
    physically marry in Ghana but instead married by proxy. Proxy marriages
    are legal but they are only legal  when  evidence  that  the  sponsor's
    state accepts them as valid is produced.

18. The Tribunal stated at paragraph [68(g)] of Kareem-

        "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
        evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
        the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
        the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
        evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.   Mere
        production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
        the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
        will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
        countries.  Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
        similar reasons, carry no weight."

19. There was no evidence before the  FtTJ  that  France  recognised  proxy
    marriages and for the reasons set out above I find there was  an  error
    in law.

20.  No  additional  documents  were  submitted  and  I  indicated  to  the
    representatives that if there was an error in law I  would  remake  the
    decision by refusing the appellant's application.

21. As a side issue I make the observation that the obvious solution is for
    the appellant to  provide  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  France
    accepts her proxy marriage under French law.








    DECISION


22. There is a material error of law.


23. I set aside the original decision and I remake the decision and dismiss
    the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.


24. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.





Signed:                                 Dated:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I reverse the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal because I have
dismissed the appeal.







Signed:                                 Dated:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

