
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46531/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 May 2015                                 |On 27 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       MRS Sioneia Sirene Raabe PINTO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant :   In person, with Mr Fleming assisting as a
                           McKenzie Friend.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  revoke  her  five  year  EEA
    residence card, and against the separate decision of the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse to issue her with  a  permanent  residence  card.   The
    First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and I  do  not
    consider that the claimant  should  be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of  Brazil.   On  25  August  2007  she  got
    married in Brazil to Hermes  Edwardo  Jung,  a  German  national.   The
    claimant subsequently entered the United Kingdom with her husband,  and
    made a successful application for a five-year residence card which  was
    issued to her as the family member of an EEA national exercising treaty
    rights here.  The card was issued to her on 9 October 2009.

 3. On 19 April 2013  a  judge  at  Wandsworth  County  Court  granted  the
    claimant a decree nisi, and on 26 June 2013 the court issued  a  decree
    absolute, thereby dissolving the marriage.

 4. In the meantime, on 15 May 2013 the claimant applied  for  a  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of her right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom on a permanent basis under the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.

 5. On 21 October 2013 the Home  Office  issued  a  notice  of  immigration
    decision revoking the claimant's residence card under Regulation 20(2).
     This was on the ground that she had ceased to be the family member  of
    a qualified person and no longer had a right of residence in the United
    Kingdom or the right to hold a residence card confirming such a  right.



 6. On 26 October 2013  the  respondent  issued  a  notice  of  immigration
    decision refusing her application for a permanent residence card.

 7. The Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 17 October 2013 seems to have been
    directed to the second immigration decision, rather than the first.  In
    order to qualify for  a  retained  right  of  residence  following  her
    divorce from an EEA national, in accordance with  Regulation  10(5)  of
    the Regulations 2006 the following information was required:

       . Evidence that the former  EEA  spouse  was  exercising  freedom  of
         movement rights in the United Kingdom at the time of divorce.

       . Evidence that the marriage lasted for at least three years and that
         she and her former spouse resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at
         least one year during their marriage.

       . Evidence that she was currently in employment,  self-employment  or
         economically self-sufficient as if she were an EEA national.

 8. In addition, as her application was for permanent residence, she had to
    demonstrate that she had resided in accordance with the Regulations for
    a continuous five-year period which would mean that  her  EEA  national
    former spouse needed to have exercised free movement rights up  to  the
    point of divorce; and that she had been employed, self-employed or self-
    sufficient since the divorce.  Collectively, the evidence had to  cover
    a continuous five-year period to meet  the  requirement  of  Regulation
    15(1)(f).

 9. Among other things, she had not provided evidence that the EEA national
    was  a  qualified  person  and  that  she  was  therefore  residing  in
    accordance with the Regulations at the point of  divorce.   So  it  had
    been decided to refuse to  issue  the  confirmation  she  sought  under
    Regulation 15(1)(f) with reference to Regulations 10(5) and 10(6).

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

10. The claimant's appeal came before Judge Afako sitting at  Taylor  House
    in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  17  September  2014.   The  appellant
    appeared in person, with Mr Fleming acting as a McKenzie friend.

11. In his subsequent decision, the  judge  found  that  the  claimant  had
    entered the United Kingdom on 16 September 2007 as  the  spouse  of  Mr
    Jung, a German national who was  already  in  this  country  apparently
    exercising treaty rights.  Her husband's pay slips had been produced to
    reflect the fact that he was working in the period  2008  to  2009  and
    beyond.  The evidence from HMRC dated 3 April 2013 showed that Mr  Jung
    was collecting a job seekers allowance from 29 January 2008 and  worked
    for two different employers in that tax year.  The last record the HMRC
    had for his employment was 1 February 2010.

12. With reference to Regulation 10(5), although the  marriage  had  broken
    down in an earlier period, it was only terminated in June last year:

         [B]y that time, and certainly by  the  time  of  the  hearing,  the
         claimant had already been residing in this country  for  more  than
         five years and  for  most  of  that  time  she  was  married.   She
         therefore meets the requirements of paragraph 10(5)( d).

13. The judge said that  whatever  the  questions  about  her  ex-husband's
    whereabouts or activities in the UK, it seemed to him that  as  at  the
    date of the hearing the claimant had retained her right of residence in
    accordance with Regulation 15(1)(f), as she had been residing  in  this
    country for the last five years and was married for more than one  year
    of that period.

14. Applying Samsam (EEA: revocation and retained rights) Syria [2011] UKUT
    165 (IAC), there was no justification or proper process observed in the
    revocation of her residence card, which should be reinstated.  It  also
    seemed to him that the claimant  met  the  requirements  for  permanent
    residence.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

15. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal on  the  ground
    that the judge had materially erred in law in not making a  finding  as
    to whether her former husband had acquired permanent residence  at  the
    point of divorce, and it seemed from the facts set out at paragraph [3]
    of his decision that the evidence of his exercising treaty  rights  did
    not go beyond 2010.  So, on the evidence  before  him,  it  was  not  a
    finding open to him in any event.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

16. On 24 November 2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on the grounds raised.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me, Mr Tarlow relied on Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552.
     The appellant through Mr Fleming relied on the opinion of the Advocate
    General in Bott, case C-244/13 delivered on  14  May  2014  and  on  NA
    (Pakistan) [2014] EWCA  Civ  995  in  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  at
    paragraph [20] posed the following question for the Court of Justice of
    the European Union to decide:

         Must a third country national ex-spouse of a union citizen be  able
         to show that their former spouse was exercising  treaty  rights  in
         the host member state at the time of  their  divorce  in  order  to
         retain a right  of  residence  under  Article  13(2)  of  Directive
         2004/38/EC?

18. As Mr Fleming elaborated, in essence the case for the claimant was that
    the Regulations 2006 were incompatible with the  Directive;  and  that,
    upon the correct construction of the Directive, the  claimant  did  not
    need to show that her husband was exercising treaty rights at the  date
    of divorce in order to retain  a  right  of  residence  under  European
    Community law.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

19. Regulation 10 sets out the criteria  which  must  be  fulfilled  for  a
    family member to retain the right of residence.

20. Regulation 10(5) provides that a person  satisfies  the  conditions  in
    this paragraph if -

         (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person or of  an
         EEA national with a permanent right of residence on the termination
         of the marriage or civil partnership of that person;

         (b) he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with  these
         Regulations at the date of the termination;

         (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph 6; and

         (d) either -

             (i) prior  to  the  initiation  of  the  proceedings  for  the
             termination of the  marriage  or  the  civil  partnership  the
             marriage or civil partnership had lasted for  at  least  three
             years and the parties to the marriage or civil partnership had
             resided in the United Kingdom for at least one year during its
             duration ...

21. Judge Afako found that the claimant was able to  bring  herself  within
    Regulation 10(5)(d)(i). and there is no challenge by the  Secretary  of
    State to this finding.

22. There is also no challenge to Judge Afako's finding that  the  claimant
    satisfies the condition in Regulation 10(6).

23. However, the judge clearly failed to make a finding  on  the  following
    questions  relating  to  compliance  with  Regulations  10(5)  (a)  and
    10(5)(b):

         (a) whether the  claimant  ceased  to  be  a  family  member  of  a
         qualified person on the termination of the marriage; and/or

         (b) whether the claimant ceased to be the family member of  an  EEA
         national who had a permanent right of residence on the  termination
         of the marriage; and/or

         (c) whether the claimant was residing in  the  United  Kingdom  "in
         accordance with these Regulations" at the date of the  termination.



24. The judge purported to allow the appeal under the Regulations 2006.  He
    did not base his decision on the proposition that Regulation 10(5)  was
    unlawful because it was incompatible with the Directive, and  that  the
    claimant's  appeal  succeeded  through  a  direct  application  of  the
    Directive.

25. It follows that the judge has not given adequate reasons  for  allowing
    the claimant's appeal.

The Remaking of the Decision

26. There were two appellants in Amos, the second of whose material history
    is similar to  that  of  the  claimant's  in  this  case.   The  second
    appellant entered the UK in February 2002  and  on  12  June  2003  she
    married a French national.  She was granted a right of residence in the
    UK as a family member of an EEA national for the period 27 August  2003
    to 21 August 2008.  Their marriage broke down, and the couple separated
    when Mr Batman moved out of the matrimonial home  in  late  2007.   She
    started divorce proceedings in July  2008  and  was  granted  a  decree
    absolute on 8 December 2008.  She had worked throughout her time in the
    UK.  Her evidence on appeal was that when she met her husband he worked
    as a chef.  She did not know whether he had  continued  to  work  after
    their separation, and in particular she did not  know  whether  he  was
    working at the date of their divorce, or  even  whether  he  was  still
    living in the UK at that date.

27. Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden dismissed her appeal because she  did  not
    satisfy the requirements of Regulation 10(5)(b), because  she  had  not
    shown that her husband was exercising treaty rights (i.e.  working)  at
    the date of her divorce.

28. The Court of Appeal upheld the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
    on appeal.  Giving the leading judgment of the court,  Stanley  Burnton
    LJ held at paragraph [30] that the Regulations were consistent with the
    terms of the Citizenship Directive (Directive 2004/38/EC) on the rights
    of citizens of the Union to reside freely within the territory  of  the
    member states.  He further held that if a non-EEA national met the  the
    conditions contained in Regulation 10(5), including the condition  that
    the EEA national spouse was a qualified person at the date of  divorce,
    then after five years' continuous  residence  in  the  UK  the  non-EEA
    national would be entitled to a  permanent  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 15(1)(f).  In the circumstances, he did not consider that  a
    reference to the Court of Justice was necessary or appropriate.

29. In NA (Pakistan) a differently constituted Court  of  Appeal  found  at
    paragraph 21(3) that Amos was not binding authority for the proposition
    that the Regulations have correctly transposed the Directive. There  IS
    no express requirement in Article 13(2) of  the  Directive  that  there
    should be proof that the former spouse was exercising treaty rights  in
    the host member state at the time of divorce.  The issue raised in Amos
    was dealt with by way of a concession.

30. The fact that Amos had proceeded by way of a concession was one of  the
    reasons why the Court of Appeal in NA (Pakistan) decided to  request  a
    preliminary ruling from the Court of Justice of the European  Union  on
    the proper interpretation of Article 13(2).  Another  reason  was  that
    neither party submitted that the answer to  the  issue  raised  in  the
    appeal was acte clair.

31. In the light of the Court of  Appeal  in  NA  (Pakistan)  requesting  a
    preliminary ruling from the Court of Justice of the European  Union  on
    the proper interpretation of Article 13(2), there is clearly a distinct
    possibility that Community law will  be  clarified  in  the  claimant's
    favour.  But, as is recognised by the  Court  of  Appeal  at  paragraph
    21(2) of NA  (Pakistan),  at  present  our  national  law  imposes  the
    requirement  that  an  ex-spouse   of   a   union   citizen,   who   is
    himself/herself a third country national, must be  able  to  show  that
    their former spouse was exercising treaty rights  in  the  host  member
    state at the time of their divorce.

32. I must apply our national law as it stands today, and so  I  find  that
    the claimant's appeal fails under the Regulations 2006.   She  has  not
    shown by reference to the Regulations that the Secretary of  State  was
    wrong to revoke her existing residence card,  or  wrong  to  refuse  to
    issue her with a permanent residence card.

33. The claimant through Mr Fleming raised the fact that she was  in  limbo
    until the Court of  Justice  gave  a  ruling  on  the  reference.   Her
    passport had been retained by the Home Office, and her ability to carry
    on a normal life is hampered by not being able to produce any  official
    documentation with regard to her immigration  status.   Mr  Tarlow  was
    sympathetic, but said he was not in a position to  help.   He  did  not
    demur from my suggestion that the way forward was for the  claimant  to
    make written representations to the Home Office.





Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: the claimant's appeal under the Regulations 2006 is  dismissed.


No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson





























