
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46225/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 March 2016                               |On 13 April 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 PEI-JUI LAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Sreeraman, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Walsh, Counsel, instructed by Farani-Javid
-Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. Although the appellant is the Secretary of State for  the  purposes  of
    this decision I refer to the parties as they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is a resumed hearing.  The Upper Tribunal at a  hearing
    on 22 December 2015 found an error of law and set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 8 June 2015.   The  Decision  on
    Error of Law and Directions is appended to this Decision and Reasons.

Remaking the Decision

 2. I rely on the background of this case set out in the appended decision.
     Although I had been initially disposed to remake the decision  on  the
    available evidence, as indicated in the Decision on Error  of  Law  and
    Directions I concluded that it should be relisted for a further hearing
    due to the unavailability of all the witnesses.  I gave directions that
    any evidence to be relied  on  be  filed  and  served  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Hearing

 3. Mr Walsh relied on a consolidated bundle of evidence from  pages  1  to
    146 with updated witness statements. In addition a supplementary bundle
    with further updated witness statements had been submitted on behalf of
    Miss Pei-Jui Lai prior to the resumed hearing.  This  contains  updated
    witness statements for the appellant, for her partner Mr Timothy Gordon
    Russell Royall and for Lee-Sham Wong.

 4. Mr Walsh indicated that he intended to call the appellant, her partner,
    Mr Royall and the appellant's sister,  Yi-Chun  Lai.    Mr  Walsh  also
    indicated that he  did  not  propose  to  call  any  of  the  remaining
    witnesses (although a number of them were present in court) and  relied
    on their witness statement evidence.

 5. The appellant and witnesses gave evidence in English  and  were  cross-
    examined on that evidence.  The oral evidence together the  submissions
    of  both  representatives  are  set  out  in  full  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings. At the end of the hearing I reserved my decision  which  I
    now give.

The Law

 6. Paragraph 276ADE provides including as follows:


         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
             to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at
             the date of application, the applicant:
             ....


             (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  18  years  or
                  above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  there
                  would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK."



Findings

 7. Mr Walsh relied on his skeleton argument.  He indicated that he did not
    have instructions to concede the appeal under the Immigration Rules but
    nevertheless stated that this was not his main argument by reference to
    his skeleton argument.

Immigration Rules

 8. In considering the appeal under the Immigration  Rules,  although  this
    point was  not  specifically  pursued  by  Mr  Walsh,  the  appellant's
    argument  (including  in  her  witness  statements  and   the   witness
    statements  in  support  of  her  appeal)  was  that  there  were  very
    significant obstacles to her integration into Taiwan.

 9. I have taken into consideration all of  the  detailed  information  and
    evidence which was before  me.   In  summary,  however,  the  appellant
    contends that she has been resident in the UK since the age of  13  and
    has established a number of close ties in the UK as well as having  her
    older sister, a British  national  living  in  London  (with  whom  she
    previously resided).  Her entire way of life and career path  had  been
    geared towards remaining in the UK,  albeit  unintentionally.   It  has
    been the appellant's case that her professional qualifications (in law)
    count for little if anything in Taiwan.  As set out in the Decision  on
    Error of Law and Directions I was referred by  the  respondent  to  the
    respondent's guidance in the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  in
    relation to the meaning of very significant obstacles.   This  guidance
    was dated August 2015 and I repeat it here:

         "When assessing whether there are 'very significant  obstacles'  to
         integration into the country to which they  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK' the starting point is to assume that  the
         applicant will be able to integrate  into  the  country  of  return
         unless they can demonstrate why that is not the case.  The onus  is
         on the appellant to show that there are very significant  obstacles
         to their integration, not on the decision maker to  show  that  are
         not."

10. The guidance continues:

         "A very significant obstacle  to  integration  is  something  which
         would prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating
         into the country of return. The decision maker is looking for  more
         than obstacles.  They  are  looking  to  whether  there  are  'very
         significant' obstacles which is a high threshold.  Very significant
         obstacles will exist where the  appellant  demonstrates  that  they
         would be unable to establish a  private  life  in  the  country  of
         return, or where establishing a private  life  in  the  country  of
         return will entail very serious hardship for the applicant."

11. I have reminded myself  that  this  is  guidance.   However  I  am  not
    satisfied that the evidence relied upon by the  appellant  demonstrates
    that there are such obstacles to her reintegration to Taiwan.  Although
    there  was  much  evidence  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  claimed
    difficulties, including that she was not yet qualified as a  lawyer  in
    the UK and the difficulties she would have in so qualifying in  Taiwan,
    that is not the test before me. The  appellant  is  a  highly  educated
    individual.  She has a number  of  qualifications  in  the  UK,  having
    studied here since the age of 13.  She speaks  English  fluently.   She
    has also gained a number of skills through her current employment as  a
    trainee solicitor and the evidence indicates that she has  also  worked
    including as an intern in the USA and in Taiwan. She indicated  in  her
    oral evidence  that  she  worked  for  a  law  firm  in  Taiwan  in  an
    administrative role.  This was a short-term internship over a number of
    months.

12. In my view the test  in  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  constitutes  a  high
    threshold and clearly is  a  more  demanding  test  than  the  previous
    requirement to show "a lack of  ties"  to  the  claimant's  country  of
    return.  I have considered the meaning of  integration:  an  individual
    returning to their home country has to be in a position to  participate
    in life in that country.  I  have  taken  into  consideration  all  the
    evidence in relation to the appellant's stated difficulties.

13. Although I find the appellant to be generally credible in her  evidence
    I am of the view that she sought to over-emphasise the  degree  of  her
    claimed lack of fluency in Mandarin.  The  appellant  lived  in  Taiwan
    until the age of 13 and attended school there.  She  also  told  me  in
    oral evidence that whilst in the UK she had passed both a GCSE  and  an
    "A" level (it would appear without attending  lessons)  in  the  UK  in
    Mandarin.  She told me that she obtained an A in  "A"  level  Mandarin.
    She also confirmed that she speaks with  her  parents  (who  reside  in
    Taiwan) through the medium of Mandarin and her sister in oral  evidence
    confirmed that this was the case. Both the  appellant  and  her  sister
    confirmed that they speak to each other with a combination  of  English
    and Mandarin, although again I find  the  appellant's  evidence  tended
    towards exaggeration as  she  initially  indicated  that  it  was  more
    English than Mandarin whereas this contradicted her sister's statement.



14. I accept Miss Sreeraman's submission that the test is not  whether  the
    appellant can obtain employment which is on  a  par  with  her  current
    employment in the UK. The test is whether there  are  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration into Taiwan.

15. Although it may well be that the appellant's Mandarin is not  currently
    at the level of  someone  who  is  currently  resident  in  Taiwan  and
    speaking and using the language on  a  daily  basis,  nevertheless  the
    appellant continues to use  the  language  and  has  not  provided  any
    adequate information that might  suggest  that  her  current  level  of
    language would be a barrier to obtaining employment in  Taiwan.  Indeed
    she confirmed that she was able to obtain  employment  as  recently  as
    2010 on a short term basis when she undertook voluntary employment  for
    a law firm in Taiwan.

16. Although the appellant repeatedly indicated that she believed it  would
    be difficult to obtain any employment,  again  there  was  no  adequate
    evidence to support this and it is notable that the appellant has  made
    no enquiries as to what employment she  might  be  able  to  obtain  in
    Taiwan either in the  legal  field,  for  example  as  a  paralegal  or
    otherwise.  In addition again, the test is not one of employment, it is
    of integration.  The appellant continues to have her parents in Taiwan.
     All the evidence before me confirms that her parents  continue  to  be
    very supportive of her.  The appellant is currently living rent free in
    a property owned by her parents in the UK.   She did not indicate  that
    there would be any difficulty in returning to the family home in Taiwan
    should she need to.  Given the support that her family have  previously
    provided to the appellant, I am not satisfied that there would  be  any
    barriers to her so  doing.   As  relied  upon  by  the  respondent  the
    appellant  had  provided  information   confirming   that   there   are
    international law firms  in  Taiwan.   Although  it  may  well  be  the
    appellant might have to take further qualifications in order to  obtain
    employment at the level she wishes in these or other firms, and it  may
    well be  that  this  could  arguably  constitute  an  obstacle  to  her
    reintegration into Taiwan, I am not satisfied  that  it  constitutes  a
    very significant obstacle.

17. The appellant's sister gave evidence as to the emotional  support  that
    she provides to  the  appellant  and  indeed  she  confirmed  that  the
    appellant provides similar emotional support to her.   There  was  also
    evidence that  the  appellant  has  in  the  past  suffered  and  taken
    medication in relation to difficulties with her  mental  and  emotional
    health.  She confirmed that she was not currently taking any medication
    and had not been doing  so  for  approximately  a  year.   However  she
    continues to attend counselling.

18. The appellant in oral evidence attempted to suggest that  it  would  be
    difficult to obtain such  counselling  in  Taiwan.   However  she  also
    confirmed that she had previously attended counselling in Taiwan  on  a
    temporary basis  during  visits  home.   Although  I  accept  that  the
    appellant may have developed a relationship with her counsellor in  the
    UK, there was no adequate information or evidence to suggest  that  she
    could not develop a similar relationship with a counsellor and/or other
    professionals, if  such  counselling  or  other  treatment  was  deemed
    necessary.

19. I am satisfied that the  appellant  has  retained  significant  social,
    family and cultural ties to Taiwan.  Although she has not visited there
    since 2012, her travel history indicates significant  return  trips  to
    Taiwan throughout the appellant's studies and life in the UK, including
    for extended periods. This  included  periods  to  obtain  support  and
    assistance from her parents due to the difficulties that the  appellant
    was then experiencing.

20. The appellant and her sister confirmed that they have  extended  family
    in Taiwan and the appellant's sister confirmed that she  visits  Taiwan
    every year.  The appellant's parents have also continued to  visit  the
    appellant and her sister in the UK, it would appear on an annual basis.
     Although again the  appellant  suggested  that  the  family  were  not
    particularly close,  it  would  seem  that  they  do  provide  support,
    emotional and financial if necessary, where needed to each other.

21. The appellant has a further sister in Taiwan who also was  educated  in
    the UK.  The appellant told me this sister had also obtained  a  number
    of qualifications  in  the  UK  and  had  returned,  after  marrying  a
    Taiwanese national and was living and working  in  a  part  of  Taiwan,
    separate from their parents. Although the appellant indicated that  she
    was not currently in regular contact with this  sister,  there  was  no
    adequate information or evidence to suggest that this sister could  not
    (together  with  the  appellant's  parents)  provide  support,   either
    emotional or financial if such were needed, to the appellant to  assist
    in her integration.

22. Although the appellant indicated that she did not wish to be reliant on
    her parents, the appellant was financially  supported  by  her  parents
    until she commenced her current employment,  and  as  noted  above,  is
    currently living rent free in their property.

23. In assessing whether  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to  the
    appellant's  integration  into  Taiwan,  I  have  considered  that  the
    appellant is also currently in a relationship with a British  national.
    Her partner gave evidence before me.  They have been in a  relationship
    for over a year and she indicated that her partner moved in with her in
    approximately September 2015 (the  relationship  commenced  in  October
    2014).

24. Her partner indicated that he would be happy to support any application
    that the appellant might make to return to the UK.  Both the  appellant
    and her partner indicated that  they  did  not  wish  to  continue  the
    relationship in Taiwan.  However,  I  am  not  satisfied  it  has  been
    demonstrated  that  there  would  be  significant  hardship  were   the
    appellant to return for a temporary  period  to  reapply  to  join  her
    partner if that is what they chose to do.

25. In addition, Mr Royall's objection to moving to Taiwan seemed primarily
    concerned with his current employment and the fact that it was based on
    face to face contact in the UK.  He also  indicated  that  he  did  not
    speak the language and may have difficulties in  obtaining  employment.
    However,  there  was  no  adequate  information  to  suggest  that  any
    enquiries had been made as to potential employment for Mr Royall if the
    couple decided to continue the relationship in Taiwan.

26. I was also referred by Miss Sreermanan to the Court of Appeal  case  of
    Agyarko & Ors, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2015]  and it was  her
    submission that the mere fact that the appellant has a British  citizen
    partner does not amount in itself  to  very  significant  obstacles  to
    living abroad.  I have also taken into consideration that the appellant
    could maintain any relationship through visits in the interim period if
    necessary.

27. For all the reasons set out above I am not satisfied that the appellant
    has demonstrated  that  she  can  qualify  under  paragraph  276ADE  or
    otherwise under the Immigration Rules in relation to private life.   As
    noted above, the thrust of Mr  Walsh's  skeleton  argument,  which  was
    based on Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules, would support that
    conclusion.

Article 8

28. Miss Sreeraman submitted that there was no evidence  of  compelling  or
    compassionate  circumstances  which  would  warrant  consideration   of
    Article 8 outside of the Rules or that there was any circumstances  not
    adequately addressed under the Immigration Rules.   I  have  considered
    the relevant case law including the Court of Appeal in SS  (Congo)  and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

29. I have also considered that Article  8  is  not  a  general  dispensing
    power.  Patel & Others v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] UKSC 72 applied.

30.  In terms of family ties, Miss Sreeraman conceded  that  the  appellant
    had lived with her sister in the UK. It was  her  submission  that  any
    family ties that they  had  did  not  go  beyond  normal  family  ties.
    Although I accept that the appellant and her sister did  live  together
    for a number of years in the UK, they are both adults.  They  both  now
    live with their own respective partners.  Both the  appellant  and  her
    sister in  oral  evidence  confirmed  that  they  see  each  other  now
    approximately once a week. I have taken  into  consideration  that  the
    appellant and her sister gave evidence that  they  support  each  other
    emotionally.  However, I am not satisfied that it has been demonstrated
    that the ties that exist between  them  go  beyond  the  normal  family
    relationships between adult siblings.  I  am  therefore  not  satisfied
    that family life is engaged in terms of Article 8.

31. In relation to the appellant's partner, I accept that  they  have  been
    living together  for  a  number  of  months.  Although  there  are  not
    currently any plans to marry and the couple are not engaged, they  both
    indicated that this was  their  future  intention.   I  note  that  the
    appellant's partner currently pays rent  to  the  appellant's  parents.
    The couple have been going out for less than two years.  It is arguable
    that their relationship does not yet constitute family life.   However,
    on balance I accept that it may do so and I note  that  Miss  Sreeraman
    conceded that it did.  I therefore proceed on the basis that  it  does.
    However,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  removal  would
    constitute a disproportionate interference with any family life  and  I
    consider  in  the  alternative  if  I  am  wrong  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's relationship with her sister, I have also  considered  that
    removal  will  not  be  a  disproportionate  interference   with   that
    relationship.

32. I have applied the five stage test in Razgar.  As  noted  above,  I  am
    satisfied that family life exists and I am also further satisfied  that
    the appellant has established private life in the UK.  I  am  satisfied
    that removal may interfere with that private and family  life  and  the
    consequences of  such  interference  may  be  of  such  gravity  as  to
    potentially engage Article 8.   Such interference is in accordance with
    the law as  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules and is for the legitimate aim of the  maintenance  of
    immigration control.  I therefore go on to consider the final  test  in
    Razgar, whether such interference is proportionate.

33. In doing so, I must take into account Section 117  of  the  Immigration
    Act 2002, the public interest considerations applicable in all cases. I
    remind myself that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is
    in the public interest.  The appellant does not meet  the  requirements
    of the relevant immigration rules.  In relation to  Section  117B(2)  I
    accept that the appellant is able to  speak  English.  In  relation  to
    117B(3) I further accept that the appellant is financially  independent
    (there was no indication that the appellant is in receipt of benefits).
    The appellant is currently in employment and would if necessary receive
    financial support from her parents. Therefore there is no weight to  be
    given out the public interest in relation to either Section 117B(2)  or
    (3).  However, Section 117B(5) indicates that little weight  should  be
    given to a private life established by a person  at  a  time  when  the
    person's immigration status is precarious.  I have also

34. Although Mr Walsh submitted that I should give weight to the fact  that
    the appellant had been in the UK for a  considerable  length  of  time,
    despite his submissions to the contrary, I find this to be a  near-miss
    argument in relation to the long residence Immigration  Rules.  As  set
    out in my error of law decision that finding by the First-tier Tribunal
    stands, in that the appellant could not meet the residence requirements
    in relation to long residence.  I am required by statute to give little
    weight to the appellant's private  life.   Nevertheless  I  have  given
    weight to the fact that she has professionally developed in the UK as a
    trainee lawyer.  I have given weight to the evidence that the appellant
    believes that her professional development would  be  severely  impeded
    should she have to return to Taiwan.  I have also given weight  to  the
    evidence before me including the witness  statement  evidence  and  the
    oral evidence of the appellant's close ties to friends  and  family  in
    the UK.  I have also given weight to the evidence before  me  that  the
    appellant has suffered from anorexia  and  depression  in  the  UK  and
    continues to receive counselling.

35. Mr Walsh in his skeleton  argument  submitted  that  under  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 in cases where family life is built up on the  back
    of  a  precarious  immigration  status  the  test  for  Article  8   is
    exceptional circumstances.  In  other  contexts  such  as  where  entry
    clearance is sought to continue family life previously formed the  test
    is compelling circumstances.

36. I am not  satisfied  that  there  are  any  compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances in the appellant's case, having  considered  all  of  the
    evidence in the round.  In relation to the appellant's family life with
    her partner, this was formed at a time when the appellant's partner was
    aware that the appellant, although lawfully in the  UK,  did  not  have
    permanent status in the UK.

37. Miss Sreeraman provided information in relation to processing times  at
    entry clearance posts in Taiwan which confirms  that  all  applications
    are processed within ten days.  Although she conceded that it may  well
    be that the appellant cannot yet meet the  requisite  requirements  for
    entry, for example as a partner, I am not satisfied that this would  be
    a disproportionate interference with any family life that the appellant
    has developed with her partner or with her private life, if she chooses
    to return to  the  UK.   I  accept  that  her  relationships  could  be
    maintained in the interim through visits.

38. The appellant and her  partner  have  been  in  a  relationship  for  a
    relatively short time.  The appellant's partner indicated that he would
    not be prepared to live in  Taiwan.  It  was  not  clear  what  it  was
    intended would happen to the relationship if the appellant is unable to
    return to the UK, which casts some doubt as  to  the  strength  of  the
    relationship.   Although  it  may  cause  some  difficulties  for   the
    appellant's partner to relocate to Taiwan, I am not satisfied  that  it
    would be disproportionate interference for him to do so if that is what
    the couple decide.

39.  The  couple  have  no  children.   The  appellant's  emotional  health
    difficulties are currently well managed with counselling and  there  is
    no evidence of any hardship in requiring the appellant to  return  home
    to Taiwan and make an application to re-enter the UK, if they  wish  to
    continue the relationship in the UK.

40.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  removal  would   be   a
    disproportionate interference with her family and private life  in  the
    UK.

Decision

41. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed and the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal is set aside to the extent set out at paragraph  20
    of the Decision on  Error  of  Law  and  Directions  appended  to  this
    decision.  I remake the  decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    under paragraph 276ADE and under Article 8.

42. No anonymity direction was sought or made.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


As the appeal is dismissed no fee is payable.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46225/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                              |
|On 22nd December 2015                         |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Miss Pei-Jui Lai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Seehra, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid Taylor
                    Solicitors

                   DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Veloso in a decision promulgated on 8th June
    2015 to allow Miss Pei-Jui Lai's appeal.  However, I shall refer to the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant Miss Pei-Jui Lai is a citizen of Taiwan born on 3rd  July
    1989.  The Appellant first entered the UK on a  student  visa  on  23rd
    September 2003.  The chronology of the Appellant's stay in  the  UK  is
    summarised at paragraph 2 of Judge Veloso's decision as follows:

    23rd September 2003    the Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  a
                      student visa valid until 31st August 2005

    16th July 2005    the Appellant returned to Taiwan

    27th August 2005  the Appellant entered the United Kingdom on a student
                      visa valid until 31st October 2006

    1st July 2006 the Appellant returned to Taiwan

    26th August 2006  the Appellant entered the United Kingdom on a student
                      visa valid until 31st October 2008

    14th July 2008    the Appellant returned to Taiwan

    17th September 2008    the Appellant entered the United  Kingdom  on  a
                      student visa valid until 31st October 2011

    30th October 2011 the Appellant returned to Taiwan

    2nd December 2011  the  Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
                      visitor's visa valid six months

    21st December 2011     the Appellant returned to Taiwan

    6th January 2012  the Appellant entered the United Kingdom on a Tier  4
                      (General) Migrant visa valid until 15th June 2012

    17th July 2012    the Appellant returned to Taiwan

    21st August 2012  the Appellant entered the United Kingdom on a Tier  4
                      (General) Migrant visa valid until 14th August 2013

    August 2012   the Appellant was awarded her Diploma in Law from UCL

    8th August 2013   the Appellant applied for indefinite leave to  remain
                      on the grounds of ten years' long residence

    18th  December  2013      the  Respondent   refused   the   Appellant's
                      application for indefinite leave to remain

    14th January 2014 the Appellant lodged Grounds of  Appeal  against  the
                      Respondent's decision

    June 2014     the Appellant completed her legal practice course

    1st August 2014   the Tribunal allowed the Appellant's appeal in  order
                      to permit the  Respondent  to  consider  the  correct
                      criteria

    September  2014     the  Appellant  started  work  for   Fletcher   Day
                      Solicitors.

 3. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on 7th November 2014
    for the reasons set out in  the  refusal  letter  of  that  date.   The
    Respondent's Notice of Immigration Decision is also dated 7th  November
    2014 in which the Respondent refuses to vary leave to enter  or  remain
    and decides that the Appellant should be removed from the UK by way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 4.  The  appeal  came  before  Judge  Veloso,  who  considered  first  the
    Appellant's application under paragraph 276B of the Immigration  Rules.
    Paragraph 276B(i)(a) requires that

    "... has had at least ten years' continuous  lawful  residence  in  the
         United Kingdom."

 5. The Respondent in the refusal letter asserted that  the  Appellant  had
    been outside  the  UK  for  637  days  whilst  her  own  representative
    confirmed that the absence totalled around 600 days.

 6. Judge Veloso found that the Appellant had failed to show that  she  had
    been absent for less than the maximum number of days over the qualified
    period and therefore  had  failed  to  show  that  she  had  continuous
    residence as required by paragraph 276B(i)(a).  The judge has  set  out
    that for the purposes of both paragraphs  276B  and  276ADE,  paragraph
    276A(a)(v) considers "continuous residence" to have been broken  if  an
    applicant

    "has spent a total of more than eighteen months absent from the  United
         Kingdom during the period in question."

 7. Paragraph 276A(c) states that:

    "'lived  continuously'  and  'living  continuously'  mean   'continuous
         residence'."

 8. However, the judge in considering the Appellant's  private  life  under
    paragraph 276ADE found that it fell to be  considered  under  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) and found that there were "very  significant  obstacles"  to
    the Appellant's integration into her home country of Taiwan if required
    to leave the UK.

 9. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal.  The Grounds of Appeal
    argue that the decision of the First-tier  Judge  contained  inadequate
    reasons  for  the  finding  of  "very  significant  obstacles  to   the
    Appellant's integration" into her home country of Taiwan, and that  the
    judge ultimately reached a conclusion not open to him on  the  evidence
    and therefore the decision was perverse.

10. The grounds set out that at paragraph 33 the judge appeared  to  accept
    the Appellant's claim that  her  career  prospects  would  be  severely
    hampered by her return to Taiwan, although the judge failed to  explain
    why this would be the case; which, it was argued, was perverse  on  the
    facts.  The  judge  also  accepted  in  the  same  paragraph  that  the
    Appellant's Chinese is "no longer very good" and that this would form a
    further barrier to her integration.  However, given that the  Appellant
    had lived permanently in Taiwan until she was 14 and failed to meet the
    long residence Rules because of the long holidays she had  spent  there
    between school terms it was argued that it was not clear why the  judge
    found that the Appellant's Chinese had deteriorated to any  appreciable
    degree.  Even if it had, it was argued that it was irrational  to  find
    that this could  amount  to  a  very  significant  obstacle  given  the
    Appellant's clear academic aptitude and consequent  ability  to  regain
    fluency.

11. The judge placed reliance on a report from a psychologist  in  relation
    to the Appellant's vulnerability to depression.  It was argued that the
    judge failed to explain why the readjustment required by the  Appellant
    in requiring her to go back to Taiwan as an adult, with the  assistance
    of ongoing counselling if required,  amounted  to  a  very  significant
    obstacle to reintegration.

Error of Law Hearing

12. The appeal came before me.  Ms Fijiwala  for  the  Secretary  of  State
    relied on the Grounds of Appeal as summarised above.  Ms Seehra for the
    Appellant provided me with the Appellant's Rule 24 response and  argued
    that the challenge was unfounded considering the detailed reasons given
    by the  judge.   She  expanded  on  this  before  me  and  referred  in
    particular  to  the  fact  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   had
    identified a number of factors in relation to the  Appellant  including
    her vulnerability to relocating at a young age, that she had  lived  in
    the UK since 2003 when attending boarding school; that she was aged  14
    on arrival and at the time of hearing was nearly 26 years old; that she
    had spent twelve years living lawfully in the UK; that she had  battled
    with anorexia and depression whilst at school and this had led to trips
    to Taiwan; that her adolescence, some of her formative  years  and  her
    entire adulthood had been spent in the UK; that she had lived with  her
    sister in the UK since 2006; that she had  been  undertaking  cognitive
    behavioural therapy since July 2003; and she had employment in the UK.

13. Ms Fijiwala relied on the Respondent's  guidance  in  relation  to  the
    meaning of very significant obstacles.  The extract before me was dated
    August 2015.  This provides that:

    "When assessing  whether  there  are  'very  significant  obstacles  to
         integration into the country to which they  would  have  to  go  if
         required to leave the UK', the starting point is to assume that the
         applicant will be able to integrate into their country  of  return,
         unless they can demonstrate why that is not the case.  The onus  is
         on the applicant to show that there are very significant  obstacles
         to that integration, not on the decision maker to show  that  there
         are not."

    The guidance further provides:

    "A very significant obstacle to integration means something which would
         prevent or seriously inhibit the applicant  from  integrating  into
         the country of return.  The decision maker is looking for more than
         obstacles.  They  are  looking  to  see  whether  there  are  'very
         significant'  obstacles,  which  is   a   high   threshold.    Very
         significant obstacles will exist where the  applicant  demonstrates
         that they would be unable  to  establish  a  private  life  in  the
         country of return, or where establishing  a  private  life  in  the
         country of return  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
         applicant."

14. Ms Seehra reminded me that this extract was just guidance.

15. I have also considered that there is  a  very  high  threshold  for  an
    irrationality argument to succeed.   I  have  reminded  myself  that  a
    conclusion is not irrational just because some alternative  explanation
    has been rejected or can be said to be  possible:  R  (Iran)  &  Ors  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982 applied.

16. However, in this appeal I am satisfied that  that  threshold  has  been
    reached.  Although it is clear that the judge took into consideration a
    number of factors including as summarised by  Ms  Seehra  and  set  out
    above, I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Judge  failed
    to take full cognisance of the Appellant's  repeated  return  trips  to
    Taiwan (again as set out above) which it was found  defeated  the  long
    residence claim.  These trips back, it has not been disputed,  were  to
    obtain emotional support from her parents, who still live in Taiwan.

17. Although Ms Seehra argued that this was very much in the context of the
    Appellant as a child, I am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge  has  made
    adequate findings, or indeed any, as to why her parents would not be in
    a position to provide support, if required, on return.  In addition the
    Appellant's return trips to Taiwan, together with  the  fact  that  she
    lived there until the age of 14, is also relevant  to  the  Appellant's
    level of ability in the Chinese language.  However, as noted above, the
    judge found that the Appellant was credible and that  her  Chinese  was
    "no longer very good".  I am not satisfied that Ms Seehra was  able  to
    demonstrate how such a finding was sustainable in the  absence  of  any
    adequate reasons for reaching such a  decision  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence before the judge.

18. In the alternative I am further satisfied that even if such  a  finding
    were correct, that the Appellant's Chinese is "no  longer  very  good",
    that it was irrational to conclude that this  was  a  very  significant
    obstacle without providing adequate reasons as to why  the  Appellant's
    clear academic aptitude would not assist her in regaining the requisite
    level of fluency and in integrating generally.

19. I am satisfied therefore that the making of the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal did involve the making of an error of  a  point  of  law,
    capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and is set aside to  the
    extent set out below.  I gave my decision at the hearing.

20. I am satisfied that this error did not infect the judge's  findings  in
    relation to paragraph 276B in relation  to  long  residence  and  I  am
    satisfied that these findings, at paragraphs 25 to 27  of  the  judge's
    decision,  can stand.

21.  However,  given  in  particular  the  question  in  relation  to   the
    Appellant's command and level of Chinese,  it  is  not  appropriate  to
    preserve  Judge  Veloso's  findings  of  credibility.   None  of  Judge
    Veloso's findings in relation to paragraph 276ADE are to stand.

Remaking the Decision

22. I had initially been disposed to remake the decision on the day and  to
    hear further evidence, Ms Seehra having provided a bundle of  documents
    in the event that the Tribunal wished to remake the decision.   However
    Ms Seehra indicated  that  not  all  of  the  witnesses  were  in  fact
    available, due to a variety  of  factors.  I  considered  the  Tribunal
    Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  including   the   overriding
    objective at Rule 2 which is to enable the Upper Tribunal to deal  with
    cases fairly and justly.

23. Although the missing witnesses' evidence may be more peripheral to  the
    Appellant's  case  than  that  of  the  witnesses  who  were   present,
    nevertheless I accepted Ms Seehra's submission that given  the  failure
    of Judge Veloso to make findings in relation to Article  8  outside  of
    the Rules that issue  will  still  be  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    remaking the decision.

24. Given that Judge Veloso did not make findings of fact  in  relation  to
    the oral evidence that was given before Judge Veloso in relation to the
    witnesses who were not present before me, I was of the view that it was
    fair and just to both parties to adjourn the hearing.  Ms Fijiwala  did
    not object to such a course.

Notice of Decision on Error of Law


The First-tier Tribunal's determination contains an error of law capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal and is set aside (other than as set  out
at paragraph 20 above)

The decision on the appeal will be remade by the Upper Tribunal.

                                   DIRECTIONS

 A. The appeal is relisted on 10th February  2016  (am),  before  a  single
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

 B. The Appellant's representative is to ensure  that  witness  statements,
    updated if necessary, are  filed  and  served  for  all  of  the  seven
    proposed witnesses.

 C. The  Appellant's  representative  is  directed  to  file  and  serve  a
    consolidated, tabulated bundle of any evidence, including such  witness
    statements, which the Appellant wishes to rely on  in  respect  of  her
    appeal under paragraph 276ADE(1) and under Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules, no later than 27th January 2016.

 D. The  Appellant's  representative  is  to  file  and  serve  a  skeleton
    argument.

 E.  The Secretary of State is to file  and  serve,  by  no  later  than  3
    February 2016, any evidence relied upon that is  not  contained  within
    the bundle she relied upon before the First-tier Tribunal

 F. The case is to be listed for three hours.

   Any failure to comply with these directions  may  lead  the  Tribunal  to
   exercise its powers to decide the appeal without a further oral  hearing,
   or to conclude that the defaulting party  has  no  relevant  information,
   evidence or submissions to provide.

No anonymity direction is made

Signed                                  Date:  12 January 2016


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hutchinson


