
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46005/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 April 2015                     |On 28 April 2015                     |
|Dictated 21 April 2015               |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                            olugbade olao thomas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None (The appellant attended the hearing in person)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a Nigerian citizen, came to the  UK  in  2007  with  his
    French wife, and had a residence card as her husband  for  five  years,
    until June 2013.  An application for a further residence card, made  in
    April 2013, was then refused, and the appellant's appeal  against  this
    refusal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidson,  following
    a hearing at Taylor House on 7 August 2014.

2.   Permission to  appeal  was  initially  refused,  but  was  subsequently
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane, on  15  January  2015.   In
    granting permission reference was made to the fact that Article  8  had
    been raised in the grounds of appeal before  the  First-tier,  but  the
    judge had not addressed this at all in his decision.  If the judge  had
    considered that Article 8 was not engaged, then arguably reasons should
    have been given.

Error of Law

3.   At the hearing the appellant confirmed that he was  no  longer  legally
    represented.  I explained the purpose of the hearing, and asked  him  a
    number of questions designed to clarify the nature of his challenge  to
    the judge's decision.

4.   The appellant said that his wife  and  son  were  currently  living  in
    Israel.  They had been there since January 2015.  His wife's mother  in
    Israel is ill, and relies on her.  The appellant then mentioned that he
    was now separated from his wife.   The  couple  had  been  divorced  in
    Nigeria in 2012.  This had not been mentioned at the hearing  in  2014.
    The appellant was particularly worried about losing  contact  with  his
    son.  The couple had met in Israel in 2001, and had  married  in  2004.
    The appellant was still hoping that they might be reunited.

5.   Ms Everett, for the Secretary of State, referred to  a  case  that  had
    been heard on 31 March 2015, before a Presidential panel,  in  which  a
    decision was awaited.  Although she was not aware of the  full  details
    of the submissions made she knew that the Secretary of State had  taken
    the position that Article 8  was  not  engaged  in  EEA  appeals.   She
    therefore had to resile from the position  in  the  Rule  24  response,
    where it had been accepted that there was an error of law, although not
    a material one.

6.   As I indicated at the hearing I have decided that there  was  an  error
    of law, but that it was not material to the outcome.

7.   The question of whether Article 8  is  engaged  in  EEA  appeals  is  a
    complex one, on  which  there  may  be  guidance  available  soon.   At
    present, however, it appears to me to be safe to say that the judge was
    obliged to consider Article 8, even if briefly, because it was a matter
    raised in the grounds of appeal.  As indicated by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge who gave permission it would also have  been  necessary,  if  the
    judge had decided that Article 8 was not engaged, for some  reasons  to
    have been given, even if brief.  It therefore appears to me to  be  the
    case that the judge can be said to have erred in law in not making  any
    reference whatsoever to the Article 8 grounds raised before him.

8.   My decision that this was not material, however, rests on a  number  of
    findings in the decision.  Although the appellant's wife was present at
    the hearing the judge found, at paragraph 17, that the appellant's wife
    and child had been spending considerable periods,  including  a  period
    from November 2011 to May 2013, living in Israel.   Any  assessment  of
    Article 8  would  therefore  not  have  been  on  the  basis  that  the
    appellant's wife and child, being resident in the UK, would  have  been
    separated from the appellant by  his  being  removed,  or  required  to
    leave.  For these reasons I accept  the  point  made  in  the  Rule  24
    response, that the appeal could  not  possibly  have  been  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds, for these  reasons,  even  if  Article  8  had  been
    considered.

9.   The appellant mentioned significant new issues, but these were  matters
    that were not raised before the judge.  The most important of these was
    that the appellant said that he and his wife had in fact been  divorced
    in 2012.  This was an important piece of information that  neither  the
    appellant nor the appellant's wife disclosed at the  hearing.   If  the
    appellant now has concerns about access to his child, then  those  have
    to be addressed in the light of the fact that his child is  now  living
    in Israel.

10.  There was some discussion of the issue of a  potential  retained  right
    of residence.  This was not explored in any detail.  Again, this was  a
    matter that was not raised before the  judge.   If  the  appellant  now
    wants to pursue an application on the basis  that  he  had  acquired  a
    retained right of residence in the UK by the time of the  divorce,  and
    if he can establish the divorce itself, which he has said took place in
    Nigeria, then it  is  open  to  him  to  make  an  application  to  the
    respondent.  He would need to  show  that  she  was  exercising  treaty
    rights at the time of the divorce; that they had lived together in  the
    UK for at least a year (and been married for 3 years); and that he  was
    and is working.  He would also need to explain his decision to withhold
    the true picture in his application and at the appeal.  None  of  this,
    however, appears to me to impact on the question of whether the judge's
    approach involved a material error of law.

11.  No mention was made of any issues in  relation  to  anonymity,  or  fee
    awards.

Notice of Decision

12.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

13.  The error of law in not  dealing  with  Article  8  was  not,  in  this
    particular case, a material one, and the  judge's  decision  dismissing
    the appeal stands.

14.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

