
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46629/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On  9th September 2014                          |On 8th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                              MR ALSANA JAMMEH
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia who  was  born  on  the  16th  March
   1969. He appeals, with permission, against the dismissal of his appeal by
   the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Borsada) to  refuse  his  application  for
   discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  (outside  the
   Immigration Rules) and to remove him from the United Kingdom.

2. The appellant's application for leave to remain was based upon his  claim
   that his removal from the United Kingdom would be contravene his right to
   freedom from inhuman and degrading treatment under Article 3 and right to
   respect for his physical and moral integrity under Article 8 of the  1950
   European Convention for the Protection of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
   Freedoms. These claims were in turn based upon the undisputed  fact  that
   the appellant is currently receiving treatment in the UK for  a  urethral
   stricture.

3. At paragraph 9, the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  determined  the  appeal
   under Article 3 of the Convention in the following terms:

    I note the appellant's sole reason for staying in the UK is to continue
    with his medical treatment. I do however agree with the respondent that
    there is a lack of authoritative  evidence  concerning  this  treatment
    including the 'on going' nature of such treatment and prognosis.  There
    is no medical report provided which indicates the  seriousness  of  the
    condition or whether as appears to be claimed that it is in  any  sense
    life threatening without  treatment.  Furthermore,  the  appellant  has
    provided no evidence as to why he would not be able to obtain treatment
    in Gambia other than the assertion that  it  would  not  be  available.
    Given the lack of evidence I can make no findings of  fact  on  any  of
    these issues and the appellant has failed to meet the burden of  proof.
    The appellant clearly has a subjective fear of being returned to Gambia
    but he has provided no evidence to support his  claim  that  this  fear
    would be realised and the high threshold in article 3 cases has  simply
    not demonstrably been reached. There is  certainly  not  the  near  the
    certainty of death on his return that is required in  article  3  cases
    and he has not established that he would suffer inhuman  and  degrading
    treatment.

4. At paragraph 10, the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considered  Article  8
   within the context of the appellant's social, cultural and family ties to
   the United Kingdom. He did not however consider it within the context  of
   the medical issues raised in the appeal.

5. In refusing permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Designated  Judge
   Garratt noted that the appellant claimed  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   judge had failed to apply the decision in N v United  Kingdom  [2008]  47
   EHRR 885 to  the  facts  of  his  case.  However,  the  Designated  Judge
   concluded that this ground was not arguable because there was a  lack  of
   evidence concerning the treatment for and prognosis  of  the  appellant's
   medical  condition,  or  to  show  that  any  necessary   treatment   was
   unavailable in Gambia.

6. In granting  a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Macleman noted that the appellant now relied upon  JA  and
   ES [2009] EWCA Civ  1353,  and  concluded  that  there  appeared  "to  be
   principles in relation to which the case  under  article  8  may  require
   further analysis".

7. Although this case was listed for an  oral  hearing,  the  appellant  has
   always stated that he wished for his appeal determined without a hearing.
   It therefore came as no surprise to discover that he had not attended the
   hearing, of which I am satisfied  he  had  been  served  with  notice.  I
   therefore decided to determine his appeal on the papers.

8. In his  renewed  application,  the  appellant  implies  that  the  United
   Kingdom may have assumed responsibility for his  treatment  and  that  he
   should therefore "be granted ELR [exceptional leave  to  remain]  in  the
   light of (JA) and (ES)". He adds  that  "there  was  no  finding  by  the
   Tribunal that I had much if any hope of securing treatment if returned to
   Gambia or as to the severity and consequences of removal".

9. It is clear from the terms in which the appellant's  renewed  application
   is couched, that his argument in founded entirely upon  the  observations
   of the Court of Appeal in JA (Ivory Coast) and ES (Tanzania) [2009]  EWCA
   Civ 1353. It may thus be helpful to  summarise  those  principles  before
   returning to consider the First-tier Tribunal's analysis of  the  instant
   appeal.

10. Firstly, "assumption of responsibility" in this  context  is  neither  a
   term of legal art nor a description of a legal obligation [paragraph 7 of
   the  judgement  in  JA  (Ivory  Coast)].  Secondly,  there  is  no  fixed
   relationship between Art.  3  and  Art.  8.  Typically  a  finding  of  a
   violation of the former may make a decision on  the  latter  unnecessary;
   but the latter is not simply  a  more  easily  accessed  version  of  the
   former. Each has to be approached and applied on its own terms. It is not
   therefore the case that the appeal must either succeed under Article 3 or
   not at all [paragraph 17]. Thirdly, in order for Article 8 to be  engaged
   in a medical case, it is necessary for the appellant  to  show  that  the
   United Kingdom has made a commitment, initially  prompted  by  compassion
   and subsequently by  a  sense  of  moral  obligation,  to  providing  the
   appellant with NHS treatment [paragraph 23]. Fourthly,  if  it  is  found
   that such a commitment has been made in an individual case, then this  is
   capable of tipping the proportionality balance  against  the  appellant's
   removal in furtherance of the economic well being of the country.

11. The First-tier Tribunal did not consider any of  the  above  principles.
   Instead, it focussed entirely upon the test for engagement of  Article  3
   in medical cases, and considered Article 8 only within the context of the
   appellant's social, cultural and family ties to the  United  Kingdom.  In
   failing to consider whether the appellant's removal might also amount  to
   an unjustified breach of his right to moral and  physical  integrity,  by
   reason of the  interruption  it  would  cause  to  the  treatment  he  is
   currently receiving for his medical condition, the Tribunal erred in law.
   However, this error was immaterial to the outcome of the appeal. Although
   the appellant openly seeks to indentify the facts of his case with  those
   of JA (as opposed to those of ES, in respect of whom the Court of  Appeal
   found that Article 8 was not engaged) the fact remains that there was  no
   evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to show that the  United  Kingdom
   had made any form of commitment to providing the appellant with long-term
   medical  treatment,  whether  out  of  a  sense  of   compassion,   moral
   obligation, or otherwise. The appellant entered the United Kingdom  as  a
   Tier 5 TW (religious migrant).  His  treatment  on  the  National  Health
   Service was thus an incidental benefit of his having leave to  remain  in
   the United Kingdom in that category, rather than the reason for it  being
   granted.  The  appellant  cannot  therefore  have  had   any   legitimate
   expectation that he would be permitted to remain in the  United  Kingdom,
   beyond the limited period of his leave to  remain,  for  the  purpose  of
   continuing to receive treatment on the NHS. Article 8 was  not  therefore
   engaged by the facts of the  appellant's  case,  and  the  issue  of  the
   proportionality of his removal to Gambia  did  not  therefore  arise  for
   consideration within this context.

Decision

12. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity not directed.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

