
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46794/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 June 2014                                |On 18 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                          Veronica Ayoyemi Famoroti

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms O Ukachi-Lois instructed by Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S L Ong, Home Office Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Nigeria who appealed to a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's  decision  of  21  October
    2013 refusing her application for a  derivative  residence  card.   The
    basis of her application was that she was a third country national upon
    whom a British citizen was dependent in  the  United  Kingdom,  on  the
    basis of the decision of the CJEU in Zambrano  [2011]  EUECJ-34/09  (08
    March 2011).

2.   The judge noted that for the appellant to qualify  she  would  have  to
    show that she was the primary carer  of  the  EEA  national,  i.e.  her
    daughter M.

3.   Her evidence was that she had come to the United Kingdom as  a  student
    and entered into a relationship with George Guduza  and  they  had  the
    child M together.  M was born  in  April  2012.   By  that  stage,  the
    appellant said, her relationship with Mr Guduza had already broken down
    though after M's birth contact was resumed to the extent that  he  gave
    her his passport which she then used to apply for  a  British  passport
    for M.  Subsequently he retrieved his passport but  she  said  that  in
    every other respect he had disappeared.

4.   In her statement she said she was the sole and  primary  carer  of  her
    child and had full parental responsibility and Mr Guduza had failed  to
    take any care or accept  responsibility  for  her  and  had  failed  to
    provide any financial support.  She provided two documents  in  support
    of her arguments.  The first was a letter from the Kent County  Council
    stating that the appellant and her daughter  had  been  known  to  them
    since October 2013 and according to the  information  provided  by  the
    appellant and to the best of the writer's knowledge the  appellant  was
    the main carer for M.  The second letter came from Temple Hill  Surgery
    and was from the GP who said with reference to the appellant  that  she
    had requested a letter confirming that she was the  only  one  who  had
    brought her daughter into the surgery and she confirmed that since  she
    had been bringing her daughter to the surgery she was the only one  who
    had been doing so.

5.   In oral evidence the appellant said that she had  been  working  twenty
    hours a week in accordance with her student visa and  had  been  helped
    financially by friends.  She had not been sent any money by her parents
    as they considered the child to be illegitimate.

6.   The judge considered the chain of events set out above to  be  curious.
    He found it more than coincidental that the father came back to reclaim
    his passport and then simply abandoned the appellant.  He said that the
    lack of any evidence as to the appellant's personal  circumstances,  in
    particular critical evidence as to how she was  supporting  herself  in
    relation to looking after her child and continuing her studies,  showed
    to him that her case lacked substance and in fact  the  more  she  gave
    evidence the more satisfied he was that there was much more to her case
    than she was prepared to reveal.  He did not  find  credible  the  bare
    assertion that she was on her own and dependent  upon  friends  without
    any support from her family.  He considered that all  the  evidence  in
    the case pointed to the father having played a careful role in ensuring
    that his child had a British passport, and he did not accept  that  the
    father had disappeared from the scene.  He  said  that  for  all  these
    reasons he was satisfied that that part of the  case  relating  to  the
    alleged care of her child had been manufactured, and he  dismissed  the
    appeal.
7.   Permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that  no  evidence  had
    been adduced to suggest that the child's father had any involvement  in
    the child's care and the judge had not commented on the letter from the
    Social Services  or  the  GP  and  did  not  indicate  whether  he  had
    considered the case of Omotunde (best interests -  Zambrano  applied  -
    Razgar) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00247 (IAC).

8.    On  the  issue  of  whether  there  was  an  error  of  law   in   the
    determination, Ms Ukachi-Lois referred  to  the  respondent's  Rule  24
    response which had been served on 14 May 2014 and argued  that  it  did
    not address the Zambrano and Omotunde issues that had  been  raised  in
    the grounds.  The judge had not referred to the evidence and it  should
    be found that he had erred materially.

9.   In her submissions Ms Ong argued that the judge had not  accepted  that
    the appellant was the primary carer.  He had not accepted  the  account
    she gave concerning the child's father and there were concerns about  a
    lack of evidence and these were proper concerns.  The  absence  of  any
    consideration of Article 8 was not material.  It was the case that  the
    two letters had not been referred to specifically, but  they  were  set
    out at paragraphs 8 and  9  in  the  summary  of  submissions  and  the
    reference to them showed that they had been considered  by  the  judge.
    In any event it was not material.  What was said in that  evidence  was
    very limited and did not take the case much further and  there  was  no
    evidence for example from friends in the  United  Kingdom  which  could
    have assisted or any other forms of evidence which could  be  what  the
    judge meant with regard to the reference to  a  lack  of  evidence,  at
    paragraph 15.

10.  By way of reply Ms Ukachi-Lois referred to the birth certificate at  E1
    of the respondent's bundle which showed the different addresses of  the
    appellant and the father which she said showed  that  at  the  time  of
    birth they were living at two different address and that  was  relevant
    to the claim that they were not together.  It was crucial  in  such  an
    application for the relevant case law to be considered and there was no
    consideration of the best interests of the child.

11.  After consideration I concluded  that  the  judge's  determination  was
    marred by a material error  of  law  in  the  failure  to  address  the
    evidence from Kent County Council and from the GP in assessing  whether
    or not the appellant had shown that she was the primary carer, and also
    with regard to the failure to address Article 8.

12.  The appellant produced further evidence in the  form  of  letters  from
    the Kent County Council and a letter from HMRC concerning tax  credits.
    She argued with regard to the former, which was dated 22 May 2012, that
    it related also to the letter in the bundle  of  24  January  2014  and
    addressed the initial assessment that had been made in the  absence  of
    any safeguarding issues.  It pointed to the council  being  aware  that
    the appellant and her daughter needed help.  There was no reference  to
    anyone else.  The tax credits letter identified that she  was  entitled
    to tax credit and  it  was  again  specifically  in  reference  to  the
    appellant.  It was all of that evidence which pointed to her being  the
    primary carer for her daughter.
13.  In her submissions Ms Ong argued that this evidence did not  prove  the
    appellant was the primary carer on a balance of  probabilities.   There
    had been very limited Social Services involvement to date, including  a
    reference "to the best of their knowledge", her being the  sole  carer.
    The HMRC letter about tax credits was based on what the appellant said.
     It did not go to prove the issue of her  being  a  primary  carer  and
    there was no evidence as to how she supported herself  for  example  by
    way  of  bank  statements  or  evidence  from   friends   without   the
    relationship.  This was of relevance to the burden of proof.

14.  With regard to Article 8, Regulation  15A  had  been  introduced  after
    Zambrano to take into account the fact that where the appellant was not
    a primary carer there might be someone,  potentially  the  father,  who
    could provide care.  The appellant could not meet the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE and there was no evidence put in  about
    either of those and it was clear from Gulshan that otherwise compelling
    circumstances needed to be shown and that had not been done.

15.  By way of reply Ms Ukachi-Lois argued  that  the  appellant's  evidence
    was that friends and family supported her and  her  evidence  had  been
    consistent.  There was no proof of financial assistance as she had been
    helped by way of money paid by hand and it was very hard to  prove  any
    kind of audit trail.  The crux was whether the best  interests  of  the
    child were to remain with her mother and she was the  only  person  who
    could care for her.

16.  I reserved my determination.

17.  The onus is on the appellant to show that she is the primary  carer  of
    her daughter M.  The evidence in this regard is essentially as set  out
    above.  The documentation, such as it is, all goes  one  way.   As  was
    pointed out by the judge who granted permission to appeal, there is  no
    evidence to show that the child's father has had any involvement in her
    care.  There is the indirect point referred to by Ms Ukachi-Lois of the
    mention of the two addresses on the birth certificate, the birth having
    been registered on 11 May 2012, and the further evidence put  in  today
    from the Kent County Council and also from HMRC with regard  to  a  tax
    credits award to the appellant.  It is  a  matter  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities only, and although the evidence is far from overwhelming,
    I am persuaded that the burden of  proof  has  been  satisfied  by  the
    appellant in this case.  Accordingly I conclude that she has  made  out
    the requirements of Regulation 15A and has shown that she  is  entitled
    to a derivative  right  of  residence,  and  her  appeal  is  therefore
    allowed.





Signed                                  Date 12.06.2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
