

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/46532/2013
                                                               IA/46533/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2014                               |On 9 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR WAQAR AHMED
                                MRS MARIA TAJ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, Muzaffar Associates Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This appeal is brought with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal  Fox.   The  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   allowed appeals by a husband and wife, Mr Waqar Ahmed and Mrs  Maria  Taj
   (hereinafter referred to as "the applicants".  The first named  applicant
   was appealing against refusal of leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant
   under the Points Based System and  the  second  applicant  was  appealing
   against a refusal of leave as his dependant.  The applications were  made
   on 3 October 2013 and the refusal decisions were dated 30  October  2013.
   The reason for the refusal decision was that the  first  applicant  could
   not satisfy the English language requirement under the Immigration Rules.



2) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that the first  applicant  had
   not provided the appropriate English language test certificate  with  his
   application for a variation of leave.   However,  a  certificate  showing
   English language ability to the required standard was before the judge by
   the date of the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  judge
   recorded that he was able to accept  this  as  evidence  because  he  was
   "allowed to engage flexibility" in making his determination.   The  judge
   further recorded that the first applicant was  advised  by  his  original
   solicitors that he did not need an English language certificate in  order
   to make his application.  If he did need one, then the  respondent  would
   contact him to ask for it.  The judge found that the applicant was  badly
   advised by his original solicitors.  The judge  further  found  that  the
   refusal to vary leave was disproportionate under Article 8.

3) The Secretary of State submitted a number of grounds in  the  application
   for permission to appeal.  The first of these was that the judge was  not
   entitled to take into account additional evidence not submitted with  the
   application, in terms of  the  restrictions  on  additional  evidence  in
   section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration  &  Asylum  Act  2002.    The
   judge was not entitled to make an adverse finding against the applicants'
   former legal advisers in the absence of evidence  that  a  complaint  had
   been made and the advisers had had a chance  to  respond,  in  accordance
   with BT  (Former  solicitors'  alleged  misconduct)  Nepal  [2014]  UKIAT
   00311.  It was further submitted that the judge  erred  in  finding  that
   Article 8 was engaged.  It was  not  open  to  the  judge  to  reach  the
   decision on Article 8 which he did and there was inadequate reasoning for
   the decision.  Permission was granted on all these grounds.

4) At the hearing Mrs O'Brien, for the Secretary of State, relied  upon  the
   grounds in the application.  The judge had accepted  evidence  which  was
   not submitted with the application, contrary to section 85A.  It was  not
   clear what concept of "flexibility" the judge had in mind.  The judge had
   accepted that a  mistake  had  been  made  by  the  applicants'  previous
   advisers without the maligned party having had the  chance  to  make  any
   comment.  There were no grounds to support  the  judge's  decision  under
   Article 8.  The  judge's  decision  was  flawed  and  should  be  re-made
   dismissing the appeals on all grounds.

5) For the applicants, Mr Iqbal  submitted  that  the  first  applicant  had
   passed the required language  test  before  submitting  the  application.
   Appropriate reasons were given by the judge at paragraph 12 for admitting
   the certificate.  If the Secretary of State had  sent  a  letter  to  the
   first applicant asking for the certificate it would have  been  provided.
   The judge had properly applied evidential flexibility in accordance  with
   the case of Rodriguez, which had not yet been overturned at the  time  of
   the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

6) Mr Iqbal  confirmed  that  he  had  not  obtained  the  comments  of  the
   applicants' previous advisers in relation to the inappropriate advice the
   applicants said they had been given.  Mr Iqbal sought to explain that  he
   had not filed the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  but  had  only  been
   instructed after the appeal was listed.

7) Section 85 of the 2002 Act sets out the general rule that  in  an  appeal
   the Tribunal may consider evidence  about  any  matter  which  it  thinks
   relevant to the substance  of  the  decision,  including  evidence  which
   concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.   This  general
   rule is, however, subject to exceptions set out in section 85A,  inserted
   by the UK Borders Act 2007, section  19.   Exception  2  in  section  85A
   applies to an appeal under the Points Based System, which  these  appeals
   were.  Where Exception 2  applies  the  Tribunal  may  consider  evidence
   adduced by the appellant only if it was submitted in support of,  and  at
   the time of making, the application to  which  the  immigration  decision
   related (subject to certain limited exceptions which are not relevant  to
   these appeals).  Accordingly, in terms of section 85A the judge  was  not
   entitled to consider as evidence the English  language  test  certificate
   adduced by the appellant after the application was made.    Although  the
   judge referred to the concept of  "flexibility",  no  authority  was  put
   before us which would have entitled the judge to consider this  evidence,
   even under the case law at that time.  Accordingly we are satisfied  that
   the judge erred in law by considering as evidence  the  English  language
   test certificate.

8) We are further satisfied that the judge erred in relation  to  Article  8
   by not giving adequate reasons for his decision.  The judge further erred
   in his treatment of the  criticism  made  by  the  applicants'  of  their
   previous legal advisers.

9) The decision of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  is  flawed  and  as
   such it is set aside.  Without evidence to show  that  he  satisfied  the
   English language test requirement, the application by the first applicant
   could not succeed under the Immigration Rules.  The first  applicant  was
   not entitled to  the  necessary  points  for  knowledge  of  the  English
   language under Appendix B of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Accordingly  his
   appeal could not succeed.  The appeal by his wife as his dependant  could
   not succeed where his appeal was unsuccessful.

10) There was no adequate basis for allowing the appeals  under  Article  8.
   The first applicant came to the UK in 2008 with leave as a  student.   In
   2011 he was granted leave as a Tier 1 (HS Post  Study)  Migrant.   At  no
   point did the first applicant have anything other than limited leave  and
   there was no expectation that  he  and  the  second  applicant  would  be
   allowed to remain indefinitely in the UK.  The refusal decisions  do  not
   constitute an interference with their family life and, to the extent that
   they interfere with the applicants' private life, there  are  no  grounds
   for finding that that interference is disproportionate, given the  length
   of time they have been in the UK and the reasons  for  their  stay.   The
   decision the First-tier Tribunal should have made  was  to  dismiss  both
   appeals and this is the decision we now make.




Conclusions

11) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of errors on points of law.

12) We set aside the decision.

13) We re-make the decision in the appeals by dismissing the appeals.

Anonymity

14) The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  any  order  or  direction  for
   anonymity.  We have not had any application made to us for such an  order
   and we see no reason for making one.





Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans



Fee Award                  Note: this is not part of the determination

As the appeals are dismissed, no fee award can be made.

Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


