
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46884/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th January 2017                          |On 7 February 2017            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Mr FABIAN RICHARDO ARTERO BROWN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Heybroek (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision promulgated  on  1st  August  2016,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andonian ("the judge")  allowed  the  appeal  of  Mr  Brown,  the
    respondent, against a removal decision made on 27th October 2014.   The
    judge found that Mr Brown  met  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  in
    relation to both the parent and spouse routes.  He also found that  the
    respondent had become a reformed person, since his convictions in 2006,
    that he had established private life ties in the United Kingdom  having
    lived here for fourteen years  and  that  there  would  be  significant
    obstacles in the way of integrating into Jamaica, were he to be removed
    there.  The judge found that it would be  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    children of the family to leave the United Kingdom and "absurd" of  the
    Secretary of State to  consider  that  they  could  adapt  to  life  in
    Jamaica.  In the final substantive paragraph (which appears not  to  be
    numbered) the judge recorded that he had considered "section 117B"  and
    believed that it was not in the interests of  immigration  control  for
    the respondent to  be  removed  and  separated  from  his  partner  and
    children.

2.   In grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal,  the
    Secretary of State contended that the judge erred in several  respects.
    It was plainly incorrect that the respondent met  the  requirements  of
    the rules in relation to either the partner or the parent route  as  he
    could not bring himself within E-LTRP1.1 or 1.2.  The judge also  erred
    in relation to obstacles to Mr Brown reintegrating  into  Jamaica,  the
    correct test being  whether  there  are  "very  significant  obstacles"
    impeding this.  The judge also erred in this context in focusing on the
    respondent's family life in the United Kingdom, rather than considering
    the obstacles he would meet in Jamaica.

3.   It was also contended that although the judge  indicated  that  he  had
    considered section 117B of the 2002 Act, he in fact failed  to  do  so.
    So far as the respondent's convictions  are  concerned,  there  was  an
    insufficiency of reasoning in relation to the judge's  conclusion  that
    it could not be said that his presence was not conducive to the  public
    good.  The judge appeared to rely on the passage  of  time  to  justify
    this finding but it was unclear what weight was  given  to  the  public
    interest in this context.  Finally, no substantial reasons  were  given
    for the judge's findings that  it  was  unreasonable  and  "absurd"  to
    expect the respondent's children to go and live with him in Jamaica.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 5th December 2016.

5.   Ms Heybroek provided a detailed  skeleton  argument.   Attached  to  it
    were copies of the judgments in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ  705,  AQ
    and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 250 and of the Grand Chamber of the CJEU  in
    CS (case C-304/14).

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Melvin said that there were five material errors of law.  The  judge
    wrongly found that the respondent met the requirements of the rules  in
    relation to the partner route and the parent route.   He  assessed  the
    obstacles  to  the   respondent's   reintegration   following   removal
    incorrectly, failing also to take  into  account  the  many  years  the
    respondent had spent in Jamaica in this context.  His focus appeared to
    be on the family life ties  in  the  United  Kingdom  rather  than  the
    position in  Jamaica,  where  reintegration  would  occur.   The  judge
    assessed the 2003 and 2006  convictions  wrongly  in  relation  to  the
    proper weight to be given to the public interest,  focusing  simply  on
    the passage of time.  Finally the judge's findings regarding whether it
    was reasonable  to  expect  the  children  to  return  to  Jamaica  was
    insufficiently reasoned.  The  proper  course  was  to  set  aside  the
    decision and remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal  so  that  a  proper
    assessment could be made on these matters by a different  judge.   Even
    if the judge had correctly found that the respondent could not meet the
    requirements of the rules, in order to conclude that the appeal  should
    be allowed, he was required  to  identify  compelling  reasons  why  an
    assessment outside the rules was required.

7.   Ms Heybroek relied on her skeleton argument.  It was conceded that  the
    judge erred in relation to the requirements of the rules but that error
    was not material.  The judge was entitled on the evidence  to  conclude
    that it was not reasonable  to  remove  the  oldest  child,  a  British
    citizen aged 13 who had lived in the United Kingdom all his  life.   He
    was also entitled to conclude that the respondent  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his children, so that  there  was
    no public interest in his removal, which, if effected, would amount  to
    an infringement  of  Article  8.   In  relation  to  British  children,
    following the Zambrano principle, the proportionality question in a non-
    deportation case could not be resolved on  the  basis  that  a  British
    child might leave the United Kingdom to be with the parent.   The  CJEU
    had decided, in CS that it may be lawful for a  domestic  authority  to
    make a decision resulting in an EU citizen child being removed from the
    EEA with their non-EEA parent or carer,  but  only  in  cases  of  very
    serious criminal offending amounting  to  "exceptional  circumstances",
    not shown in the present appeal.  For the purposes of  section  117B(6)
    the correct position in respect of a  British  citizen  child,  in  the
    light of the European authorities, is that  it  is  only  in  the  most
    serious cases that it  would  be  "reasonable"  to  remove  them.   The
    judge's decision was sustainable.  Even if it fell to be set aside, the
    decision could be remade in the Upper Tribunal and the  appeal  allowed
    under Article 8.

8.   In oral submissions, Ms Heybroek said that the Secretary of State  made
    strong representations before the judge.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude at paragraph 9 of the decision that  the  respondent  was  now
    reformed and the "not conducive" finding in Mr Brown's favour was  open
    to him.  The respondent did not rely merely on the passage of time.  He
    also asserted that he is a reformed person.

9.   Overall, the decision contained findings of fact  in  relation  to  all
    relevant matters.  The judge made a clear finding that it  was  not  in
    the best interests of the children to return to  Jamaica  and,  in  the
    light of section 117B(6) and MA (Pakistan), if the Tribunal found  that
    it was not reasonable to expect them to leave, that  would  decide  the
    appeal.

10.  In answer to a question from me regarding  the  approach  suggested  by
    the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and  Agyarko
    [2015] EWCA Civ 440 which  might  require  the  judge  to   make  clear
    findings that the requirements of the  rules  were  not  met  and  then
    address  the  "threshold  question"  by  asking  whether   there   were
    compelling circumstances justifying an assessment  outside  the  rules,
    while keeping in mind as legally relevant factors the precise  failures
    to meet the requirements of the rules in  any  assessment  outside  the
    rules, Ms Heybroek said that the Supreme  Court  had  perhaps  resolved
    this issue in Hesham Ali.  That case, albeit a deportation case, showed
    that the Article 8 assessment was for the court or Tribunal and whether
    or not there is indeed a  "threshold  question"  now  requires  further
    consideration.

11.  She added that the Upper Tribunal might, if minded  to  set  aside  the
    decision, remake it and allow it on Article 8 grounds on the  basis  of
    the judge's findings of fact.  The public interest in the  respondent's
    removal fell away as it was not reasonable to expect his  13  year  old
    child to leave the United Kingdom.  Applying the CS  approach,  as  the
    present appeal was not a deportation case, it could only be  reasonable
    to expect such a child to leave if the evidence showed a serious  level
    of threat from the respondent, akin to the imperative grounds  required
    in removal cases under the 2006 Regulations.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  I find that the decision contains material errors of law  and  must  be
    remade.  Notwithstanding Ms Heybroek's  careful,  concise  and  focused
    submissions, the errors identified by Mr Melvin undermine the integrity
    of the decision.

13.  It is worth observing that the decision is very  short,  consisting  of
    only eighteen paragraphs, with a final paragraph which is not numbered.
     There is a brief summary of the appellant's circumstances and those of
    his family members.   The  rules  assessment  is,  as  accepted  by  Ms
    Heybroek, wrong.  The respondent cannot  succeed  as  a  partner  or  a
    parent and the judge did not correctly consider, in  the  private  life
    context, whether very significant obstacles exist  in  relation  to  Mr
    Brown's integration into Jamaica.

14.  So far as the convictions are concerned, these are  dealt  with  rather
    briefly, the reasoning appearing in paragraphs 9  and  10.   The  judge
    finds that the respondent is now a reformed person but there is  little
    detail.  So far as whether or  not  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  the
    respondent's children, and particularly the British  13  year  old,  to
    leave the United Kingdom, the finding of fact is, as the  Secretary  of
    State argues, not fully reasoned at all.  Paragraph 16  refers  to  the
    duty under section 55 of the 2009 Act.  This is followed by a statement
    that "it would be unreasonable" to expect the  children  to  leave,  to
    return to a country "where they have no ties or connections."

15.  Leaving aside the lack of detail and the absence of any  assessment  of
    the ties to Jamaica revealed in paragraph 17, being the presence  there
    of the respondent's  mother  and  stepfather,  what  is  missing  is  a
    structured analysis.  There  are  two  aspects  to  this.   First,  the
    judge's error in relation to the requirements of  the  rules  no  doubt
    deflected him from considering whether an assessment outside the  rules
    was required, in accordance with the approach of the Court of Appeal in
    SS (Congo) and Agyarko (and other cases).  Notwithstanding the  Supreme
    Court judgment in Hesham Ali, which concerned deportation and  part  13
    of the rules,  that  approach  and  the  need  to  identify  compelling
    circumstances explaining and justifying an assessment outside the rules
    has not been doubted.  The Supreme Court is likely to give judgment  in
    Agyarko within the next month or two.  The important point is that,  on
    the evidence, the respondent failed to meet  the  requirements  of  the
    rules and those particular failures retained their legal relevance  and
    weight in any assessment outside the Rules.  There is  nothing  in  the
    decision in the present appeal showing that the  judge's  reasoning  is
    consistent with this approach.

16.   The  second  important  point  is  that  the  finding  regarding   the
    reasonableness of expecting the children to leave  the  United  Kingdom
    itself required a proper assessment of  the  public  interest,  as  now
    explained in MA (Pakistan).  Notwithstanding the passage of  time,  the
    respondent's convictions were manifestly capable  of  bearing  on  that
    assessment.

17.  There is merit in the Secretary  of  State's  contention  that  section
    117B(6) has  not  been  properly  considered.   The  final  substantive
    paragraph of the decision contains the judge's finding that it  is  not
    in the interests of  immigration  control  for  the  respondent  to  be
    removed but a careful  reading  of  the  preceding  paragraphs  reveals
    almost no reasoning bearing  on  the  relevant  question  contained  in
    section 117B(6)(b) of the 2002 Act.

18.  So far as the Zambrano principle is concerned, no doubt this too  ought
    to have taken into account, precisely because  the  family  includes  a
    British citizen child but  in  fact  there  is  nothing  revealing  any
    attempt to distinguish between that child and his siblings.   Paragraph
    3 of the decision records that the respondent's wife said  in  evidence
    that she would consider being "forced to go  with  (Mr  Brown)"  as  "a
    hugely unreasonable step and unduly harsh".   The  decision  continues:
    "See Zambrano, see the case  of  CS  and  also  Senade".   That  is  an
    altogether too brief analysis.

19.  Having found material errors of  law,  I  conclude  that  the  decision
    cannot be sustained and must be remade.   So  far  as  the  appropriate
    venue is concerned, although at first sight it might  be  thought  that
    the Upper Tribunal could build on the  judge's  findings  of  fact  and
    remake the decision, on reflection this is  not  an  appropriate  step.
    The key findings are too briefly reasoned,  or  inaccurately  reasoned,
    and there is no discernable structure regarding the  rules  assessment,
    justification for any assessment outside the rules, section 117B or the
    European  Community  law  principles.   Remaking  the  decision  should
    include all of these.

20.  As noted above, the  Supreme  Court  is  likely  to  give  judgment  in
    Agyarko soon, which should assist in the remaking of the decision.   Mr
    Melvin told me that CS will be heard in the Upper Tribunal at  the  end
    of January and guidance will then emerge on the relevance and impact of
    European Community law, including in relation to section 117B(6) of the
    2002 Act.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It  shall  be  remade
in the First-tier Tribunal, at Taylor  House,  before  a  judge  other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian.  No findings of fact are preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

