
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
ia/46438/2014

                                                     ia/46454/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 10 February 2016                      |     On 4 March 2016                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                     mr Sarfaraj hasan (first Appellant)
                  ms Sakhina Akhtar Pria (second Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    None
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The first  Appellant  a  national  of  Bangladesh,  date  of  birth  11
    February 1983 and the second Appellant a national of  Bangladesh,  date
    of birth 16 October 1993, appealed against the Respondent's  decisions,
    dated 30 October 2014, to refuse the first Appellant leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant with reference to
    paragraph 245DD of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  as  amended.   In
    particular the Appellant was refused with reference to the  requirement
    of paragraph 41-SD(e)(iv) of the  Immigration  Rules  in  that  he  had
    failed to provide the required evidence that he  had  been  advertising
    his business on the continuous basis required  under  the  Rules.   The
    second Appellant, the partner/wife of the first Appellant  was  refused
    leave to remain on the  basis  of  the  first  Appellant's  application
    having been refused.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Clemes  (the  judge)
    who dismissed the appeals both under the Rules and  with  reference  to
    human rights grounds.

3.   The grounds of appeal  sought  to  argue  that  the  judge's  view  was
    fundamentally flawed because of what was said to be a failure to  apply
    evidential flexibility in relation  to  the  advertising  or  marketing
    material submitted by the Appellants.  The judge analysed the issue  of
    the advertising requirements in an extensive decision dated 21 May 2015
    and referred to, although it was perhaps  unnecessary  to  do  so,  the
    issue of evidential flexibility and the extent to  which  there  was  a
    discretion in relation to  mandatory  requirements  for  the  specified
    documents.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on  30
    September 2015 in the following terms:


         "The grounds argue that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
         concluding that evidence the appellant  produced  to  show  he  had
         advertised his business did not meet the requirements of  paragraph
         41-SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A of the immigration  rules.   While  the
         wording of the rule does appear to  suggest  that  the  advertising
         must be for 'a continuous period' commencing before 11 July 2014 it
         is at least arguable that the rule does not then go on  to  specify
         how long the continuous period must be.  The rule only states  that
         the period must commence before 11 July 2014  (in  this  particular
         case) 'up to no earlier than three months before the  date  of  his
         application'.   The  grounds  would  benefit  from  more   detailed
         argument at a hearing."
5.   In fact what the judge did was to analyse what  advertising  had  taken
    place as claimed by the first  Appellant.  The  judge  decided  on  the
    evidence before him that there had been  one  advert  submitted  in  an
    original newspaper Bangla Sanglap and paid for and that whilst  it  was
    contended other advertising had taken place by way  of  leaflets  which
    had been distributed it was by no means clear on the evidence  provided
    to the judge that such advertising as had taken place could be regarded
    as continuous:  Even if 'continuous' on  a  weekly  or  biweekly  basis
    might be continuous in the same publication rather than intermittent as
    it might otherwise be characterised.

6.   Ultimately the application of the word continuous was a matter of  fact
    for the judge.  At the hearing before me there was no appearance by the
    Appellants.  There was no appearance by their nominated  representative
    Londonium Solicitors.  There was no  application  for  an  adjournment.
    There was no explanation given for the absence of the second  Appellant
    let alone the first Appellant.

7.   I note from the file that  on  or  about  5  February  2016  the  first
    Appellant sought an  adjournment  of  both  appeals  through  Londonium
    Solicitors arguing that the he had a bad back.  A medical note  of  the
    "standard fitness to work form" used for social security  or  statutory
    sick pay simply said the first Appellant has' low back pain and is  not
    fit to work'.  That certificate was said to run from 5 February 2016 to
    21 February 2016 and was signed by someone at the Whalebridge  Practice
    on 5 February 2015.  There was also a copy of a  prescription  for  Co-
    codamol, a painkiller, signed by Dr R C Carter.   The  application  was
    refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordon and notice of that  refusal  was
    given by letter dated 8 February  2016.   The  letter  pointed  out  to
    experienced solicitors that it is wholly inadequate to support such  an
    application on the basis of not fit  to  work  because  the  issue  was
    whether the person was unable to attend a  hearing  or  give  evidence.
    Nor was there any attempt to explain why low back  pain  prevented  the
    first Appellant's attendance nor why  it  meant  the  second  Appellant
    could not attend.  Given the absence of Londonium Solicitors I arranged
    for the court administration service to telephone  the  representatives
    but no reply was forthcoming from their identified phone number.

8.   In the  circumstances  I  was  satisfied  that  having  regard  to  the
    overriding objective that fairness was not compromised by proceeding in
    the absence of the Appellants, there being no reason  given,  and  that
    the timely disposal of Tribunal business meant that it was  appropriate
    to  proceed  in  their  absence.  No  prejudice  was  advanced  by  the
    Appellants in my doing so.  In those circumstances,  having  considered
    the brief submissions made by Mr Richards on behalf of the Secretary of
    State I was satisfied that the evidence did not disclose that there was
    any failure by the judge to properly consider the matter.  The  grounds
    disclose no arguable error of law.

9.   The original Tribunal decision stands.

10.  The appeals of the Appellants are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 27 February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

