
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:   IA/46141/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2015                              |On 25 June 2015              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                        MS MA NADIA DEL CAMPO ESTARIS
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Nicholson, Counsel (instructed by Douglas
Simon, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision  by  Judge  of  First-tier  Tribunal
   Barker dismissing an appeal against a refusal to vary leave and a removal
   decision both made by the respondent on 16 October 2013.

2) The appellant was born in 1978 and is  a  national  of  the  Philippines.
   She entered the UK in 2008 as a Tier 4 Student Migrant.   Her  leave  was
   extended and she was subsequently granted leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1
   Post Study Work Migrant from 15 August 2011 until 15  August  2013.   The
   application giving rise to the present  appeal  was  made  prior  to  the
   expiry of her leave.

3) Since 2009 the  appellant  has  worked  for  a  firm  known  as  Ladbroke
   Security Services Limited.  She worked for this firm initially on a part-
   time basis but after having completed an MBA she worked full-time for the
   firm from 2011.  It is clear from  the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal that the appellant  is  regarded  by  the  firm  as  a  valuable
   employee and the firm is anxious to retain her services.

4) An obstacle emerged,  however,  in  relation  to  the  retention  of  the
   appellant by Ladbroke Security Services Limited because the firm did  not
   have the required Tier 2 sponsor licence from the Home Office.  The  firm
   applied for a licence in July 2013, seemingly for the specific purpose of
   the appellant's application for further leave.   The  application  for  a
   sponsor licence had not been decided by the time the application  for  an
   extension of leave was made so the appellant applied for an extension for
   60 days to allow the sponsorship issue to be resolved and for her then to
   apply as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  The application  for  an  extension
   was refused on 16 October 2013 under paragraph 322(1) of the  Immigration
   Rules on the basis that the appellant had  applied  for  a  variation  of
   leave to enter or remain for a purpose not covered by the Rules.

5) Meanwhile the employer's application for a sponsor  licence  was  refused
   on 16 September 2013.  A second application submitted in  September  2013
   was refused on 24 December 2013.  Following the  refusal  of  the  second
   application a pre-action protocol letter dated 17 February 2014 was  sent
   to the respondent with a view to pursuing judicial review.  By  the  date
   of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, which was  on  17  October
   2014, no further action had been taken in  relation  to  the  sponsorship
   licence or the proposed judicial review.  At the hearing before the First-
   tier Tribunal the position of the appellant and the witness who  appeared
   on behalf of her employer was that they were critical of the way in which
   the Home Office had dealt with the sponsorship  licence  application  but
   the sponsorship issue remained unresolved.

6) The issue for the First-tier Tribunal was whether  the  appellant  should
   succeed in her appeal on the basis of her right to private  life.   There
   was no suggestion that the appellant had developed any family life in the
   UK.  It was accepted that she did not meet the criteria for leave on  the
   basis of private life as set out at paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
   Rules.  It was argued, however, that her  circumstances  were  such  that
   they should be considered outside the Immigration Rules.

7) At paragraph 25 of the determination  of  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal it was found that the appellant's private life consisted of  her
   employment with the firm Ladbroke Security Services  Limited.   No  other
   specific private life was detailed in evidence though the Judge  accepted
   that there would have been private life developed with friends  and  work
   colleagues over the time that the appellant was residing in the  UK.   It
   was argued that the employer's operations would be radically affected  by
   the loss of  the  appellant.   In  particular,  the  company  would  have
   difficulties with regard to its HR system and software,  which  had  been
   developed by the appellant.

8) The Judge  observed  at  paragraph  26  of  the  determination  that  the
   principal factor relied upon by the appellant in relation to her  private
   life was the application for a sponsor  licence  and  its  refusal.   The
   Judge noted that there had been two refusals and that the  appellant  had
   sought leave for a limited time while the issue was resolved.  The  Judge
   further noted that the sponsor had failed to make an application for  the
   licence in good time but made the  application  only  in  July  when  the
   appellant's leave was due to expire in August.  In the light of  the  two
   refusals of a Tier 2 sponsor licence the Judge considered it  appropriate
   to consider whether the issue of the sponsor licence  was  likely  to  be
   resolved within a reasonable time.  The Judge concluded, at paragraph  26
   of the determination, that this was not the case and if the appellant was
   allowed to remain in the UK pending the resolution of the  issue  of  the
   sponsor licence this was likely to be for some considerable time.  It was
   possible furthermore that the employer would not  be  granted  a  Tier  2
   sponsor licence in which case the appellant would not be able  to  fulfil
   the criteria required.

9)  The  Judge  accepted  that  the  refusal  decision  gave  rise  to  some
   interference with the private life of the appellant due to  the  loss  of
   her well paid employment.  There  was  a  public  interest  in  effective
   immigration control as part of the economic well-being of the UK.  It had
   been argued on behalf of the  appellant  that  little  weight  should  be
   attached to this aspect of the public interest as the appellant  met  the
   criteria for highly skilled persons who were recognised by the government
   in the Immigration Rules as persons the government wished to encourage to
   come and work here.

10) The Judge then had regard to Section 117B of the 2002  Act  as  amended.
   The Judge concluded that  the  public  interest  criterion  of  effective
   immigration control had weight  to  be  applied  in  the  proportionality
   exercise.  When the interference with the private life of  the  appellant
   was weighed against the public interest in effective immigration control,
   the interference with the appellant's private life was both proportionate
   and justified.  The appellant did not fit the criteria  for  a  grant  of
   leave under the Immigration Rules and there was  no  certainty  that  she
   would fit  the  criteria  within  a  reasonable  time.   The  appeal  was
   dismissed.

11) In the application for permission to appeal it was acknowledged that  no
   third application for a Tier 2 sponsor licence had  been  submitted.   It
   was argued that it was reasonable for the employer to await  the  outcome
   of the appellant's appeal to the Tribunal before incurring  the  cost  of
   making a further application.  The application then pointed out  that  at
   paragraphs 26 and 29 of the determination the  Judge  regarded  it  as  a
   significant issue as to  whether  a  Tier  2  sponsor  licence  would  be
   available to the employer within a reasonable time.  It appeared from the
   determination that the reason the Judge refused the appeal under  Article
   8 was that it was unlikely that the sponsor licence would be granted in a
   reasonable time.  In the view of the appellant this was  not  a  relevant
   factor to the assessment of proportionality under Article 8 and the Judge
   erred in law in taking this factor into account.

12) According to the appellant, the question of the time it would  take  for
   a Tier 2 sponsor licence to be granted could only be relevant if this was
   detrimental to the economic well-being of the country.  In this regard it
   was pointed out that the appellant gave rise to no expense to the  public
   purse but was paying income tax  and  national  insurance  contributions.
   Even if a prolonged time was taken for the granting of a Tier  2  sponsor
   licence it was not argued by the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
   this would be to the detriment of the economic well-being of the country.
    Comparison was made with the case of Mohan  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1363,  in
   which the entitlement to family  life  was  affected  by  ongoing  family
   proceedings.  The length of those proceedings,  which  were  expected  to
   last for months if not  years,  did  not  detract  from  the  appellant's
   Article 8 rights and were not pivotal in the proportionality  assessment.
   The appellant had behaved impeccably.  She was well-integrated and  spoke
   perfect English.  She  was  well  qualified  and  had  not  breached  any
   immigration laws.

13) In granting permission to appeal the  Judge  concerned  noted  that  the
   decision and reasons by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal were careful
   and well-reasoned and set out the pertinent issues, law and evidence.  It
   was nonetheless arguable that the Judge  had  inappropriately  considered
   time to be a pertinent factor in the assessment of  proportionality.   It
   was arguably an error for the Judge to have allowed the  issue  of  time,
   and what was a reasonable time, to be given a greater priority than  what
   was right and fair.

14) A rule 24 notice was submitted by the  respondent.   This  disputed  the
   view set out by the Judge that the  length  of  time  a  fresh  sponsor's
   licence might take to grant should be taken into account under Article  8
   but nevertheless submitted that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had
   directed himself appropriately.

Submissions

15) At the hearing Mr Nicholson addressed me on  behalf  of  the  appellant,
   beginning by setting out  the  factual  background.   Mr  Nicholson  then
   referred to the grant of permission to appeal and the  reasoning  in  the
   decision by the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.   He  referred  to  the
   decision of the High Court in Aliyu [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin), in terms of
   which there was no threshold of arguability in relation to Article 8.  Mr
   Nicholson submitted that the question  of  whether  the  Tier  2  sponsor
   licence would  be  granted  should  not  have  played  any  part  in  the
   assessment of proportionality.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  had
   taken into account an irrelevant consideration in deciding the appeal.

16) In response to this point I asked Mr Nicholson  what  factors  from  the
   evidence the Judge should have referred to if he was to have allowed  the
   appeal under Article 8.  Mr Nicholson replied that the  Judge  recognised
   that the appellant enjoyed Article 8 rights in the UK.  The appellant was
   here lawfully.  There had been a delay by the decision-maker in  deciding
   the second application for a Tier 2 sponsor licence.  The appellant could
   not succeed under the Immigration Rules because of this delay.   All  she
   had sought was an extension for a short  period  of  time  to  await  the
   decision of the Secretary of State on the sponsor licence.  There was  no
   support for the Judge's position from section 117A of the 2002  Act.   In
   terms of the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in  McMichael
   v United Kingdom (1995) 20 EHRR 205 the Secretary of State ought  not  to
   benefit from her own failure.  If the Secretary of State  was  unable  to
   decide the licence application quickly because of her lack of  resources,
   this  should  not  override  the  appellant's  protected   rights.    The
   respondent sought to rely on the case of Nasim [2013] UKUT 00610 but this
   applied to applications under the PBS system  and  this  appeal  did  not
   concern  a  PBS  case.   The  respondent  sought  also  to  rely  on  the
   Immigration Directorate Instructions at chapter 13, paragraph 2.3.8 as to
   when someone's immigration status was precarious.  This was  relevant  to
   section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act.  According to the respondent a  person's
   immigration status was precarious if he or she was in the UK with limited
   leave to enter or remain but without settled or permanent  status.   This
   was not however supported by legal authority.  Those who had leave should
   not be lumped together with those who did not.

17) For the respondent, Mr Clarke argued there  was  no  material  error  of
   law.  There were two refusals of a Tier 2 sponsor licence  prior  to  the
   hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 17 October  2014.   The  second
   refusal was made in December 2013 and in the following ten  months  there
   was no further attempt to obtain Tier 2 sponsor status.  The Judge of the
   First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take into account the maintenance  of
   effective  immigration  control.   There  was  no  application  to   this
   appellant either of Appendix FM or of paragraph  276ADE.   There  was  no
   legitimate expectation, in terms of Nasim.  Section 117B(5) was relevant.
    Section 117B distinguished between residence which was unlawful and that
   which  was  precarious.   As  the  private  life  of  the  appellant  was
   established when her status was precarious it carried very little weight.
    The Judge considered the appellant's private life and  in  essence  this
   amounted to little more than a vain  hope  of  the  sponsor  obtaining  a
   licence successfully.  The Judge was obliged to follow section 117B.

18) In response Mr Nicholson said the appellant  had  applied  for  a  short
   period of leave until the question of the  Tier  2  sponsor  licence  was
   resolved.  This issue was outstanding from July 2013 for six months.  The
   fact that no further application had been made was not relevant.  A Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal had heard detailed evidence from the appellant
   and from her employer regarding the circumstances surrounding the refusal
   of the Tier 2 licence.  The Judge did not make findings on these matters.

19) It was put to Mr Nicholson that putting aside the question of  the  Tier
   2 sponsor licence, could the Judge have reached any other decision  under
   Article 8 other than to dismiss the appeal.   In  response  Mr  Nicholson
   submitted that the respondent's decision was a breach of  Article  8  and
   was not proportionate.  All the  appellant  needed  was  time  while  the
   respondent resolved the  sponsorship  application.   The  respondent  now
   sought to rely on  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  but  there  was  no
   definition of what  was  meant  by  "precarious"  in  the  statute.   The
   respondent's decision was disproportionate because it was unfair.  At the
   time of the decision the respondent was relying on  her  own  failure  to
   make a decision on the Tier 2 licence.  The Judge should have  looked  at
   whether the respondent's decision was in accordance with the law.

Discussion

20) The issue before the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal can  be  expressed
   as a straightforward question of whether the  respondent's  decisions  to
   refuse leave and to remove  her  from  the  UK  were  a  disproportionate
   interference with the appellant's right to private or family  life  under
   Article 8.  The application for leave itself was refused under  paragraph
   322(1) and it has not  been  disputed  that  this  refusal  was  made  in
   accordance with the Immigration Rules.  It has not been disputed that the
   appellant would not succeed under paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM of  the
   Rules.

21) How then should the Judge have approached  consideration  of  Article  8
   outside the Rules?  As was pointed out in the decision of  the  Court  of
   Appeal in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74, per Underhill LJ at 64, there  is  no
   "threshold" or "intermediary" test in considering Article 8  outside  the
   Rules.  If the appellant does not succeed under the Rules,  the  decision
   maker should "simply decide whether there was a good  claim  outside  the
   Rules or not".  Of course, where all the issues have been addressed in  a
   consideration under the Rules there may be no  need  to  conduct  a  full
   separate examination of Article 8 outside the  Rules.   In  this  appeal,
   however, consideration under the Rules by the Secretary of  State  turned
   on a rather narrow point as to whether the purpose of the application  as
   made by the appellant was for a purpose covered by the Rules or not.   In
   the reasons for refusal letter of 16 October 2013 the Secretary of  State
   considered also whether the appellant fell  under  paragraph  276ADE  and
   concluded that she did not.

22) To succeed outside the Rules it is not  in  general  necessary  for  the
   appellant to satisfy a test of exceptionality but, where the  Rules  seek
   to strike a fair balance under Article 8, then any circumstances on which
   the appellant relies outside the Rules will need to be compelling if  the
   appellant is to succeed.  This point  was  considered  by  the  Court  of
   Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

23) When considering  the  application  of  Article  8  outside  the  Rules,
   however, the Tribunal must have regard to Section 117A of the 2002 Act as
   amended, which requires courts or tribunals when considering  the  public
   interest to have regard in all cases to considerations listed in  Section
   117B.  In the present appeal the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
   mindful of these provisions and set out the  terms  of  Section  117B  at
   paragraph 28 of the decision.

24) Of particular relevance to this appeal is Section 117B(5), which  states
   that little weight should be given  to  private  life  established  by  a
   person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.  The
   significance of this for the appellant is, as  already  noted,  that  the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  found  that  she  had  not  established
   family life in the UK but only private life.

25) Before me Mr Nicholson argued strenuously that the appellant should  not
   be regarded as having established private life in the UK at a  time  when
   her immigration status was precarious because at all times she  had  been
   residing here lawfully.  The Secretary of State takes a different view in
   the Immigration Directorate Instructions, in which a distinction is  made
   between those who are here unlawfully and those whose residence in the UK
   is precarious.  In the view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  those  whose
   immigration status is precarious include those who have leave for only  a
   limited period and are not settled here.

26) There was no authority before me on  this  point  at  the  date  of  the
   hearing but there is now a reported decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  on
   this issue in AM (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260.  This decision supports
   the view of the Secretary of State that there is a distinction between  a
   person who has been in the UK unlawfully and a person  whose  immigration
   status in the UK  was  precarious.   A  person's  immigration  status  is
   precarious if their continued presence in the UK will be  dependent  upon
   their obtaining a further grant of leave.

27) As I have pointed out, this decision was not available at  the  date  of
   the hearing of this appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  There was nothing,
   however, in Mr Nicholson's arguments before me that would persuade me  to
   depart from the reasoning in AM Malawi, which was a decision of  a  panel
   of the Upper Tribunal including the Vice President.

28)  Accordingly,  accepting  that  the  private  life  established  by  the
   appellant in the UK is subject to section 117B(5)  and  therefore  little
   weight should be attached to it, this re-enforces  the  decision  of  the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to the effect that the  public  interest
   in effective immigration control outweighed  the  interference  with  the
   appellant's private life arising from the decisions appealed against.

29) On the question of public interest, it was argued before  the  Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant's presence in the UK  was  not
   detrimental to the economic well-being of the UK,  in  terms  of  Article
   8(2), but could be regarded  on  the  contrary  as  contributing  to  the
   economic well-being of the UK.  I do not regard this as a material issue.
    It is for the Secretary of State to  show  that  any  interference  with
   private or family life serves a  policy  aim  or  purpose  recognised  by
   Article 8(2).  It is the position of the Secretary of State that fair and
   effective immigration control contributes to the economic  well-being  of
   the UK and the prevention of disorder and this is sufficient to show that
   the interference serves a recognised purpose under Article 8(2).

30) Another issue argued before me was the alleged failure by the  Judge  to
   assess whether the Secretary of State's decision to refuse the employer a
   Tier 2 sponsor licence was justified.  In fact the Judge  of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal did address this question at paragraph 22 of the  decision.
   The Judge noted the criticisms expressed  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
   decision in respect of the sponsor licence but rightly pointed  out  that
   it was not the role of the Tribunal in an appeal such as this  to  review
   the rights and wrongs of the  decision  in  respect  of  the  sponsorship
   licence.  This view was entirely correct.   If  the  employer  wished  to
   challenge the decision in relation to the sponsor licence there  were  no
   doubt other avenues through which this might have been pursued.   It  was
   not pursued.  From the point of view of this appeal the essential fact is
   that the employer did not have a Tier 2 sponsor licence and therefore the
   appellant was unable to make an application for  leave  to  remain  under
   Tier 2.

31) Instead, of course, the appellant applied for a short extension of  stay
   while the issue of the Tier 2 sponsor licence was resolved.  It  is  this
   application which was refused as being for a purpose  not  recognised  by
   the Immigration Rules.  It was accepted before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
   that the appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules but only
   by reliance upon Article 8.

32) The reason why permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted
   was on the question of whether the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  had
   given proper reasons for finding that the refusal  by  the  Secretary  of
   State of a short extension of stay was not disproportionate in  terms  of
   Article 8.

33) Looking at this question from  a  narrow  point  of  view,  it  is  very
   difficult to perceive how the refusal of an extension of stay of 60  days
   could, without more, constitute a disproportionate interference with  the
   appellant's private life.  Looking at the question from a  broader  point
   of view, it is argued that the refusal  of  this  extension  for  reasons
   which were unfair and disproportionate had consequences of such  severity
   for the appellant that she was unable to continue her career in  the  UK.
   Even taking the broader view, however, the issue arises of the extent  to
   which reliance on private life can be used to  continue  with  a  career,
   particularly where that career was established by a person  who  did  not
   have settled status in the UK.  Regardless  of  whether  the  appellant's
   status was precarious in terms of the statute, it is  important  to  note
   that she was not settled.  She  knew  that  continuation  of  her  career
   depended upon her leave  being  extended.   She  had  no  expectation  of
   necessarily being allowed to remain indefinitely in the UK.

34) This brings me to the crux  of  the  issue  in  this  appeal.   Was  the
   refusal decision a disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's
   private life, of which the main elements were her employment  and  career
   in the UK established a time when she had only limited leave  to  remain?
   When the question is posed in this way, there can  only  be  one  answer,
   which is no.  The interference with the appellant's continued  employment
   in the UK, including the consequent inconvenience to her employer,  would
   not constitute such a serious interference with her right to respect  for
   her private  life  as  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in  effective
   immigration control.   Whatever  way  the  issues  in  this  appeal  were
   presented in terms of Article 8, there was only one answer that the Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal could have reached and this was to dismiss the
   appeal.

35) It is in this context that the appellant has sought to  argue  first  of
   all that the decision of the Secretary of State was  unfair  and  not  in
   accordance with the law and, secondly, that the Judge took  into  account
   an irrelevant consideration in dismissing the appeal, namely  the  length
   of time it might take to resolve the issue of the Tier 2 sponsor licence.
    The appellant argued that the Secretary of State's decision was  not  in
   accordance with the law because the refusal of leave  was  based  on  the
   Secretary of State's own failure to make a decision on issuing a  Tier  2
   sponsor  licence.   It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  the  first
   application for a Tier 2 sponsor licence was refused a month  before  the
   refusal of the application for leave.  Furthermore,  both  the  appellant
   and her employer were aware that a Tier 2 sponsor  licence  was  required
   for the appellant's leave to  be  extended  but  the  application  for  a
   licence was not made until July 2013.  In refusing  the  appellant  leave
   there is no sense in which the Secretary of  State  was  relying  upon  a
   failure by her to make a decision on the licence.  There are  no  grounds
   for finding that the respondent's decision to refuse the appellant  leave
   was not in accordance with the law.  In relation  to  the  allegation  of
   unfairness, it is clear that in making  her  decision  the  Secretary  of
   State followed the Immigration Rules both in relation to the  substantive
   application and any resulting interference with private  life.   Although
   the appellant feels aggrieved by the outcome of the  application  to  the
   Secretary of State, there is  no  basis  for  finding  the  Secretary  of
   State's decision was so unfair, if indeed it was unfair at all,  that  on
   this basis it is a disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's
   right to respect for her private life.

36) This leaves  the  question  of  whether  the  Judge  had  regard  to  an
   irrelevant consideration in dismissing the appeal under Article  8.   The
   reference in the Judge's reasoning to the time it would take for the Tier
   2 sponsorship application to be resolved arises from the grounds on which
   the appellant's application to vary leave was  refused.   In  theory  the
   basis on which an application was made to the Secretary of State and  the
   grounds on which it was refused might be relevant to an Article 8  claim.
   In the circumstances of this appeal, however, the grounds  on  which  the
   variation of leave was refused were unlikely to be determinative  of  the
   Article 8 claim.  Indeed, on a proper reading  of  paragraph  29  of  the
   Judge's decision the grounds were not determinative.  The Judge  observed
   that the  appellant  did  not  fit  the  criteria  for  leave  under  the
   Immigration Rules and added that "there is no certainty  that  she  would
   fit the criteria within a  reasonable  time".   In  the  same  paragraph,
   however, the Judge makes it clear that the failure by  the  appellant  to
   satisfy the Immigration Rules was only one factor which  was  taken  into
   account along with the other arguments in the appeal.  There is no  basis
   for saying that if the Judge had not referred to  this  consideration  in
   the reason for dismissing the appeal under Article 8 his  decision  would
   have been different.

37) In this context, I was also referred  to  paragraph  26,  in  which  the
   Judge said that if the appellant was allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  on
   discretionary leave while the question of the Tier 2 sponsor licence  was
   resolved this was likely to take some considerable time and it might  not
   be resolved in favour of the appellant.  This seems to me an  observation
   which the Judge was entitled to make.  The Judge was doing no  more  than
   commenting on the  circumstances  underlying  the  Secretary  of  State's
   decision and the possible consequences of the decision for the appellant.
    It was not a factor of such significance it led the Judge to dismiss the
   appeal under Article 8, but it was part of the overall  circumstances  of
   the case to which the Judge was entitled to have regard.

38) In conclusion, the position is that on the  facts  of  this  appeal,  as
   fully set out by the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there  was  no
   realistic prospect of the appellant showing that the  decisions  appealed
   against were a disproportionate interference with her Article 8 right  to
   respect for private life.  In paragraph 29  the  Judge  referred  to  the
   appellant's inability to satisfy the Immigration Rules but this  was  not
   an essential part of the Judge's reasoning under Article 8  and  did  not
   amount to taking into account an irrelevant factor.  If the Judge had not
   mentioned this point at this juncture the outcome  would  have  been  the
   same - the appeal would  have  been  dismissed.   Accordingly  I  am  not
   satisfied that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made any error of law
   or that any such error as alleged would have affected the outcome of  the
   appeal.

Conclusions

39) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

40) I do not set aside the decision.



Anonymity

41) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  have
   not been asked to make such an order and I see no reason of substance for
   making one.







Signed                                             Date

Judge of the Upper Tribunal


