
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal NumberS: IA/47019/2014
                                                               IA/47032/2014
                                                               IA/47050/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House on             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 19 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                                    G A J
                                    A V J
                                    A A J
                          anonymity directions made
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr R Subramanian, Lambeth Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I continue the anonymity directions made. This direction is  to  remain
    in place unless and until this Tribunal or any other appropriate court,
    directs otherwise. As  such,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
    directly or indirectly identify the appellants or any member  of  their
    family. Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  amount  to  a
    contempt of Court.

 2. The appellants are nationals of  India,  born  on  20  April  1977,  26
    October 1978 and 19 December 2007 respectively. The  appellants  are  a
    family unit consisting of the mother, father and their child, AAJ,  the
    third appellant.  Their daughter, AJ, who was born in Ealing, London on
    2 October 2012, is also a  member  of  the  family.  She  also  made  a
    dependent application which was refused in line  with  the  appellants'
    refusals.  She however was not granted a right of appeal as the refusal
    of her application for leave to remain was not an immigration  decision
    within section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act. The respondent gave  the  same
    response in respect of AJ's decision regarding the s.55 duty, that  she
    gave the other appellants.

 3. I shall refer to the first  appellant  as  'the  appellant'.   She  was
    granted leave to enter the UK as a student in 2009.

 4. The appeal by the appellants against the decisions of the respondent to
    refuse to grant them leave to remain in the UK as a  Tier  4  (Student)
    migrant and her dependants under paragraph 245ZX  and  paragraph  319C,
    respectively, of the Immigration Rules, as amended, were  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A Cresswell under the Immigration  Rules  and
    the Human Rights Convention.

 5. The relevant facts are that the appellants originally entered the UK as
    a student and dependants on 22 September 2009 valid  until  23  January
    2011. Their leave was extended on that basis until 26 January 2014.  On
    19 November 2013, their leave to remain was curtailed until 18  January
    2014.

 6. On 17 January 2014 the appellants made  their  respective  applications
    for leave to remain which were refused on 7 November  2014.   Decisions
    were also made  to  remove  the  appellants  from  the  UK  by  way  of
    directions under s.47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act
    2006. These decisions were the subject matter of the appeals.

 7. The only documents submitted with the applications were their passports
    and expired biometric residence permits.

 8. The  appellants  were  issued  one-stop  notices  under  s.120  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  in  which  they  were
    required to make a statement of any additional grounds they  wished  to
    rely on as to why they should not be removed or required to  leave  the
    UK.

 9. In the decision letters the respondent contended that consideration had
    also been given to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009 which imposed on her the  duty  to  consider  the  effect  on  any
    children of a decision to refuse leave or remove against  the  need  to
    maintain the integrity of immigration control.

10. The respondent concluded that the need to maintain the integrity of the
    immigration laws outweighs the  possible  effect  on  them  that  might
    result from their having to re-establish family life outside the UK.

11. Their appeals to the First-tier Tribunal were considered on the papers.
    Judge Cresswell had regard to the refusal statement,  the  respondent's
    bundle, the notice of appeal from the appellants and documents attached
    to the appeal and received since that notice [7].

12. Each appellant provided the same 'initial grounds of appeal',  referred
    to at B, page 7 of IAFT-1. It was further stated at section  C  of  the
    notice of appeal that other supporting  documents,  witness  statements
    and further grounds they intended to rely on, would be sent.

13. The same grounds of appeal accompanying the notices of appeal dated  18
    July 2014 contended in each case that the appellant "...  had  complied
    all the rules of immigration for the time being in force for  leave  to
    remain in the UK".   It  was  asserted  that  the  appellant  "required
    consideration" under the general  grounds  of  acceptance  outside  the
    immigration rules,  using  discretionary  powers  "of  the  immigration
    officer." Moreover, the appellant's right to private life, liberty  and
    family life  under  Article  8  has  been  adversely  affected  by  the
    decision.

14. Further grounds of appeal dated 15 May 2015 were subsequently  produced
    to the First-tier tribunal.

15. In his  determination  Judge  Cresswell  has  set  out  in  detail  the
    requirements of the relevant immigration rules. He noted  that  further
    grounds of appeal were submitted as written submissions,  but  that  no
    further evidence was submitted.

16. He found that as there was no CAS submitted with the  application,  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements for  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student which meant that  her  husband  and  son  could  not  meet  the
    requirements as her dependants [15(ii)].

17. He referred to the additional grounds of  appeal  dated  15  May  2015.
    These  set  out  the  provisions  of  the  rules  with  regard  to  the
    applications for leave to remain as a student. In  addition  there  are
    various  contentions  made  in  respect  of  the  "fairness   principle
    decisions".

18. Various authorities were referred to and relied on. At paragraph  11(x)
    of the further grounds it is contended  that  the  respondent  has  not
    properly applied the best interests of the child under s.55 of the 2009
    Act. There is reference to ZH (Tanzania) and similar  cases,  including
    the decision in Razgar.

19. It is also contended from paragraph 17 of the  furtherer  grounds  that
    "the appellant has established a private and family life in the UK  and
    invested time and substantial amounts of money into the studies." There
    is also  reference  at  paragraph  18  of  the  grounds  to  CDS  (PBS,
    "available",  Article  8)  Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  305  (IAC)  and  other
    decisions.

20. It was contended that the appellant clearly has a  private  and  family
    life as a points based migrant with a business in which "he  (sic)  has
    invested heavily" which deserves respect. It is also asserted that "...
    the economic well being of the UK under  Article  8(2)  would  only  be
    enhanced and not  disadvantaged  if  this  appellant  were  allowed  to
    remain.  Accordingly  the  refusal  of  further  leave  amounts  to   a
    disproportionate breach of the appellant's Article 8 rights".

21. It is finally contended that  in  the  light  of  the  above  "...  the
    appellant believes that no reasonable authority would have come to  the
    same   conclusion   as   has   been   reached   in   the    'Wednesbury
    Unreasonableness' ...". The appellant has  established  a  private  and
    family life  here  in  the  UK  "with  his  partner,  friends  and  the
    community".

22. There is a reference at paragraph 20 of the grounds to the s.120 notice
    and it is stated that "the appellant reserves the right to amend  these
    grounds or advance additional grounds if necessary."

23. When referring to the additional  grounds  Judge  Cresswell  stated  at
    [15(iii)] that the submissions in these 11 pages

         "... miss what is a very simple issue here. This family came to the
         UK so that the appellant could study accompanied by her loved ones,
         and for no other reason; she is not studying any more. So, why  can
         she and her family not go home as planned? Or why should  they  not
         go home as planned?"

24. In 'exploring these questions below' he was critical of the appellants'
    solicitors' approach to this case [15(v)], noting that the  submissions
    on her behalf pointed out that the appellant was badly let down  having
    paid �3,000 to the college which then lost its licence. She was seeking
    return of her money and trying to find a new  sponsor.  She  could  not
    however obtain a further CAS because she could not show progression and
    did not have valid leave. Her leave was curtailed  solely  due  to  the
    suspension of her college. She had not been treated fairly.

25. He stated  at  [15(vi)]  that  he  had  a  lot  of  sympathy  with  the
    appellant's account of how the present situation was reached.

26. He noted at [15(vii)] that the  submissions  suggested  that  the  best
    interests of the child had not been considered. He  went  on  to  state
    that the submissions however did not tell him "... one word  about  AAJ
    so that I can give full consideration to her position. A  Tribunal  can
    only make decisions based on the evidence before  it;  it  is  for  the
    appellant to provide information about the best interests of the  child
    ...".

27. He found at [15(viii)] that  it  was  proper  to  include  the  removal
    directions accompanying the refusal letters.

28. He stated that no reason was given as to why the appellants cannot  now
    return to India. There was no suggestion that if allowed to remain, the
    appellant would be able to study. There was no information as  to  what
    AVJ is doing in the UK. Judge Cresswell could thus not see how it could
    be suggested that the appellant has not  been  treated  fairly  by  the
    respondent. She cannot meet the rules, which is not the  fault  of  the
    respondent [15(x)].

29. He found that the appellant had  failed  to  satisfy  the  requirements
    under the rules and that the decision was in accordance  with  the  law
    [17].

30. He then proceeded to consider from [17] onwards their Article 8 appeal.
    He set out in full the provisions of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, s.117A-B; he referred to relevant passages  from  well
    known decisions such  as  Razgar,  Huang  and  EB  (Kosovo).   He  also
    referred to MK (Best interests of the child) India  [2011]  UKUT  00475
    and the decision in Azimi-Moayed and others [2013] UKUT 00197.

31. He concluded that the refusal of leave to remain did not interfere with
    private life for the purposes of Article 8(1). The interference  is  in
    accordance with the law. He repeated that the appellant is not studying
    and had provided no evidence that she would be accepted  at  a  college
    and gave no reason why she and her family "... could not simply  return
    to India immediately" [25].

32. At [26] he stated that "... I start as I must with an assessment of the
    best interests of the child". Normally it is in  their  best  interests
    that they live with and are brought up by their natural  parents.  That
    would not change for this child on return to India as a family with her
    parents.  The  child  is  not  British  and  will  not  therefore  have
    expectations of a better life in the UK than India. She  is  young  and
    has been brought up in an Indian household and will adapt  to  life  in
    India [26].

33. After considering the best interests of the child within the context of
    the interests of the whole family, and the interests of the  State,  he
    found the interference to be  proportionate  [27].  He  considered  the
    "guidance" on proportionality in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    550 as well as the  practical  and  compassionate  circumstances  which
    underline the rules (Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72). He  also  considered
    Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 when considering the  best  interests  of
    the non-British child.  He did not refer to the second child,  AJ,  who
    was two years and seven months old at the date of the determination.

34. He repeated at [27] that he had been given little detail of the private
    life of the appellants save for knowing that the appellant has been  in
    the UK for five years and has a young child and that she lives with her
    and her partner. There were no circumstances which suggested that  this
    is  a  case  where  the  application  of   the   rules   leads   to   a
    disproportionate outcome.

35. He stated that he has followed the requirements of s.117A and B of  the
    2002 Act as well as the guidance of AM (s.117B Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260
    when considering those sections.

36. He concluded that these appellants who came to the UK 'without any hope
    of staying', who have obtained  the  benefit  from  their  stay  whilst
    building a private life, but have  built  their  private  life  in  the
    knowledge that there was a real likelihood that they would not be  able
    to remain. They would be returning  to  a  country  whose  culture  and
    language they are familiar with and no substantive reason was given  as
    to why the whole family could not return together [27].

37. On 20 August 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M Hollingworth granted
    permission  to  the  appellants  to  appeal.  He  stated  that  in  the
    circumstances an arguable error of law has arisen  given  the  decision
    has been made in the absence of sufficient information  being  provided
    to the Judge in relation to the child in order to  enable  s.55  to  be
    applied. "The corollary of the duty of the Court is  the  provision  of
    sufficient evidence".

38. Mr Subramanian produced his skeleton submissions.

39. He referred to the Upper Tribunal's decision in  MM  (Unfairness;  E&R)
    Sudan [2014] UKUT 105. He referred to the headnote  which  states  that
    where there is a defect or impropriety of a procedural  nature  in  the
    proceedings at first instance, this may amount to a material  error  of
    law. A successful appeal is not dependent on the demonstration of  some
    failing on the part of the First-tier Tribunal. An error of law may  be
    found to have occurred in circumstances where some  material  evidence,
    through no  fault  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  was  not  considered
    resulting in unfairness.

40. In MM, grant of permission to appeal was based on a piece  of  evidence
    that was not considered at first instance. That was a letter  addressed
    by the appellant's solicitors to  the  UKBA.  The  Upper  Tribunal  was
    satisfied that on the evidence, this letter was transmitted by  fax  on
    the date that it appears and was received  by  the  addressee  on  that
    date. The appellant had claimed that the record of her answers  as  set
    out in the asylum interview record was wrong. She stated that  she  had
    discussed this matter with her solicitor who told  her  that  he  would
    send a letter to the Home Office pointing out the mistake.

41. The First-tier Judge found that  the  appellant's  solicitors  did  not
    write to the Home Office pointing out such a significant error  in  the
    interview. Accordingly he found that the fact that  the  appellant  has
    given an inconsistent account as to  whether  it  was  the  same  three
    police officers who had raped her and  who  subsequently  attempted  to
    rape her at a later stage is a material inconsistency which damaged her
    credibility.

42. The ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  that  the  solicitor's
    letter was neither mentioned nor produced at the first instant hearing.
    That was considered to be an arguable procedural irregularity.

43. The Upper Tribunal noted the pivotal importance of the  error  of  fact
    upon which the reasoning of the  Judge  was  demonstrably  based.  That
    helped to explain why there is room for departure  from  an  inflexible
    application of common law rules and principles where this is  necessary
    to redress unfairness. That is especially so where the  respondent  has
    failed to cooperate to achieve a correct result.

44. It was found  that  the  solicitor's  letter  was  on  any  showing  an
    important piece of evidence. It derived  the  status  from  the  course
    which the hearing took when the appellant in cross examination made the
    claim that the interview record was erroneous and that she had promptly
    instructed her solicitors to this effect, and had been informed by them
    that they would write to the secretary of state in  appropriate  terms.
    The Judge made a positive  finding  that  there  was  no  such  letter.
    Building on that finding, he found  that  this  reinforced  a  material
    inconsistency. The Judge disbelieved the appellant's  claim  concerning
    her instructions and their response that they would write a letter.

45. Mr Subramanian also referred to the decision in  JO  and  Others  (s.55
    duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517. The duty imposed by s.55 of  the  2009
    Act requires the decision maker to be properly informed of the position
    of a child affected by the discharge of an immigration  etc.  function.
    Thus equipped, the decision maker must conduct a careful examination of
    all relevant information and factors.

46. Being adequately informed and  conducting  a  scrupulous  analysis  are
    elementary prerequisites to the interrelated tasks of  identifying  the
    child's best interests and then  balancing  them  with  other  material
    considerations.

47. The question  whether  the  duties  imposed  by  s.55  have  been  duly
    performed in any given  case  will  invariably  be  an  intensely  fact
    sensitive and contextual one. In the  real  world  of  litigation,  the
    tools available to the Court or Tribunal considering this question will
    frequently be confined to the application or  submission  made  to  the
    secretary of state and the ultimate letter of decision.

48. At the hearing, Mr Subramanian conceded that the appellants  could  not
    qualify under the immigration rules. The third appellant came to the UK
    when she was two years old. She will be eight  years  old  in  December
    2015. He  relied  on  the  decision  in  Azimi-Moayed,  supra,  and  in
    particular the headnote at 1(iv). The Tribunal noted that  seven  years
    from age 4 is likely to be more significant to a child than  the  first
    seven years of life. Very young children are focused on  their  parents
    rather than their peers and are adaptable.

49. Mr Subramanian submitted that the best interests of the child  had  not
    been properly considered. The respondent  and  the  Judge  should  have
    requested more  details  about  the  child.  The  appellants  were  not
    represented  when  the  applications  were  submitted.  There  were  no
    accompanying letters or statements that were sent.

50. He submitted that  in  the  absence  of  information,  the  conclusions
    reached at [26] were unfair. In the circumstances the Judge was obliged
    to ensure that further evidence relating to  the  appellant's  position
    was made available.

51. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Isherwood submitted that there had been
    no material error of law. The background to the appeal was  that  there
    was an application by the principal  appellant  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student and the other appellants as her  dependants.
    The mere fact that she was a successful student who did not comply with
    the rules did not mean that the appeal should be allowed under  Article
    8.

52. She submitted that from the pre-action  protocol  letter  sent  to  the
    respondent by the appellant's solicitors, it was stated that during the
    'Pendency' of her application under the Tier  4  rules  the  respondent
    withdrew the licence of the sponsor. The Home Office however  gave  her
    60 days to find a new sponsor which she was not able  to  do,  claiming
    that she did not have valid leave to remain.

53. It was contended that the appellant's  second  child,  AJ,  born  on  2
    October 2012, had not been granted an in country right  of  appeal  and
    that the secretary of state had failed  to  have  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the third appellant namely AAJ, who was born in India.

54. Ms Isherwood referred to the respondent's response  to  the  pre-action
    protocol letter where it is asserted that the respondent has considered
    her duties under s.55 of the 2009 Act. Consideration was given  in  the
    decision dated 7 November  2014  to  the  s.55  duties,  where  it  was
    concluded that the need to maintain the integrity of  immigration  laws
    outweighs the effect on the  appellant  and  her  children  that  might
    result from her and her children having  to  re-establish  family  life
    outside the UK.

55. She submitted that the only evidence supplied in respect of  the  child
    was that set out in the application form, referring to her as an Indian
    national.

56. The appellants came to the UK as a family in 2009. The third  appellant
    was then two years old. The appellants were legally represented in  the
    appeal. The grounds were prepared by  their  solicitors.  However,  the
    only 'grounds' before the Judge were the several pages setting out case
    law. No evidence was produced about the  children,  and  in  particular
    there was no submission or assertion as to why they would not  be  able
    to return to India. There had been no challenge under the Rules.

57. The burden rests of the appellant. Accordingly, the conclusion  by  the
    Judge that decisions can only be based on evidence before the  Tribunal
    was legally correct. It was not for the Judge to afford the  appellants
    a further opportunity when they decided to have a paper appeal  without
    producing any evidence. The Judge noted that the family came to the  UK
    so that the appellant could study, accompanied by her  loved  ones  and
    for no other reason. She is no longer studying here. Nor was there  any
    information produced with regard to the child's position in the UK.

58. At [26] the Judge had at the "forefront" of his decision the assessment
    of the best interests of the child. The application to remain in the UK
    was always in a temporary capacity. Now it appears that the parents are
    trying to stay indefinitely in the UK 'on the basis of the  unspecified
    alleged rights of the children'.

59. Moreover, and in  any  event,  no  other  conclusion  would  have  been
    reached.

    Assessment

60. The appellants were represented by  solicitors  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Notices of hearing, which included directions, were  sent  to
    the solicitors as well as to the appellant at the addresses on record.

61. The appellants were directed to send copies of  all  documents  to  the
    Tribunal and to the other party that they wished to rely on in  support
    of the appeal. They were informed that it was important to  submit  all
    documents as soon  as  possible  as  the  respondent  will  review  the
    evidence before the hearing, which could result in the  decision  being
    reversed in the appellants' favour.

62. The appellants' solicitors  subsequently  confirmed  that  the  appeals
    would now be dealt with on the papers.

63. At the date of hearing  on  21  May  2015,  the  Judge  identified  the
    documents before him. This contained the further grounds of appeal  and
    supplementary documents to which I have already referred.

64.  However,  there  was  no  further  evidence  submitted   by   way   of
    documentation, witness statements or otherwise, and in particular  none
    relating to the third appellant or the younger child.

65. Nor was any further information given beyond the facts set out  in  the
    application form on behalf of the third appellant. The  respondent  had
    received a pre-action letter of protocol regarding the  younger  child,
    AJ, in which it was contended that there had been  a  failure  to  have
    regard to the best interests  of  the  children.  However,  no  further
    evidence relating to those children accompanied that  letter.  Nor  was
    any further information ever sent to the respondent. On 5 December 2014
    the respondent replied to the pre-action protocol letter,  noting  that
    the respondent had considered her duties under s.55 of the 2009 Act.

66. It was contended in the grounds seeking permission to appeal  that  the
    appellants, by changing their solicitors, have demonstrated that  their
    position has not been presented properly to the Tribunal.

67. I do not find that there was a defect or impropriety  of  a  procedural
    nature in the proceedings at first instance giving rise to any material
    error of law. There is no evidence as to what instructions, if any, the
    appellants  gave  to  their  former  solicitors.  Moreover,  both   the
    solicitors as well as the appellants were directed to  supply  all  the
    evidence sought to be relied on  in  support  of  the  appeal.  It  was
    moreover the appellants' election to have the appeal determined on  the
    papers without attending the hearing in order to give evidence.

68. In those circumstances, the Judge made his decision regarding the  best
    interests of the child based on the evidence and information originally
    produced to the  respondent  in  the  application  itself  and  on  the
    additional grounds of appeal dated 15 May 2015.

69. It is submitted that the  conclusion  at  [26]  was  made  without  any
    consideration of the third appellant's expectations  in  the  UK.   The
    Judge however considered the best interests of the  child  as  a  first
    consideration [26] and has noted that she is not  British  and  has  no
    expectations of a better life in the UK than in India.   She  is  still
    young and has been brought up in an Indian  household  and  will  adapt
    well to life in India.  Nor was any substantive reason given as to  why
    the whole family could not return together.

70. The Judge had moreover been given very  little  information  about  the
    private life of the appellants; apart from knowing that  the  appellant
    herself had been in the UK for five years and has  a  young  child  who
    lives together with her and her husband, there  were  no  circumstances
    suggesting that the decision taken was disproportionate [27].

71. The Judge did not in his decision address the interests of the  younger
    child born on 2 October 2012.  However, there is no contention that the
    outcome of any decision with respect to the s.55 considerations of  the
    younger child would have been any different if her interests  had  been
    separately considered.   There  are  no  special  features  or  factors
    identified in respect of the children or either  of  them,  which  they
    claim should have been considered in discharging the s.55 duty.

72. The Judge at [27] referred to the statement of Lord Carnwath  in  Patel
    and others v SSHD [2012] UKSC 72, to the effect that Article 8 is not a
    general dispensing power. While one may sympathise with  the  call  for
    common sense in the application of the rules to graduates who have been
    studying in the UK for  some  years,  such  considerations  do  not  by
    themselves provide grounds of appeal under Article 8 which is concerned
    with private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity for
    a student to complete his course of  study  in  this  country,  however
    desirable in general terms, is  not  itself  a  right  protected  under
    Article 8.

73. I do not find that the decision relied on by Mr Subraniam in MM v SSHD,
    supra, assists the appellants in the appeal. Unlike in MM's case, there
    was no unfairness resulting from any misunderstanding or ignorance.  In
    that  case,  the  Tribunal  had  rejected  the  credibility   of   that
    appellant's claim that she had instructed her solicitors to correct the
    interview records. The Judge's belief was founded substantially in that
    case on a mistake of fact. That mistake led to the finding that she had
    been lacking in credibility and the overall assessment of her claim.

74. In this case however no such comparable or  analogous  situation  arose
    giving rise to any mistake being made. No documentary material, written
    evidence and statements were submitted  with  their  applications.   No
    submissions were made regarding the integration of the  family  in  the
    United Kingdom life and culture;  nor  was  any  issue  raised  of  the
    absence of any links with India.   There  was  no  assertion  that  the
    children would not be supported in India.  It has  not  been  suggested
    that there are any special features requiring further investigation  of
    the children's interests.   Nor  has  any  evidence  subsequently  been
    produced or any submissions made regarding the best  interests  of  the
    children which  militate  against  their  return  together  with  their
    parents to India.

75. Having regard to the circumstances as a whole and in the light  of  the
    facts  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  his  findings  at  [26]  are
    sustainable, and have not been shown to be irrational  or  perverse  in
    any way.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    any material error of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.

    Anonymity directions continued.






    Signed   Date 11 December 2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
