
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47646/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 24 January 2015                            |On 28 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                mr ahmed ali
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy, Counsel, Direct Access Barrister
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A R  Williams  promulgated  on  29  September
    2014, dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State made on 8 August 2013 to refuse him leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom.

 2. The appellant's case is, in brief,  that  he  had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 1997 and has remained here since, and had  for  the  greater
    part of that time worked here.  He also states that  he  has  lost  all
    ties to Pakistan and that  accordingly  therefore  he  is  entitled  to
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the grounds of long
    residence  having  spent  at  least  fourteen  years'  residence  here,
    pursuant to paragraph 276B of  the  Immigration  Rules;  alternatively,
    that he is entitled to leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  pursuant
    to paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The respondent refused the application on the basis that  she  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had been resident in  the  United  Kingdom
    for fourteen years continuously, noting significant errors  within  the
    documents produced and that the P60 forms adduced as  evidence  of  his
    presence here had been presented with a  temporary  national  insurance
    number.  She was not satisfied either that the appellant had  satisfied
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 4. When the matter came before Judge A R Williams initially on 3 June 2014
    when it was adjourned to 24  September  2014  to  allow  the  appellant
    additional time to produce further material relating to his presence in
    the United Kingdom in addition to the documentary  evidence  which  had
    been produced. Judge Williams heard evidence  from  the  appellant  and
    from Mr Junaid Shahzeb.

 5. Judge Williams found:-

      i) that some of the documents presented by the appellant caused  grave
         concern, containing atrocious  errors  [27]  which  shows  that  it
         became difficult for the Tribunal to rely on other documents  which
         appeared to be genuine [28];

     ii) that he could not, on all the evidence  before  him,  conclude  the
         appellant had been in the United Kingdom on a continuous  basis  of
         at least fourteen years prior to that application  and  that  "only
         one witness, apart from the appellant himself, was called.   Little
         weight can be attached to that evidence.";

    iii) that there was no evidence before him, apart from an assertion made
         by the appellant at the end of the case, that  he  had  no  one  to
         return to in Pakistan, that there had been no evidence  whereby  he
         could conclude that the appellant had no ties to that country [81];
         and

     iv)  that  the  appellant's  removal   to   Pakistan   would   not   be
         disproportionate thus the Article 8 appeal fell to be dismissed.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-

      i) that the judge had erred materially in making no specific  findings
         in relation to the P60s adduced other than stating that no  attempt
         had been made to contact HMRC;

     ii) that the judge had erred in attaching little weight to the evidence
         of Mr Shahzeb and in providing no reasoning as to why little weight
         is attached despite the oral evidence subject to cross-examination;

    iii) that the judge had erred in stating that there was no evidence that
         the appellant had no ties to Pakistan when the appellant had  given
         oral evidence  on  this  issue  in  June  and  September  2014,  as
         supported by detailed oral evidence;

     iv) that these errors affected not only paragraph 276ADE but  also  the
         assessment of Article 8 and proportionality.

 7. On 1 December 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  granted  permission
    to appeal.

 8. Mr Paramjorthy submitted, relying on the grounds, that Judge  Williams'
    assessment of the witness's evidence was  unsatisfactory.   Mr  Walker,
    for the Secretary of State submitted that viewing the determination  as
    a whole, it was evident that looking in particular what the  judge  had
    said at paragraphs 26 and 37, that the judge  had  reached  conclusions
    that were open to him.  He submitted further that it was  evident  from
    the judge's assessment of the evidence [20] that the witness'  evidence
    could not account for the whole of the period the appellant  said  that
    he had spent in the United Kingdom.

 9. In reply Mr Paramjorthy submitted that whilst weight was a  matter  for
    the judge, there was simply no explanation here as to why little weight
    had been attached to the evidence of Mr Shahzeb; or, if  little  weight
    had been attached to what extent it had been  considered  at  all.   It
    was, he submitted, an absence of reasoning.

10. In the context of the defects identified by Judge Williams at paragraph
    [27] of the determination, and observations regarding the problems with
    the P60s produced [26] it is unarguable that the judge was entitled  to
    attach no weight to the P60s hence his reasons for so doing [26] in the
    context of the documents as  a  whole,  is  adequate  and  sufficiently
    explains his approach.

11. That said, the determination does not explain adequately why the judge,
    absent any adverse credibility findings, did not accept the evidence of
    Mr Shahzeb or why he attached little weight thereto.  Whilst I note  Mr
    Walker's submission that the evidence of the witness was not capable of
    corroborating the entirety of the time the appellant had spent  in  the
    United Kingdom, that is not a reason given by  the  judge,  nor  is  it
    necessarily so.  Further,  as  Mr  Paramjorthy  submitted,  it  is  not
    entirely correct to say that there was no  evidence  regarding  whether
    the appellant had lost all ties to Pakistan.

12. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of  Judge  Williams
    did involve the making an error of law and I set it aside.  Given  that
    there will need to be a  fresh  examination  of  all  the  evidence  in
    particular the evidence of the witness, I am satisfied that it would be
    appropriate for this matter to remitted to the First-tier to  be  heard
    afresh.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

    1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
       error of law and I set it aside.
    2. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  decision
       on all issues. None of the findings of fact are preserved.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





