

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/47499/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 4th February 2016                   |       On 6th July 2016             |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                         MR MIGUEL CORDEIRO SILVANIO
                        (NO anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


                 THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME OFFICE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Miguel Cordeiro Silvanio, in person
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas,  Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1.  This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Ford promulgated on 27th August  2015  in  which  she
       dismissed an appeal against a decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of
       State on 7th November 2014 refusing the appellant's application  for
       a permanent residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in
       the UK.


    2. The appellant is a national of Brazil, born on 28th  December  1969.
       On 21st January 2010, the appellant applied for, and was  granted  a
       residence card that expired on 22nd June 2015.  On 30th August 2014,
       the appellant applied for a permanent residence card as the  non-EEA
       national family member (spouse) of Vania Maria Bizzotto, an  Italian
       national,  who  claimed  to  have  exercised  treaty  rights  for  a
       continuous period of five years in the UK  in  accordance  with  the
       Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.  It  was  the  refusal  of  that
       application on 7th November 2014 that gave rise to the appeal before
       the First-tier Tribunal.


    3. The application  was  refused  by  the  respondent  because  on  the
       evidence provided by the appellant, the respondent had  been  unable
       to establish whether the EEA  sponsor  had  been  exercising  Treaty
       rights in the UK for a continuous period of 5 years whilst employed.
        Furthermore, the respondent had been unable  to  establish  whether
       the appellant had resided in the UK for a  continuous  period  of  5
       years.


 The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


    4. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is brief. At paragraph
       [5] the Judge notes the appellant's  claim  that  he  has  lived  in
       England since November 2009 with his EEA national Sponsor  wife  and
       two daughters and that they are EEA nationals as well.    The  Judge
       saw the Italian passports  of  the  appellant's  wife  and  his  two
       daughters, and was satisfied that all three are Italian nationals.


    5. At paragraph [12] of her decision the Judge concluded that  she  was
       satisfied that the appellant has been residing continuously  in  the
       UK for a period in excess of five years.


    6. The Judge concluded at paragraph [11] of her decision that  she  was
       not satisfied that either the appellant  or  his  wife  Vania  Maria
       Bizzotto was employed continuously for a period of five years in the
       UK either prior to date of application or as  at  date  of  hearing.
       Her reasons for that conclusion are to be found  at  paragraphs  [8]
       and [9] of the decision:


              "8.  I have reviewed the wage slips provided by the  Appellant
             both in his name and the name of his wife. It is a  matter  of
             concern that the national insurance number quoted on  both  is
             in fact the Appellant's national insurance number as evidenced
             by a copy of  his  national  insurance  card.    The  national
             insurance  number  is  [                   ].   There  is   no
             explanation as to why the  wage  slips  in  the  name  of  the
             Appellant's wife bear his national insurance number.


              9.   On the evidence provided I am not satisfied  that  either
             the Appellant or his wife was employed continuously in the  UK
             for  a  period  of  five  years  prior  to  the  date  of  his
             application or prior to the date  of  hearing.  The  Appellant
             asked for this matter to be dealt with on the papers and I was
             therefore unable to clarify  my  concerns  with  him  on  this
             issue."


The appeal before me


    7. The appellant appeals on the ground that  the  judge  erred  in  her
       consideration of the wage slips before her.  The appellant  contends
       that his national insurance number is [                    ] and his
       wife's  national  insurance  number  is  [                 ].    The
       appellant contends that he had provided 5 years of  wage  slips  for
       both himself and his wife.


    8. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Froom  on
       15th December 2015 noting that it is arguable that the  Judge  erred
       by misinterpreting the evidence before her.  The matter comes before
       me to consider whether or not the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Ford involved the making of a material error of  law,  and  if
       the decision is set aside, to re-make the decision.


    9. At the hearing before me,  the  appellant  maintained  that  he  had
       provided the Tribunal with the relevant wage slips showing his  wife
       had been exercising Treaty rights in the UK for a continuous  period
       of 5 years whilst employed and that he himself has also been working
       during that five year period save for during the short  period  that
       he was not in the UK.  The wage slips  for  the  appellant  and  his
       wife's  employment  were  contained  in   two   separate   envelopes
       previously sent to the Tribunal.


   10. A written response was submitted on behalf of the  respondent  under
       Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.   The
       respondent  opposes  the  appellant's  appeal  and  in  summary  the
       respondent submits that the Judge  directed  herself  appropriately,
       and was entitled to make the findings that she did, on the  evidence
       available.  Before me, Mr Kotas submits that the  issue  for  me  is
       whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge did proceed upon a mistake  as
       to fact.  He concedes that if  there  is  a  factual  error  in  the
       decision, it would be material to the outcome of the appeal.


 Discussion


   11. I have carefully considered the wage slips that had  been  presented
       by the appellant.  There is a complete series of wage  slips  issued
       by "Deeland Ltd t/a Service Master" that are addressed to Mrs  Vania
       Maria Bizzotto (NI No ...........) for the period 21st December 2009
       to 28th August 2015.  The wage slips for the  period  21st  December
       2009 to 6th June 2010 do not show her national insurance number  but
       do show what appears to be her employee reference, her name and full
       address.


   12. Save for the period between 7th January 2011 and  11th  March  2012,
       there was also a complete series of wage slips  issued  by  "Deeland
       Ltd t/a Service  Master"  that  are  addressed  to  Miguel  Cordeiro
       Silvanio (NI No .............) for the period 15th March 2010 to 5th
       April 2015.  I noted the following:


          a. The wage slips for the period 15th March 2010 to 5th July  2010
             do not show the appellant's national insurance  number  but  do
             show what appears to be his employee reference,  and  his  name
             and full address.


          b. The wage slips for the period 15th March 2010 to 9th March 2014
             show the appellant as "Mrs Miguel Cordeiro Silvan".   The  wage
             slips thereafter show the  appellant  as  "Mr  Miguel  Cordeiro
             Silvan".


   13. In my judgement,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does
       contain a mistake of fact that amounts to a material error  of  law.
       At paragraph [8] of her decision, the Judge proceeds upon the  basis
       that there is no explanation as to why the wage slips in the name of
       the appellant's wife bear his national insurance  number.   They  do
       not.  It is understandable that the Judge might well have been drawn
       to that conclusion because the wage slips for the appellant for  the
       large part refer to him as "Mrs".  One might readily have understood
       those wage slips to be those of the appellant's  wife  and  thus  be
       concerned that they  are  endorsed  with  the  appellant's  national
       insurance number.  They are in fact the appellant's wage slips.


   14.  There  was  therefore  evidence  before  the  Tribunal   that   the
       appellant's EEA sponsor has been exercising  Treaty  tights  in  the
       United Kingdom for a continuous period of 5 years  whilst  employed.
       The Judge proceeds upon a mistake as to fact and the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.


   15. The Judge found  that  the  appellant  had  resided  in  the  UK  in
       accordance with the Regulations for  a  continuous  period  of  five
       years and that finding is not challenged.  The only issue is whether
       his sponsor has been exercising Treaty rights in the United  Kingdom
       for a continuous period of 5 years  whilst  employed.  The  evidence
       that  I  have  referred  to,  establishes  that  on  a  balance   of
       probabilities she has, such that that Regulation 15(1) is satisfied.
        No argument was made by Mr. Kotas to the contrary.


   16. Accordingly, I remake the decision and allow the appeal.






 Notice of Decision


   17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   18. The decision is remade and the appeal is allowed.


   19. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.


Signed                                  Date: 6th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The appeal has been allowed on the basis  of  evidence
that was before the First-tier Tribunal but does not  appear  to  have  been
before the respondent at the time of her decision.

Signed                                  Date: 6th July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





