
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47856/2014
                                                               IA/47863/2014
                                                               IA/47869/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd October 2016                           |On 24th October 2016          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               (1) RAFAEL [M]
                              (2) PATRICIA [C]
                                  (3) [A C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Claire (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid, promulgated on 30th March 2016, following a  hearing  at  Taylor
    House on 18th March 2016.  In the determination, the judge allowed  the
    appeals of the Appellants whereupon the Respondent Secretary  of  State
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Brazil and appeal against  the  decision
    of the Respondent dated 10th November  2014,  refusing  them  leave  to
    remain in the UK under the Immigration Rules.   The  First  and  Second
    Appellants are the father and mother of the Third Appellant.

 3. At paragraph 11 of  the  determination,  the  judge  states  that  "The
    marital relationship is genuine" but provides  no  reasoning  for  this
    conclusion (see paragraph 11(a)).  At  paragraph  11,  the  judge  also
    states that "The best interests of the  child  (wherever  possible)  is
    manifestly in favour of the daughter to remain with her two parents and
    not to be uprooted from a culture which is the only one  known  to  her
    compared with the other country's" (see paragraph 11(d)).  Mr  Whitwell
    appearing before me on the Secretary of State's behalf stated that this
    was inadequate reasoning and wrong statement of the law because whereas
    the best interests may well be for a child to remain with the  parents,
    it is not, without any further reasoning, not to be uprooted  from  the
    culture in which she lives, given that she  is  8  years  of  age.   At
    paragraph 16, the judge concludes with  the  observation  that,  "These
    Appellants can benefit from the Rules because the 'best  interests'  of
    the Third Appellant demands that she should not be  uprooted  from  the
    British culture as her interests will not be served if she is separated
    from her biological parents".  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  this  was
    problematic because the "best interests"  consideration  was  only  one
    consideration amongst many others which had to be  taken  into  account
    and the way in which this was stated appeared to indicate that  it  was
    the only consideration, and a governing one at that,  which  the  judge
    had to take into account.

 4. For his  part,  Mr  Claire,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the  Appellants
    submitted that, as the grant of permission stated,  it  was  not  clear
    whether the judge had allowed the appeal  with  respect  to  the  Third
    Appellant, the child, under Rule 276ADE, and if so,  upon  what  basis,
    because no reasons were given to justify such a decision,  and  it  was
    not clear whether the appeal was allowed under Article  8  outside  the
    Rules either.  It would have been better, submitted Mr Claire,  if  the
    judge had taken this into account.  However, at paragraph 11, the judge
    has referred to the fact that the best interests of the  child  are  to
    remain with the parents, and the child is accustomed to the culture  in
    this country, and that if the determination is read broadly  and  as  a
    whole, it was sustainable.

Error of Law

 5. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of  TCA  2007)
    such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are  that  the
    judge does not make it clear which provisions of the  Rules  are  being
    considered.  The emphasis is very much  on  the  Third  Appellant,  the
    child, and even then, the fact that the "best interests" of  the  child
    are a primary consideration, as explicated in  ZH  (Tanzania),  is  not
    made clear.  This is important because other  considerations,  such  as
    the illegal or unlawful behaviour of the parents, must also be factored
    into the equation.  Furthermore, the judge does not make it  clear  how
    the appeal of the Third Appellant, the child is  allowed,  and  whether
    this  is  under  paragraph  276ADE  or  under  freestanding  Article  8
    jurisprudence.  In any event, the case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 75, which
    involved much older children is authority for the proposition that even
    if the best interests of the child is to remain with  the  parents,  if
    the parents are being removed, then the best interests do not stand  to
    be necessarily jeopardised, and no attention is drawn to this important
    case.

Remaking the Decision

 6. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.

 7. I am allowing this appeal to the extent that it is  submitted  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Majid,
    under Practice Statement 7.2(b) in that  he  major  or  extent  of  any
    judicial fact-finding which is necessary for the decisions appealed  to
    be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2016
