
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47196/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th July 2014                               |On 16th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                        MS OGHENECHAVWE NAOMI AKORODA
                          (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



               the secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Izevbizua, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on the 26th May  1979.
   She appeals, with permission, against the dismissal of her appeal by  the
   First-tier Tribunal (Judge Upson) from the decision of the respondent  to
   refuse her application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
   and to issue directions for her removal.


2. The respondent's decision was primarily  made  on  the  ground  that  the
   appellant could not meet the requirement under  paragraph  245ZX  of  the
   Immigration Rules that the grant of leave that she was seeking would  not
   lead to her having spent more than five as a student studying courses  at
   degree level or above. The argument raised against this objection in  the
   First-tier Tribunal was that granting further  leave  to  remain  to  the
   appellant would not in fact lead to a breach of the  five-year  limit  of
   leave to remain; alternatively, that the requirement not to  exceed  five
   years leave to remain was unlawful due to  its  supposedly  retrospective
   effect. Permission to renew these arguments in  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
   refused, by First-tier Tribunal Osborne, on the 11th  April  2014.  Judge
   Osborne did however grant permission for  the  appellant  to  argue  that
   Judge Upson had failed to consider whether the fact  that  the  appellant
   was, "very close to the end of her  course",  amounted  to  a  compelling
   circumstance that merited a full consideration of the appellant's  rights
   under Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention  for  the  Protection  of
   Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and in line with  the  decision  in
   Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640.


3. At paragraph 16 of his determination, Judge Upson noted that he had  been
   urged to consider the appellant's case, outside the  Rules,  pursuant  to
   Article 8. He further noted that it was conceded by  the  appellant  that
   she was unable to meet the conditions for further leave to  remain  under
   Appendix FM or under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  Although
   the matter  is  not  spelt  out  in  the  determination,  it  is  perhaps
   reasonable to assume that this concession was based upon the  appellant's
   lack of a family member who is settled in the  United  Kingdom,  together
   with the fact that she has not resided in the United Kingdom for at least
   20 years and continues to have ties to Nigeria. The judge then noted that
   it had been stated in Gulshan that it was only if there may  be  arguably
   good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules that it would
   become necessary for Article 8 purposes to  go  on  to  consider  whether
   there were compelling circumstances that are not sufficiently  recognised
   under them.


4. At paragraph 17, the judge said this:


    It is, as I have said, conceded that the appellant  could  not  succeed
    under the Rules. In that respect I have had regard to the case of Nasim
    and others (Article 8) [2014] 00025 (IAC). I am satisfied that the fact
    that the appellant has stayed in the UK as a student lawfully  for  the
    period outlined is not sufficient to engage Article 8. I  do  not  find
    that removal of the appellant, pursuant to the decision  to  refuse  to
    grant her application for leave, would potentially engage the operation
    of Article 8. In any event, such removal would be proportionate to  the
    legitimate public end; namely, the operation of  a  coherent  and  fair
    system of immigration control. In those circumstances, pursuant to  the
    case of Gulshan, I find there are no arguably good grounds for granting
    leave to remain outside the Rules.


5. Mr Izevbizua focussed  (as  had  Judge  Osborne)  upon  the  question  of
   whether the requirement for only a  short  further  period  of  leave  to
   remain so as to be able to complete the appellant's course  of  study  in
   the United Kingdom gave rise to arguable grounds for a grant of leave  to
   remain outside the Immigration Rules. Whilst it is  true  that  this  was
   argument not specifically considered by the Tribunal,  I  have  concluded
   that its omission was immaterial to the outcome of the  appeal.  This  is
   for the following reasons.


6. Mr Izevbizua stressed the relatively short period  of  leave  that  would
   now be required so as to enable the appellant to complete her course.  He
   also stressed the fact that the appellant had entered upon her course  of
   study in the belief that she met the requirements for  further  leave  to
   remain. That belief, however, was mistaken. It was the responsibility  of
   the appellant to ensure that she  already  had  the  requisite  leave  to
   remain - or at least to ensure that she would meet the  requirements  for
   obtaining it - prior to embarking upon a further course of study  in  the
   United Kingdom that she might otherwise be unable to complete. Otherwise,
   it would be open to every student  to  embark  upon  a  course  of  study
   without the need to consider whether they met the requirements for  leave
   to remain under the Immigration Rules. This is because  they  would  know
   that leave to remain would in any event  ultimately  be  granted  outside
   Rules. That would hardly be conducive  to  the  legitimate  objective  of
   maintaining a coherent and effective system of  immigration  control.  It
   cannot therefore provide a basis for holding that  there  are  compelling
   circumstances such as to justify a grant of leave to remain  outside  the
   Immigration Rules. I  am  of  course  conscious  of  the  fact  that  the
   appellant has  no doubt invested a great deal of  money  in  her  present
   course of study and that this may be wasted if she is  removed  prior  to
   its completion. However, that was a risk that she took by  failing  first
   to ensure that she would be granted leave to remain. The  situation  that
   she now faces is therefore entirely of her own making.


7. I am therefore satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  a
   material error of law in its  determination  of  this  appeal  and  that,
   accordingly, the appeal to the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed.


Decision


8. The appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity is not directed.



Signed                                  Date

David Kelly



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





