

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                Appeal Number:
IA/47978/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 19 August 2014                      |On 20 August 2014         |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr OLADAPO STEPHEN FAKEYE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel
      (instructed by Fitzpatrick & Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.    The Respondent's appeal against the decision  dated  30  October
           2013 to refuse to issue him with a EEA permanent residence  card
           was allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Lingam  in  a  determination
           promulgated on 5 June 2014.  The judge had ruled that a previous
           notice of revocation in 2007 had not complied  with  the  notice
           regulations.  Permission to  appeal  had  been  granted  to  the
           Secretary of  State,  rightly  in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  view,
           because the determination was inadequately reasoned.


      2.    Following informal discussion, it was  agreed  by  both  parties
           that  the  determination  was  unsustainable  because   of   its
           inadequate reasoning.   It was noted that the Secretary of State
           had not been represented at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.


      3.    The tribunal finds that the determination cannot stand and it is
           set aside by consent.  It was not correct to state (see [23]  of
           the determination) that the 2007  notice  had  resulted  in  the
           present appeal. The judge conflated the previous decision notice
           with decision notice before the First-tier Tribunal,  which  was
           plainly in the correct form and required a decision.  The  judge
           should have determined all issues, but failed to do so.


      4.    This led to a rehearing in the Upper Tribunal. There was a clear
           issue as to service of the notice of revocation in 2007  on  the
           original Appellant which could  not  be  decided  today  on  the
           evidence available to the Secretary of State.  There  were  also
           other issues which the original Appellant wished to raise  about
           events since 2007.  The Upper Tribunal was unwilling to  adjourn
           the appeal or to remit it to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  because
           either route  would  have  been  a  recipe  for  delay  and  had
           potential to create procedural confusion.


      5.    In view of the clear inadequacy  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
           decision dated 30 October 2013,  which  failed  to  address  the
           prior revocation issue, Mr  Walker  applied  for  permission  to
           withdraw the original decision.


      6.    Withdrawal of pending appeals is  only  possible  in  the  Upper
           Tribunal with judicial approval.  The reasons  which  Mr  Walker
           gave were  sufficient  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  approves  such
           withdrawal.  Clarity is in the Appellant's interest.  The result
           of the permitted withdrawal means that the  Secretary  of  State
           has yet to determine the original Appellant's application.




      DECISION


      The determination promulgated on 5 June 2014 is set aside for material
      error of law


      The original appeal was withdrawn by the Secretary of State


      Decision by the Secretary of State on original EEA application yet to
      be made



      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal

       TO THE RESPONDENT
       FEE AWARD

       The appeal was withdrawn.  Therefore there can be no fee award

       Signed                                Dated


       Designated Judge Manuell
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal





