
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47144/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2016                  |On 28 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 RASEL AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Mustafa, Solicitor, Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department.
    The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 3 October 1974 who had
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 26 March 2014  to
    deprive him of his British citizenship under Section 40 of the  British
    Nationality Act 1981 (as amended). For the sake of convenience, I shall
    continue to refer to the parties as they were referred  to  before  the
    first-tier Tribunal.

2.   Permission to appeal was initially refused but subsequently granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt on  28  July  2016  on  the  basis  that  the
    determination at paragraph 9 of the  judge  is  not  accurate  when  it
    stated clearly that the respondent  wished  to  rely  on  a  bundle  of
    documents from the previous appeal and not  just  on  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusal letter.

3.   Judge Rimington in her  decision  made  the  following  findings.   The
    deprivation of a British citizenship is a  serious  matter.   The  only
    document from the Secretary of State before the Tribunal was a  reasons
    for refusal letter drafted on 26 March 2014 and a further  letter  from
    the respondent dated 13 December 2015.  The respondent did not  provide
    a passport or the interview record and there was no further evidence in
    support of the assertion of the false passport being produced,  by  the
    appellant.

4.   It is the responsibility of the respondent to provide such evidence  as
    the burden of proof lies with the Secretary  of  State.    The  refusal
    letter was dated nearly two years  prior  to  the  hearing  date.   The
    Secretary of State has had ample time within which to produce  evidence
    after the active investigation and nothing has  been  produced  despite
    three sets of directions from the Tribunal being issued and a  previous
    adjournment of the appeal.

5.   The judge found that in the circumstances the Secretary  of  State  has
    failed to substantiate the assertions made in her reasons  for  refusal
    letter for depriving the appellant of British citizenship and failed to
    comply with the Tribunal directions to produce supporting  evidence  or
    documentation.  The judge found that the respondent cannot rely on  the
    bare assertion of fraudulent  activity  alone,  and  particularly  when
    given repeated opportunities to submit  the  documents  required  given
    that the burden of proof  lies  on  the  respondent,  and  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal.

6.   The grounds of appeal of the respondent state that  there  has  been  a
    mistake  as  to  a  material  fact.   The  respondent  states  that  at
    paragraphs 9 to 10 of her decision the  judge  records  that  the  only
    document before the Tribunal was the respondent's reasons  for  refusal
    letter from 2014 and a further letter in  response  to  the  directions
    dated December 2015.

7.   This is in fact a mistake as to a  material  fact.   The  letter  dated
    December 2015 written in response to directions clearly indicates  that
    the Secretary of State stated that she wises to rely upon the bundle of
    evidence which was submitted for the previous hearing  in  2014  before
    Judge Bird.  This bundle included a copy of the  appellant's  interview
    record, solely  upon  which  the  respondent  relied,  to  derived  the
    appellant of his fraudulently  attained  citizenship.   The  respondent
    states that if the judge had regard to this  evidence  she  would  have
    reached an alternative conclusion.

8.   I heard submissions from both parties at  the  hearing  as  to  whether
    there was an error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Mr Bramble in his submissions said that the judge had clearly failed to
    focus on the 13 December 2015 letter which  refers  to  the  bundle  of
    documents that the respondent wished to rely upon.  It has been a clear
    misunderstanding and he speculated that the two files may not have been
    linked or because of some other administrative  error.   He  said  that
    this is a very serious matter and it is a matter of fairness  that  the
    decision be allowed after having considered the bundle of documents  by
    the respondent.

9.   Mr Mustafa on behalf of the appellant stated that  the  respondent  has
    had ample opportunities to furnish the documents and this  is  no  more
    than an attempt at a second bite of the cherry.  He said that the judge
    considered all the evidence and even considered adjourning the  hearing
    but eventually decided that they had been given sufficient  opportunity
    to provide whatever evidence they wanted the judge to consider.

My Decision as to whether there is an Error in the Decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

10.  Deprivation of citizenship is a very serious matter.  It  is  a  matter
    which should only  have  been  considered  and  decided  when  all  the
    evidence was before the Tribunal.  Considering the decision it is clear
    that the judge at paragraph 8 stated that the only  document  from  the
    Secretary of State before the Tribunal was a reasons for refusal letter
    and a further letter from  the  respondent  on  13  December  2015  but
    clearly did not consider the contents of the  letter  in  which  it  is
    stated that the Secretary of State seeks to rely on  the  bundle  which
    was before Judge Bird in the initial hearing.

11.  I do not wish to go into why and how this bundle  was  not  before  the
    Tribunal.  I accept Mr Bramble's submissions that this is a  matter  of
    such importance that it cannot simply be made without the  evidence  of
    the respondent.  This is especially so because the burden of proof lies
    on her.

12.  Mr Bramble has said that he does have the bundle of  documents  at  the
    hearing which he can produce if I was to find an error of  law  in  the
    determination.  This clearly demonstrates to  me  that  a  bundle  does
    indeed exist and it is in the hands of Mr Bramble. Not that  I  condone
    the Secretary of State's lacksadaisical behaviour in not providing  the
    bundle of  documents  upon  which  they  seek  to  rely,  but  in  this
    particular instant fairness demands that this appeal be  heard  on  all
    the evidence so I find that there is an error of law  in  the  decision
    and I set it aside.



Notice of Decision

13.  I therefore remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  findings
    of fact to be made.  The appeal will be placed  before  any  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge except for Judge Rimington on the first available date.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mrs S Chana                    Dated this  25th  day  of  September
    2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed        Mrs S Chana                     Date  25th  day  of  September
    2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

