
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47699/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 9 December 2015                   |On 14 January 2016                   |
|Oral determination given following   |                                     |
|hearing                              |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE S. STOREY


                                   Between

                                tahir hafeez
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Basharat, Counsel, instructed by UNQ
Immigration Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this case is a national of Pakistan who was born on 25
    April 1979.  He arrived in this country on 14 June 2011  as  a  student
    with leave to remain until 21 July 2014.  The college at which  he  was
    enrolled lost its status and was effectively  closed  down  by  the  UK
    Borders Agency.  He accordingly brought an  application  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Rules under Article 8 on the basis that his  Article
    8 rights to respect for a private life would  be  violated  if  he  was
    required to return to Pakistan.  That application was made prior to the
    expiration of his current leave. The application  was  refused  by  the
    respondent but the respondent  did  not  certify  the  claim  as  being
    clearly unfounded although it would have been open to the respondent to
    have done so.  Accordingly the  appellant  had  a  statutory  right  of
    appeal against that decision.

 2. The appellant exercised that right and although he initially asked  for
    the  appeal  to  be  considered  on  the  papers  his  previous   legal
    representatives then wrote to the Tribunal requesting an  oral  hearing
    which was something he was entitled to provided he paid the appropriate
    fee.  The procedure following the making  of  this  application  should
    have been that the  First-tier  Tribunal  would  have  written  to  him
    requesting the fee but it never did so.  The reason it  never  did  so,
    and I  am  told  has  still  not  done  so,  is  because  although  the
    correspondence requesting an oral hearing was undoubtedly served on the
    Tribunal (and it is not suggested on behalf of the respondent  that  it
    was not) that correspondence got mislaid as  regrettably  happens  from
    time to time even in the best run organisation.

 3. The consequence was  that  the  appeal  was  considered  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flower on the papers at Birmingham Sheldon Court  on  11
    March 2015 and in a determination promulgated  on  16  March  2015  the
    appellant's appeal was dismissed.

 4. The appellant's new solicitors then wrote to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    inviting the First-tier Tribunal to set aside the  decision  which  had
    been made on the papers on the basis that there had been  a  procedural
    irregularity but the Tribunal refused  to  do  this  and  required  the
    appellant to seek permission to appeal against the decision  which  had
    been made to the Upper Tribunal, which he did.

 5. Permission to appeal was understandably and properly granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A K Simpson on 17 July 2015.  In  setting  out  her
    reasons for granting permission Judge Simpson  stated  as  follows,  at
    paragraph 4:

         "4.  I have the representatives' copies of the  letters  that  were
             sent to the First-tier Tribunal in Leicester and the originals
             do appear in the appellant's file  date  stamped  12  February
             2015 and with the correct  hearing  number.   For  an  unknown
             reason this letter subsequently found its way to  Castle  Park
             Storage on 24 March 2015 and there  is  nothing  on  the  file
             itself to indicate that it was ever  actioned.   Clearly  this
             appeal should not have proceeded as a 'paper appeal'.  In  any
             event, in proceeding to deal with the appeal 'on  the  papers'
             the judge has denied the appellant the opportunity to  present
             further evidence and/or argument."

 6. In our judgment Judge Simpson was undoubtedly right to grant permission
    to appeal and was also undoubtedly right in stating that "clearly  this
    appeal should not have proceeded as a 'paper appeal'".

 7. On behalf of the respondent before us Mr Kandola submitted  that  there
    was still a question to be determined as to whether or not the error of
    law which he did not dispute had occurred, was a material one.  In  our
    judgment it must have been because the appellant, however weak his case
    may have been, was entitled to exercise his statutory right  of  appeal
    and included within that right was the right to have it  determined  at
    an oral hearing.  Had the  respondent  certified  his  claim  as  being
    clearly unfounded, he would not have had a right of appeal but  in  the
    absence of such certification he did, and this included is right on  an
    oral hearing, of which he has  been  deprived.   Accordingly  the  only
    proper course open to us is to remit the appeal back to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for it now to be heard before any judge other than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flower and we shall so order.

 8. On the face of the papers which we have seen, the appellant's case does
    not appear to be a strong one, to say the least, and we would hope that
    an early listing could be obtained because it  cannot  be  in  anyone's
    interests for the appellant in these circumstances to have to wait  any
    longer than is necessary for his appeal to be properly determined.

Decision

We set aside the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Flower  as  being
vitiated by a procedural error, and direct that the appeal  be  remitted  to
the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Birmingham  for  rehearing  before  any
judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Flower.


Signed:

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 16 November 2015
