
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47004/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th December 2015                 |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   MARIE ELODIE ARIELLE LEGRAS (NEE COTTE)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss V Mania, Raj Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Ms Legras is a citizen of Mauritius whose date of birth is recorded  as
    27th March 1991.  She came to the United Kingdom  on  31st  March  2005
    using her own passport. She came as visitor though she was then just 14
    years of age. She came with her parents.   She  was  dependent  on  her
    mother's subsequent unsuccessful application for leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom.  These applications were made  in  2005  and  again  in
    2006.

 2. In December 2011 Ms Legras made application for leave to remain on  the
    basis of family life.  That was refused.  On 24th March 2012 Ms  Legras
    married.  Application was made on the basis of that marriage eventually
    resulting in the decision of 12th November 2014 giving rise to a  right
    of appeal.  In the refusal the Secretary of  State  made  reference  to
    Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE, and the wider application of  Article  8
    ECHR but concluded that  the  applicant,  as  she  then  was,  was  not
    entitled to the status which was being sought.  She appealed.  On  22nd
    May 2015 the matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ievins
    sitting at Taylor House. He allowed the appeal under paragraph  EX1  of
    Appendix FM and under Article 8 without specifically  making  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE.

 3. Not content with that decision, by Notice  dated  10th  June  2015  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and on 3rd September  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simpson granted permission.

 4. The grounds make reference to the exceptions to  Appendix  FM,  notably
    EX.1(b) whilst ground 2 challenges the finding of the judge in allowing
    the appeal outside the Rules.

 5. At the commencement of proceedings before me there was some  discussion
    about whether in fact, although not specifically raised in the grounds,
    the judge had erred  in  purporting  to  allow  the  appeal  under  the
    exception to Appendix FM when given the guidance in the case  of  Sabir
    (Appendix FM - EX.1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 63, the Exception  is
    not freestanding and the suitability requirements had not been met.

 6. By consent the Secretary of State amended the grounds  specifically  to
    make reference to that point and quite  properly  Miss  Mania  accepted
    that there was an error on the part of the judge although she  did  not
    accept that such error was material.

 7. There are difficulties in following the way  in  which  the  judge  has
    approached this appeal because he was right to have regard to  Appendix
    FM; the Secretary of State had done so.  It  was  also  right  to  have
    regard to 276ADE and clearly looking at paragraphs 6 and  7  the  judge
    aware that the matter was before him. What he then seems to have  done,
    looking at paragraph 30 of the notice of decision, was to have  allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8  without  regard  to
    276ADE save what follows. It  is  perfectly  clear,  and  Miss  Everett
    accepts this, that when one reads the decision as a  whole,  the  judge
    has made sufficient findings so that whether the error is  said  to  be
    immaterial or whether I remake it on the basis of a material  error  of
    law with regard to those  findings,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is to be maintained.

 8. Paragraph 276ADE(vi) provides for the situation in which  an  applicant
    is 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the United Kingdom  for
    less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment), but  there
    would be very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into
    the country to which [she] would have to go if required  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  Quite apart from the judge clearly placing significant
    weight on the fact that Ms Legras was minor when she first came to  the
    United Kingdom and therefore innocent insofar as she was an  overstayer
    he has made findings.  He says at paragraph 24, although  appearing  to
    consider EX.1 this:

         "... the Appellant's own lack of continuing ties to Mauritius,  and
         the fact that she found herself an overstayer through no  fault  of
         her own in my judgment do amount  to  insurmountable  obstacles  to
         family life with the Appellant's  partner  continuing  outside  the
         United Kingdom."

 9. Whilst he is referring to insurmountable obstacles they also  speak  to
    the significant obstacles to the applicant's integration.

10. The judge also had regard to the fact  that  her  parents  had  already
    managed to obtain some status although she had not.

11. The issue of materiality also arises because if, as I find, it was open
    to the judge to allow the appeal pursuant  to  276ADE  with  sufficient
    findings having been made,  then the wider  application  of  Article  8
    necessarily would lead to a finding that the Appellant  in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was also entitled to succeed because considerable  weight
    would have to be given to the fact that she met the  Immigration  Rule.
    It seems to me  that  what  weighed  with  the  judge  was  a  material
    consideration and one to which he was entitled to have  regard,  namely
    that people simply cannot be expected to put their lives  on  hold  and
    this Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, young as she  was,  innocent
    of the failures to comply with the  Immigration  Rules,  could  not  be
    expected to simply sit back and wait to see what happened to her.

12. In all the circumstances I find that the findings  of  the  judge  were
    open to him and essentially this is a case which turned on the findings
    of fact.  In those circumstances, although there are errors of law they
    are not material and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

13. I should say that Miss Everett very fairly accepted  that  the  grounds
    did not in fact address 276ADE which left her  in  some  difficulty  in
    advancing  the  Respondent's  case.   Had  the  grounds  been   drafted
    differently it may be that she could have put different points  to  me.
    As it was, her hands were rather tied but she was right  to  make  that
    observation and that concession.

Notice of Decision

14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

15. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
