
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47025/2014
                                                               IA/47033/2014
                                                               IA/47035/2014
                                                               IA/47043/2014
                                                               IA/47055/2014
                                                               IA/47062/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 February 2016                   |On 15 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                             HUMAIRA NASIR BAIG
                              MIRZA NASIR BAIG
                                     HN
                                     TN
                                     MSB
                                     MHB
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chaudhry of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Staunton a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent refused the Appellants' applications  for  leave  to
         remain on 8 November 2014. The First Appellant (referred  to  below
         at [2] by Judge  Shimmin  as  "the  appellant")  sought  a  Tier  1
         Entrepreneur visa and the rest of the Appellants  sought  leave  to
         remain as her dependents. They  were  all  required  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom. Their appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal
         Judge Oakley ("the Judge") following a hearing on 19 August 2015.

The grant of permission

      2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted permission to appeal  (29
         December 2015) on the ground that it is arguable that the Judge:

             "... misunderstood the arguments  made  by  the  appellant  in
             respect of the decision not being in accordance with the  law.
             It was submitted that the  decision  was  unfair  because  the
             appellant had not been given an  opportunity  to  address  the
             concerns raised in  the  refusal  letter.  The  basis  of  the
             refusal  was  solely  on  the  interview  conducted  with  the
             appellant after she submitted  her  application.  The  refusal
             letter raised issues which  were  not  put  to  the  appellant
             during  the  interview.  The  appellant  was  prohibited  from
             relying  on  any  documentation   not   submitted   with   the
             application and therefore could not deal with these issues".

Respondent's position

      3. Mr Staunton relied on the rule 24 notice. The Judge was  unable  to
         take account of further evidence from  the  First  Appellant  as  a
         result of s85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
         The Respondent had clear and serious concerns  over  the  viability
         and  genuineness  of  the  First  Appellant's  business   and   the
         availability of her claimed funds. The First Appellant was  invited
         to interview to address the Respondent's concerns  and  could  have
         been expected to have assembled all relevant  evidence  to  support
         her contention that she was a genuine entrepreneur. He orally added
         that her answers in interview were misleading and vague.

Appellants' position

      4. It was procedurally unfair  for  the  Respondent  to  make  adverse
         findings against the First Appellant without giving her the  chance
         to address the concerns in her interview. The Judge did not look at
         her explanation within her appeal  statement  for  the  matters  of
         concern raised in the interview.  Reliance  was  placed  upon  Miah
         (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00515
         (IAC) and R (on the  application  of  Mushtaq)  v  Entry  Clearance
         Officer of Islamabad, Pakistan (ECO -  procedural  fairness)  (IJR)
         [2015] UKUT 00224 (IAC).

Discussion

      5. The Judge noted [26] that the First Appellant had been  written  to
         prior to the interview explaining that she could:

             "... bring any further documents to the interview  in  support
             of the application"

         and

             "... if other documents had been brought  then  I  would  have
             expected them to have been recorded but since none  have  been
             recorded clearly the First Appellant has not brought any other
             documents to the interview."

      6. Contrary to that which was asserted on behalf of the Appellants the
         Judge  did  consider  the  explanation  given  within   the   First
         Appellant's appeal statement for the matters of concern  raised  in
         the interview. The Judge stated [17]:

             "...the First Appellant has made  a  statement  dated  the  14
             August 2015 but notwithstanding the fact that she attended the
             Appeal she did not give evidence and was therefore not  cross-
             examined and  consequently  I  attach  little  weight  to  the
             statement that has been made by her."

      7. In addition, the Judge applied his own mind to the  issues  in  the
         case. He identified the matters of  concern  that  arose  from  the
         interview regarding what she did [24],  what  set  her  apart  from
         other competitors [25], her rate  of  pay  and  reason  for  having
         premises in the infancy of  the  business  [27],  her  poor  market
         research [28], and her lack of work experience [29]. The Judge  was
         entitled to find her answers unclear, evasive,  inconceivable,  and
         lacking in credibility.

      8. I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to find that  there  was
         nothing procedurally unfair in the manner in which  the  Respondent
         considered the application.  The  First  Appellant  was  given  the
         opportunity to provide whatever documents she wanted prior  to  and
         at the  interview,  and  could  say  anything  she  wished  at  the
         interview to explain how the documents showed that it was a genuine
         business. The Judge did consider the First Appellant's explanations
         for the shortcomings identified. The Judge was  entitled  to  place
         little weight on her explanations as she chose not to give evidence
         or consequently make herself available for  cross-examination.  The
         Judge applied his mind to all the evidence before him and  did  not
         slavishly simply accept the Respondent's concerns.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 February 2016
