

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: IA/47720/2013
                 IA/47721/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 1 July 2014         On 4 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                      1) Rafaela Yasmin Jovita Pereira
                        2) Meyre Lucia Santana Jovita
                          (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                              Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellants:    Mr M Iqbal of  Counsel  instructed  by  Farani  Javid
                       Taylor Solicitors.
For the Respondent:            Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge E M M Smith promulgated on 10 April 2014. The decisions of Judge
      Smith purport to dismiss appeals brought by each  of  the  Appellants'
      against removal decisions dated 30 October 2013. (See further below in
      respect of the relevant immigration decisions and rights of  appeal  -
      which  were  considered  potentially  contentious  in  the  grant   of
      permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.)


Background

   2. The Appellants are nationals of Brazil born on 22 August 2000  and  30
      August 1970 respectively. The First Appellant is the daughter  of  the
      Second Appellant. Their relevant immigration histories are set out  at
      paragraph 3 of a  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  30
      October  2013  addressed  to  the  Second  Appellant,  and  are   also
      summarised at paragraphs 7-10 of the determination of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge. I do not detail further here the  relevant  histories,
      but  make  reference  as  is  incidental  for  the  purposes  of  this
      determination.


   3. On 11 May 2011 the Appellants - who at that time had no current  leave
      to remain in the UK - applied jointly for leave  to  remain  on  human
      rights grounds, with particular reference to Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
      The joint application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  the  RFRL
      dated 30 October 2013.


   4. In consequence Notices of Immigration Decision of the  same  date  was
      served on the Appellant on 5 November 2013: see further below.


   5. The Appellants appealed to the IAC.


   6. The Appellants' appeals were dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  for
      reasons set out in the determination promulgated on 10 April 2014.


   7. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,
      which was granted on 19 May 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin.


   8. Judge Levin rejected the grounds in support  of  the  application  for
      permission to appeal  as  being  without  merit  and  not  raising  an
      arguable error of law (see paragraphs 3  and  5  of  the  Reasons  for
      Decision). However, on the basis of the papers available to  him,  and
      notwithstanding that no previous issue had been raised in this regard,
      Judge Levin was concerned that there  appeared  not  to  have  been  a
      relevant appealable immigration  decision  in  respect  of  the  First
      Appellant, and granted permission to appeal on this basis  (paragraphs
      4 and 5).


   9. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 6 June  2014  -  but
      was not in a position to make comment on the grant  of  permission  to
      appeal because the relevant file was not available.


Consideration

  10. There are on file Notices of Immigration Decision in respect  of  each
      of the Appellants, both dated 30 October 2013. Although the Notice  in
      respect of  the  First  Appellant  is  not  readily  apparent  in  the
      Respondent's bundle, there is a copy of it attached to the  Notice  of
      Appeal at page 12 of the Appellants' bundle.


  11. Both Notices of Immigration Decision refer  to  an  'out  of  country'
      right of appeal. However, this was the subject of consideration  as  a
      'Validity Issue' raised on  an  'Appeals  Processing  Referral  Sheet'
      which resulted in a decision on 17  December  2013  by  Judge  Birrell
      expressed  in  these  terms:  "Proceed.  App  has  made  HR  claim   -
      application made on the basis of family life."


  12. In the circumstances it was common ground between the  representatives
      before me that there were relevant appealable immigration decisions in
      respect of both Appellants; further that pursuant to the  decision  of
      Judge Birrell the right of appeal was exercisable 'in country'; and in
      consequence Judge Smith had had jurisdiction to consider and determine
      appeals in respect of each of the  Appellants.  Indeed  Mr  Iqbal  was
      understandably anxious not to concede that  there  was  no  in-country
      right of appeal in respect of either Appellant. It followed  that  the
      concerns raised by Judge Levin in the grant of  permission  to  appeal
      were answered upon closer perusal of all of the relevant materials  on
      file. (I note that even if there had  not  been  a  valid  immigration
      decision in respect of the First Appellant this  would  have  made  no
      material difference to the fact that there was  a  valid  decision  in
      respect of the Second Appellant and there was in turn a  valid  appeal
      in respect of the Second Appellant; moreover all  issues  relevant  to
      the Second Appellant - including  those  matters  that  more  directly
      affected the First Appellant - were the subject  of  consideration  by
      the First-tier Tribunal;  indeed,  as  observed  by  Judge  Smith  the
      emphasis in the case for the Second Appellant was upon  her  remaining
      in the UK as the parent of the First Appellant.)


  13. This left Mr Iqbal,  as  he  was  quick  to  observe,  in  an  unusual
      position. The pleaded  grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
      permission to appeal had been rejected; however,  the  Appellants  had
      not reviewed and renewed the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
      because permission had been granted on Judge Levin's  own  motion  for
      different reasons  -  reasons  now  shown  to  be  unfounded.  In  the
      circumstances, and without  any  objection  from  Mr  Jack,  I  simply
      invited Mr Iqbal to pursue any challenge to the decision of the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge that he wished.


  14. Mr Iqbal developed a submission based on the fact that by the date  of
      the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal  the  First  Appellant  had
      been in the UK for more than 7 years, and accordingly should have  had
      a favourable assessment  pursuant  to  the  guidance  in  Azimi-Moayed
      [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC). Mr  Iqbal  also  made  reference  to  paragraph
      276ADE of the Immigration Rules.


  15. In response, Mr Jack essentially argued  that  there  was  no  'bright
      line' rule in respect of 7 years for a minor; that the Judge had fully
      taken into account the decision in Azimi-Moayed; and  that  the  Judge
      had come to a sustainable conclusion on the particular  facts  of  the
      Appellants' cases.


  16. I make the following observations:

(i) The Judge made clear and  sustainable  findings  in  respect  of  family
      life, taking into account the best interests of the  minor  Appellant:
      see paragraph 32. I do not understand the Appellants' challenge to the
      determination of Judge Smith to focus on the evaluation of family life
      so much as the evaluation of private life with particular reference to
      the private life of the First Appellant.

(ii) The Judge plainly had in mind the respective immigration  histories  of
      the Appellants, which he summarised at paragraphs 7-10. In doing so he
      identified that the First Appellant had been brought to the UK  on  18
      June 2006 by the Second Appellant as a visitor even though it had been
      the Second Appellant's intention that her daughter would  remain  with
      her in the UK thereafter (determination at  paragraph  9).  The  Judge
      characterised the circumstances of  the  First  Appellant's  entry  as
      "deceitful", but expressly indicated that the First Appellant did  not
      bear any responsibility in this regard (paragraph 34).

(iii) I note that notwithstanding the lack of responsibility  of  the  First
      Appellant, the deceit employed in securing her entry to the UK renders
      her an illegal entrant. In  any  event,  the  deceitful  circumstances
      surrounding  her  entry  are  capable  of  being  a  relevant  adverse
      consideration in a proportionality exercise notwithstanding  the  lack
      of culpability of the First Appellant herself because they are matters
      relevant to the overall  integrity  of  immigration  control.  In  the
      event, however, the Judge did not accord  these  matters  any  adverse
      weight: in one sense his  decision  can  therefore  be  seen  to  have
      possibly involved a consideration more generous to the Appellants than
      was strictly warranted.

(iv) The Judge clearly had in mind the length of time  the  First  Appellant
      had been in the UK, and her age upon  entry:  see  paragraph  35.  The
      Judge analysed and made findings in respect of  her  private  life  in
      this context: again, see paragraph 35. The Judge also plainly  had  in
      mind the age of the First Appellant at the date of the appeal hearing,
      and her current circumstances: paragraph 37.

(v) The Judge directed himself to Azimi-Moayed:  see  paragraph  36.  I  can
      identify nothing in paragraphs  36-38,  or  indeed  elsewhere  in  the
      determination, that suggests that the Judge misunderstood the guidance
      therein, or misapplied it.

(vi) The Judge gave detailed consideration to  the  extent  of  interference
      with the First Appellant's private life, setting  out  clear  findings
      and reasons in the analysis at paragraph 38. In  reality,  Mr  Iqbal's
      challenge is essentially a  contention  that  a  different  conclusion
      should  have  been  reached,  but  does  not  identify  any   specific
      perversity in the analysis therein.


  17. Further to the above, in as much as any emphasis might be placed  upon
      the First Appellant's continuing school education in the UK,  Mr  Jack
      directed my attention to paragraphs 60  and  61  of  EV  (Philippines)
      [2014] EWCA Civ 874. Whilst the Judge had observed that  the  standard
      of education in Brazil was not so poor as to breach Article 2  of  the
      1st Protocol to the ECHR, he had not had any regard to the cost to the
      public purse in providing education to the First Appellant in the UK -
      and as such, in Mr Jack's  submission,  had  if  anything  adopted  an
      approach too favourable to the Appellants. Whilst there  may  be  some
      substance to this submission in isolation,  in  the  context  of  this
      particular case it seems to me  that  it  does  not  progress  matters
      significantly when considering 'error of law'. I do observe,  however,
      in this context that the Judge clearly had in mind the  importance  of
      continuing education to the First Appellant, and indeed addressed this
      also by reference to her ability to adapt to the educational system in
      her country of  origin  taking  full  account  of  her  oral  language
      ability, and taking full account of her  limitations  in  reading  and
      writing Portuguese.


  18. As regards paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Immigration Rules I  note  that
      this was addressed by Judge Smith at paragraph 25. The Rule  specifies
      the requirements by  reference  to  "the  date  of  application",  and
      accordingly the Judge was correct to find that the First Appellant did
      not meet the qualifying period. In any event, it would still have been
      necessary for the First Appellant to meet  the  'reasonableness'  test
      thereunder, which whilst not congruent  with  a  proportionality  test
      under Article 8 encompasses similar considerations.


  19. In all the circumstances I could identify  no  error  of  law  in  the
      approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to  the  Appellants'
      appeals, whether by reference to Mr Iqbal's submissions, or otherwise.


  20. For the avoidance of any doubt, I observe that in my  judgement  Judge
      Levin was entirely correct in ruling that  the  grounds  submitted  in
      support of the application for permission to appeal raised no arguable
      error of law, and were otherwise without merit. I adopt Judge  Levin's
      observation to the effect that  contrary  to  the  submission  in  the
      grounds, the First-tier Tribunal Judge made it clear  that  the  First
      Appellant did not bear any  responsibility  for  the  conduct  of  the
      Second  Appellant  in  failing   to   regularise   their   immigration
      circumstances; and further that Judge Smith considered in  detail  the
      best interests of the First Appellant. In  my  judgement  the  grounds
      effectively sought to re-submit the arguments that were considered and
      rejected by Judge Smith.


  21. There being no error of law, the decisions of the First-tier  Tribunal
      stand.


Decisions

  22. The appeals are dismissed. The decisions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge stand.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     3 September 2014
