
[pic]
IAC-CH-SA-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47145/2014
                                                               IA/44945/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th April 2016                           |On 6th May 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                 MR A NAZIR
                                 MR S F UMER
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit and Mr S Karim, Counsels
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Secretary of State appeals the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Flynn, both promulgated on 22nd  September  2015,  in  which  she
    allowed the Appellants' appeals against  administrative  removal  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The files have been
    linked in the context of raising the same issue.

 2. The Respondent's grounds assert an error of  law  in  respect  of  both
    decisions on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not  have
    jurisdiction.

 3. I set out the relevant part of the judge's decision below:

         "Preliminary Issues

         7.   Mr Raja submitted a witness statement from Matthew Harold  and
             annexes.  In his submission, the appellant had  no  in-country
             right of appeal.

         8.   Ms Jones submitted that the respondent had failed to establish
             a prima facie case of deception and  therefore  the  appellant
             had an in-country right of appeal.

         9.   Mr Raja submitted that there was an in-country right of appeal
             only on human rights grounds in accordance with Section 92(4).

         10.  Ms Jones  agreed  with  Mr  Raja's  submission  and  said  the
             appellant's legal representatives had written to the Secretary
             of State on 27 November 2014 before  the  appeal  was  issued.
             The appeal was only on human rights grounds because there  was
             no evidence of deception by the appellant.

         11.  Mr Raja submitted that the spreadsheet attached to Mr Harold's
             statement and the report on Stanfords' College were sufficient
             evidence that the appellant had used deception.

         12.  I decided that neither the extract from  the  ETS  spreadsheet
             nor the college report was  sufficient  evidence  because  the
             spreadsheet  contained  only  minimal  details  such  as   the
             appellant's name, date of birth, nationality  and  test  date;
             and the report did not  implicate  the  appellant.   The  only
             reference to deception was a statement in the spreadsheet that
             the test was "invalid".  I considered  this  was  insufficient
             evidence to establish deception and  therefore  the  appellant
             had an in-country right of appeal."

 4. In short neither of these Appellants had an in-country right of appeal.
     The submission of representations to the Respondent on  27th  November
    2014  did  not  assist  the  Appellants.   In  Mr  Nazir's   case   the
    Respondent's decision was dated 14th November 2014, the  appeal  lodged
    on 24th November 2014, leaving aside the issue as to whether or not the
    representations  were  a  human  rights  claim,  the  chronology  alone
    revealed that no human rights claim had been made prior to the  appeal.
    In Mr Umer's case the decision was dated 22nd October 2014, the date of
    appeal 6th November 2014, and therefore his representation, even  if  a
    human rights claim, was self-evidently not made prior to the appeal.

 5. The Respondent relied on the cases of Nirula [2012] EWCA Civ  1436;  RK
    (Nepal) [2009] EWCA Civ  359,  Alighanbari  [2013]  EWHC  181  (Admin),
    Kiarie [2015] EWCA Civ 1020.  The Appellants' relied upon the cases  of
    Rashid Anwar and Prosper Adjo [2010] EWCA Civ 1275.

 6. Mr Jarvis for the Respondent  argued  that  the  judge  was  not  in  a
    position to confer jurisdiction to herself outside of that afforded  by
    statute.

 7. Before me Mr Karim and Mr Muquit acting on  behalf  of  the  Appellants
    both conceded that as a matter of law neither of the Appellants had  an
    in-country right of  appeal.   Mr  Muquit  for  Mr  Nazir  argued  that
    although the Notice of Decision took the jurisdiction point,  informing
    Mr Nazir that his only recourse was to an out of country appeal, at the
    First-tier Tribunal, as Mr Jarvis conceded in  his  skeleton,   Mr  the
    Respondent had conceded the position, so that  it could not  be  fairly
    raised now.

 8. In response Mr Jarvis invited me to find that any such  concession  was
    on a mistaken basis, relying on the  Appellant's  Counsel's  assertions
    that a human rights claim had been made prior to  the  issuing  of  the
    appeal.  The Respondent should not be held to any such concession.

 9. Mr Muquit and Mr Karim were as one in arguing that the prejudice to the
    Appellant afforded by an out of country appeal in terms of expense  and
    inconvenience in terms of interruption to  studies  were  such  that  a
    concession should not be withdrawn.

10. Mr Muquit additionally argued that in terms of the ETS deception  point
    the out of country appeal right  was  not  an  adequate  or  sufficient
    remedy in the context  of  Judge  Flynn's  findings  that  the  generic
    evidence was an  inadequate  basis  upon  which  the  Respondent  could
    establish forgery.

11. The jurisdiction point was taken by  the  Respondent  in  both  of  the
    Appellant's notices of decision. It is a matter of law. It is not  open
    to the Respondent to confer it, whether by later concession, made on  a
    correct or incorrect understanding of the factual matrix, or otherwise.
    It is not open to the Ft-TJ to  assume  jurisdiction.  The  first  tier
    Tribunal did not have jurisdiction. That is a matter of law.

12. The position is well established in legal principle, but  if  authority
    is needed one needs look no further than the  Court  of  Appeal  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 652.Virk. This is not a case where  the  point  had  not  been
    taken and the matter progressed to the point that the issue  could  not
    on any proper basis be considered to be live.

13. I go on however to comment on the claimed concession. Neither Mr Karim,
    Mr Muquit or Mr Jarvis represented before the First-tier, so  that  the
    matter was not within their own knowledge. There was no  evidence  from
    representatives present at the First-tier. Mr Jarvis for the Respondent
    treated paragraph 9 of the  judge's  decision  as  a  reflection  of  a
    concession. Mr Karim and Mr Muquit similarly argued that there had been
    an apparent concession on the face of the decision. I disagree. On  the
    face of the decision no concession is apparent.  If the judge  intended
    to say at [9] that the matter had been conceded, paragraphs [10],  [11]
    and [12] would be superfluous.  The judge has not expressly  relied  on
    any concession, but has made her own decision that the Appellant had an
    in-country right of appeal, apparently based on an  assessment  of  the
    evidence concerning deception, all of which points to a  conflation  of
    the issues and misdirection  in  respect  of  the  jurisdiction  point.
    Further if Mr Raja incorrectly accepted  Counsel's  submission  that  a
    human rights claim had been made prior to the lodging  of  the  appeal,
    any such concession was based on an incorrect  factual  matrix  because
    neither of these Appellants made  human  rights  claims  prior  to  the
    lodging of the appeal. At its highest he mistakenly conceded a  factual
    matrix which afforded jurisdiction. It was not open to him  to  concede
    jurisdiction.

14. I find no merit in  the  submission  that  an  out  of  country  appeal
    provides an inadequate venue for the dispute  in  respect  of  the  ETS
    evidence and  issues  of  deceit.   The  matter  has  been  extensively
    litigated and  an  out  of  country  appeal  right  found  an  adequate
    response.

15. For all the reasons above the Secretary of State's appeal succeeds.

Notice of Decision

16.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  materially  erred  in  law  for   lack   of
    jurisdiction.  The decisions are  set  aside  and,  in  each  of  these
    appeals, replaced by the decision is that there is no valid appeal.

17. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


There is no valid appeal  and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

