
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47760/2013
     IA/05929/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1st October, 2014                            |On 13th November, 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                             the hon. lord boyd
                  sitting as a judge of the upper tribunal
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                rafaqat begum
                                 ruhul amin
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Z Malik of Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. These two appeals have been listed together because they raise a common
    issue, namely the proper construction of the transitional provisions in
    HC 194 and the Court of Appeal's judgment in  Edgehill  v  SSHD  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 402 and Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  With  respect
    to the decision of Ruhul Amin there is a second issue,  namely  whether
    the First-tier Judge erred in following the  decisions  in  R  (on  the
    application of) Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 and Gulshan (Article  8  -
    new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC).  There  are  no
    challenges to the judge's findings of fact in either case.

The Appeal of Ruhul Amin

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 10th October 1971.

 3. It was accepted by the First-tier Judge and not subsequently challenged
    by the Secretary of State that the Appellant came to  the  UK  in  2002
    with the aid of  an  agent.   Thereafter  he  remained  unlawfully.  In
    September 2008 he entered into a religious marriage with Tulip Sultana,
    a Bangladeshi citizen, who first came to the UK on 6th February 2008 as
    a student and was subsequently granted further leave  to  remain  until
    24th October 2011.

 4. On 9th October 2009 he applied for leave to remain outside of the Rules
    and was refused.  He then applied for  a  certificate  of  approval  to
    marry, and they had a civil ceremony on 4th July 2011.  They  have  two
    children, a son born on 5th December 2009 and a daughter born  on  27th
    June 2013.  She presently has leave as a Tier 1 HS  Entrepreneur  until
    2016.

 5. The Appellant submitted an application for leave to remain on the basis
    of his family and  private  life  on  13th  December  2011,  which  was
    initially refused on 3rd September 2012. That  decision  was  withdrawn
    and it was refused again on 14th January 2014.

 6. In her letter of refusal the Secretary of State wrote as follows:

      i) "Further to  our  withdrawal  on  17th  September  2013  from  your
         client's appeal against his refusal  of  leave  to  remain  on  3rd
         September 2012 I have reconsidered your client's application  under
         Article 8 ECHR taking into  account  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and the Immigration Rules  put
         in place on 9th July 2012 under  Appendix  FM.   In  reaching  this
         decision only the Immigration Rules and  UK  Border  Agency  policy
         applicable at the date of decision have been considered (as per the
         case of Odelola v SSHDU [2009] UKHL 25).

      7. The letter recites the Appellant's immigration history  and  states
         as follows:

         "I have considered Article 8 by applying the relevant provisions of
         the Rules in force on 9th July 2012 (paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM
         for family life and paragraph 276ADE for private life) as below.

 8. There then followed a detailed consideration of the Immigration  Rules,
    consideration of Section 55 and paragraph 353B and  a  final  paragraph
    headed "Exceptional Circumstances" which reads as follows:

         "Your  client's  application  has  been  considered   exceptionally
         outside the Immigration Rules.  However the  Secretary  of  State's
         policy is  not  to  exercise  discretion  unless  there  are  clear
         exceptional compassionate circumstances which merit the exercise of
         discretion outside the Immigration Rules.

         You  have  raised  some  issues  as  a  basis  for   a   claim   of
         exceptionality in your client's situation.  These have  been  dealt
         with elsewhere in this letter.  We do  not  consider  that  any  of
         these or any other factors you have raised in your submission offer
         sufficiently  compassionate   or   compelling   circumstances   for
         discretion to be exercised in this case."

 9. The judge accepted that the Appellant,  his  wife  and  children  enjoy
    family life together.  It was a part of the Appellant's  case  that  he
    could not return  to  Bangladesh  because  of  his  wife's  established
    business in the UK.  The judge found that it  had  only  very  recently
    been established and was not yet operational. If the Appellant and  his
    family decided to return to Bangladesh, it would not mean the demise of
    an established business.

10. The judge also considered the children.  He observed  that  they  spoke
    both English and Bengali.  He did not accept that they had no ties with
    Bangladesh nor that, as  claimed,  there  would  be  any  risk  to  the
    Appellant on return on account of his involvement in local politics  in
    Tower Hamlets.

11. He concluded that, for the reasons set out in the refusal  letter,  the
    Appellant did not satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM  with  regard
    to family life or paragraph 276ADE with regard  to  private  life.   He
    then wrote as follows:

         "I now need to consider whether there are arguably good grounds for
         the granting of leave to remain to the Appellant outside the  Rules
         and so necessitating a consideration of a  freestanding  Article  8
         claim.  Here I am guided by the case law of R (On  the  application
         of Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan (Article  8  -
         new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).   I  do  not
         find that there are any arguably good grounds for granting leave to
         remain outside the Rules and also  that  there  are  no  compelling
         circumstances  in  this  Appellant's  situation   which   are   not
         sufficiently recognised under the Rules."

12. He found that the decision of the Respondent was in accordance with the
    law and the relevant  regulations  and  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

The Appeal of Rafaqat Begum

13. Mrs Begum is a citizen of Pakistan born on  16th  November  1961.   She
    originally entered the UK on 14th April 2005 on a visit visa.  She made
    an application for leave to remain on 6th June  2011  on  human  rights
    grounds and included a claim that she had given birth to a child in the
    UK.  Her application was refused in a decision dated 25th October  2013
    by which time it had become clear that  the  child  concerned  was  the
    child of her daughter and not the Appellant.

14. In a detailed reasons for refusal letter, the Respondent  set  out  the
    Appellant's case which she considered under Appendix FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  She then considered the  claim  using
    the five stage test outlined in the case of SSHD v Razgar.

15. The Appellant claimed that she had established  a  strong  private  and
    family life in the United Kingdom with  her  daughter,  son-in-law  and
    grandchildren, and said that she needed to be able  to  access  medical
    treatment and to receive care for her multiple conditions.

16. The judge set out the  relevant  case  law.  The  provisions  governing
    Article 8 were now contained in Appendix FM but the Appellant  did  not
    meet the Rules, since she entered the UK on a visit visa  and  did  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE.

17. The judge conducted the  five  stage  Razgar  test,  finding  that  the
    Appellant did have family life in the  United  Kingdom,  and  concluded
    that whilst removal  would  interfere  with  family  life,  it  was  in
    accordance with the  law  since  she  had  no  leave  to  be  here  and
    proportionate.

The Grounds of Application

Ground 1

18. The Appellant relies on Edgehill &Anor v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  402,
    which was concerned with the proper construction of HC 194.

19. Under the heading "implementation", it reads:

      i) 'The changes set out in this Statement shall take effect on 9  July
         2012 ... however, if an application for entry clearance,  leave  to
         remain or indefinite leave to remain has been made  before  9  July
         2012 and the application has not been decided, it will  be  decided
         in accordance with the rules in force on 8 July 2012'.

20. Jackson LJ (with whom Laws LJ and Black LJ agreed)  concluded  that  an
    application made before 9 July 2012 may not be refused by reference  to
    the provisions introduced by HC 194.

21. The grounds  argue  that  the  FTT  accepted  the  application  to  the
    Secretary of State was made on '13 December 2011', and it was therefore
    not open to her to determine it by reference to  Paragraph  276ADE  and
    Appendix FM.  The Secretary of State's decision was  therefore  not  in
    accordance with the law, as plainly  inconsistent  with  the  statement
    laid before Parliament and the Court of Appeal authority.

22. It was recognised that, in Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558,  the
    Court of Appeal arrived  at  a  completely  different  conclusion.   In
    Haleemudeen, it is lawful to assess an application made prior to 9 July
    2012, by reference to the rules introduced by HC 194.

23. However it was submitted that Haleemudeen is decided per  incuriam  and
    should not be followed.  In Young v Bristol Aeroplane C�te d'Ivoire Ltd
    [1944] KB 718, 725-6, it  is  open  to  the  UT  to  refuse  to  follow
    Haleemudeen because it is in conflict with Edgehill.

24. The grounds quote Lord Bingham in  R  (Razgar)  v  Secretary  of  State
    [2004] UKHL 24, at paragraph  17'(1),  who  stated  that  in  assessing
    Article 8 claims, the appellate authority must consider five questions,
    namely;

                   a)      Will the proposed removal be an interference  by
                      a  public  authority  with  the   exercise   of   the
                      applicant's right to respect for his private  or  (as
                      the case may be) family life?


                  (b)  If so, will such interference  have  consequences  of
                      such gravity as potentially to engage  the  operation
                      of Article 8?


                  (c)  If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
                      law? (Emphasis added)


                  (d)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic
                      society in the interests of national security, public
                      safety or the economic wellbeing of the country,  for
                      the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,   for   the
                      protection of health or morals, or for the protection
                      of the rights and freedoms of others?


                  (e)  If so, is  such  interference  proportionate  to  the
                      legitimate public end sought to be achieved'?

25. An immigration decision which is unlawful at common law (as is the case
    here) will always amount to an interference which is not in  accordance
    with the law for the purpose of Article 8(2) (see SC (Article  8  -  in
    accordance with the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056 (IAC))  In  such  a
    case, if it is established that there  is  a  protected  private/family
    life, an Appellant will necessarily succeed  on  the  ground  that  the
    decision  is  incompatible  with  Article  8,  and  the   question   of
    proportionality does not arise. The FTT therefore erred in law  in  not
    allowing the Appellant's Article 8 appeal by finding that the answer to
    the third question of Razgar to be in the affirmative.

Ground 2 ( Ruhul Amin only)

26. Second, the FTT, at  paragraph  40,  followed  R  (on  the  application
    ofNagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan (Article  8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's Article 8 appeal.  In MM & Ors, R (On the application of) v
    SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, Aikens LJ  (with  whom  Maurice  Kay  LJ  and
    Treacy LJ agreed) overruled the approach taken in those authorities.

27. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lever on 30th July  2014  who
    said that, given the conclusion in Edgehill it was  arguable  that  the
    judge ought to have looked at the case under the Razgar test and had he
    done  so  it  is  entirely  possible  that  he  would  have  found   no
    disproportionality in removal. Accordingly his failure to carry out the
    assessment was arguably an error of law.

Rule 24 Responses

28. The Respondent served a Reply on 29th July 2014, opposing the appeal of
    Rafaqat Begum. The issue of transitional  provisions  were  not  raised
    before the FtT and were in any event subsequently revised.   She  noted
    that the application to the Upper Tribunal was out of time but this had
    not been addressed in the grant of permission.

29. On 7th August 2014 the Respondent served a Reply in  respect  of  Ruhul
    Amin. She said that there were no  Article  8  rules  at  the  date  of
    application and so this was not a case that fell in line with Edgehill.
     At the date of decision  the  Respondent's  policy  was  clearly  that
    embodied in the new rules, notwithstanding that they themselves did not
    apply at the date of application.  Any alternative approach would  have
    resulted in the Appellant being treated differently from others  purely
    by  virtue  of  the  date  of  application  which   would   have   been
    inconsistent. It was clear that the Appellant could not  demonstrate  a
    good arguable case for consideration under Article 8 in  the  light  of
    Razgar.  The judge was entitled to conclude that he did not make out  a
    case that there was a disproportionate interference with his Article  8
    rights on the basis of the adverse credibility findings.  The  case  of
    Rafique [2014] EWHC 1654 at  paragraph  12  considered  the  point  and
    concluded that the result when considered under either  approach,  will
    be the same.

The Appellants' Submissions

30. Mr Malik submitted that the decision in Ruhul Amin was unlawful because
    the decision-maker refused the application solely by reference  to  the
    new Rules.  The judge was bound to have found that the decision was not
    in accordance with the law and  therefore  incapable  of  justification
    under Article 8.

31. With respect to Rafaqat Begum, he accepted that the decision letter  of
    25th October 2013 was in accordance with the law since the decision was
    comprehensive and did not solely  rely  upon  the  Rules.   However  he
    submitted that it was clear that the judge had had regard  to  the  new
    Rules in  making  her  decision.   At  paragraphs  38  and  39  of  the
    determination he had referred to them, and to the decision of Nagre  at
    paragraph 40.  At paragraph 52 he had concluded that  this  was  not  a
    case where the Appellant had satisfied him that a  return  to  Pakistan
    would be unduly harsh, the language of the new  Rules,  which  made  it
    clear that she had relied upon them in reaching her decision.

Ground 1

32. Mr Malik relied on the decision in Edgehill made following a hearing on
    25th February 2014 and handed down on 2nd April  2014.   The  principal
    issue was the proper application of the transitional provisions set out
    at the front of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration  Rules  which
    came into effect on 9th July 2012.  The case involved Rule 276B of  the
    old rules, namely the requirements for indefinite leave  to  remain  on
    the ground of long residence in the UK, and  Rule  276ADE  of  the  new
    rules which set out the requirements to be  met  by  an  applicant  for
    leave to remain on the grounds of private life.

33. The Court of Appeal set out the transitional provisions set out at  the
    front of the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules which provide:

         "With the exception of paragraphs 6-72, 74-80, 82, 86,  88-90,  93,
         97, 98, 100, 102, 103 and 106 the changes set out in this statement
         shall take effect on 9th July 2012.  Paragraphs  6-72,  74-80,  82,
         86, 88-90, 93, 97, 98, 100, 102, 103 and 106 shall take  effect  on
         1st October, 2012.

         However, if an application for entry clearance, leave to remain  or
         indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9th July  2012  and
         the application has  not  been  decided,  it  will  be  decided  in
         accordance with the Rules in force on 8th July, 2012."

34. The key issue was  whether  it  was  lawful  to  reject  an  Article  8
    application made before 9th July 2012 in reliance upon the  applicant's
    failure to achieve twenty years' residence  as  specified  in  the  new
    rules.  Lord Justice Jackson recorded that Counsel for  the  applicants
    placed  reliance  upon  the  second  paragraph  of   the   transitional
    provisions, which provide that any application for indefinite leave  to
    remain made before 9th July but not yet decided,  will  be  decided  in
    accordance with the rules in force on 8th July 2012, in other words  in
    accordance with the old rules.

35. He set out the Respondent's submissions.  First,  the old  rule,  276B,
    provided that fourteen years' continuous residence  was  a  substantive
    ground upon which the Secretary of State may grant indefinite leave  to
    remain, whereas the new rule specifies requirements to  be  met  by  an
    applicant for leave under ECHR Article 8.  An application for leave  to
    remain under ECHR Article 8 is not an application under the  rules  and
    therefore the second paragraph of the transitional provisions does  not
    apply.

36. Second, appellate Tribunals make Article 8 decisions  by  reference  to
    the current state of affairs not by reference to the state  of  affairs
    when the decision was made.  The present state includes  the  new  rule
    providing a requirement for twenty years' continuous residence.

37. Jackson LJ concluded as follows:

         "I admire the dexterity of this argument.  Nevertheless it produces
         the bizarre result that the new Rules impact upon applications made
         before 9th  July  2012  even  though  the  transitional  provisions
         expressly state that they do not do so."

         The Immigration Rules need to be understood not only by  specialist
         immigration Counsel but also by ordinary people who read the  Rules
         and try to abide  by  them.   I  do  not  think  that  Mr  Bourne's
         interpretation of the  transitional  provisions  accords  with  the
         interpretation which any ordinary reader would place upon them.  To
         adopt the language of Lord Brown in Mahad:

         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the  words,  recognising  that
         they are a statement of the  Secretary  of  State's  Administrative
         Policy" is that the Secretary of State will not place  reliance  on
         the new Rules when dealing with applications made before  9th  July
         2012.

         Accordingly my answer to the question posed in  this  part  of  the
         judgment  is  'no'.   That  answer  is  subject  to  one  important
         qualification.  A mere  passing  reference  to  the  twenty  years'
         requirement  in  the  new  Rules  will  not  have  the  effect   of
         invalidating the Secretary of State's decision.  The decision  only
         becomes unlawful if the decision-maker relies upon Rule 276ADE(iii)
         as a consideration materially affecting the decision."

38. With respect to one of the two appellants in that case, since the Upper
    Tribunal had relied upon the new rules as  a  consideration  materially
    affecting the decision, it was quashed and remitted back to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In the second case, reference was made to the new  rule  but
    it was not relied upon as  a  consideration  materially  affecting  the
    decision. His appeal was dismissed.

39. Mr Malik then took us to the case of Haleemudeen heard  on  15th  April
    2014, two weeks after the promulgation of the decision in Edgehill.  He
    said that it was clear that Edgehill was not  cited  to  the  court  in
    Haleemudeen since there is no reference to it.

40. At paragraph 40 of that decision Beatson LJ said:

         "40. I however consider that the FtT Judge did err in his  approach
             to Article  8.   This  is  because  he  did  not  consider  Mr
             Haleemudeen's case for remaining in the UK on the basis of his
             private and family  life  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
             policy as contained in Appendix FM  and  Rule  276ADE  of  the
             Immigration Rules.....

         41.  The FTT's decision on Mr Haleemudeen's  Article  8  appeal  is
             contained in [34]-[41], which I summarised and set out in part
             at [21]-[23] above. Those  paragraphs  do  not  refer,  either
             expressly or implicitly, to paragraph 276ADE of the  rules  or
             to Appendix FM. None of the new more  particularised  features
             of the policy are identified or even referred  to  in  general
             terms. The only reference to the provisions is  in  the  FTT's
             summary at  [30]  of  Mr.  Richardson's  submission  that  the
             reference to the new Rules in the refusal letter was of little
             relevance because at the time of Mr Haleemudeen's  application
             those Rules had not been promulgated and thus did not apply to
             his case. That submission could not succeed  in  view  of  the
             decision of the House of Lords in Odelola's case, to  which  I
             refer at [25] above."

41. Mr Malik submitted that, whilst the authorities were on the face of  it
    conflicting, Edgehill should be preferred.  First the  principal  issue
    in Edgehill was the effect of the transitional provisions.  Second  the
    case of Odelola referred to in  Haleemudeen  was  a  statement  of  the
    general principle in these appeals that the material date was the  date
    of decision.  Third, Haleemudeen was  decided  per  incuriam.   It  was
    clear that Edgehill was not cited to the court in Haleemudeen,  because
    had it been cited, the Court of Appeal would have  followed  it,  given
    that civil division judgments are binding on the civil division.  Where
    there was a conflict of authority it was open to the Upper Tribunal  to
    refuse to follow Haleemudeen as being in conflict with Edgehill.

42. The argument being put forward by the Secretary of State in  this  case
    i.e. that because there  were  no  Article  8  rules  at  the  date  of
    application, it was not an application under the  rules  and  therefore
    the second paragraph of the transitional provisions did not apply,  was
    specifically rejected by the Court of Appeal in Edgehill.

43. Mr Malik drew our attention to the case of Singh  (on  the  application
    of) v SSHD [2014] EWHC  2330  (Admin)  which  considered  the  case  of
    Rafique cited in the Respondent's reply.  In that case Mr Justice Nicol
    said that it was not  necessary  for  him  to  resolve  the  difference
    between Edgehill and Haleemudeen.  He said:

         "Nonetheless Mr Roe accepts that he cannot succeed if the  decision
         inevitably would have been the same even if the Secretary of  State
         had paid no attention at all to the criteria in the new rules."

    He concluded as follows:

         "Bearing these factors in mind as well as  all  the  other  matters
         that were drawn to the Secretary of State's attention I am  certain
         the Secretary of State would have decided  that  refusal  of  leave
         would not be disproportionate even if the test and structure of the
         decision-making in the new rules had not been referred to.   Indeed
         the decision letter of 17  June  2014  does  reach  precisely  that
         conclusion.  Like Mr Mott in the Rafique case therefore I  conclude
         that the  reliance  on  the  new  rules  was  not  a  consideration
         materially affecting the decision as the result would have been the
         same in any case.  Similarly, in  Edgehill,  the  Court  of  Appeal
         considered that the Article 8 claim of HB was a weak  one  and  the
         court concluded that both the Secretary of State and  the  Tribunal
         would have made precisely the same decision whether or not they had
         regard to the new rules, see paragraph 8."

44. Next Mr Malik took us to the cases SC (Article 8 - in  accordance  with
    the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 00056, and Patel (revocation  of  Sponsor
    licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211, where Blake J stated:

         "However any structured analysis of the Article  8  claim  in  this
         case would require consideration of  whether  the  interference  in
         question was in accordance with the law.  At that point the Article
         8  analysis  reflects  the  Tribunal's  general   jurisdiction   to
         determine whether decisions are in accordance with the law."

45. Mr Malik accepted that if an appeal was  allowed  on  that  basis,  the
    Secretary of State was not bound to grant leave but he said, was  bound
    to make a new lawful decision. If she  materially  relied  on  the  new
    rules she had acted  inconsistently  with  published  policy  i.e.  the
    transitional provisions.  Any  decision  on  proportionality  can  only
    arise if the decision under appeal is capable of being  justified,  and
    if unlawful at common law, the issue of proportionality simply does not
    arise.  A mere reference to the new rules was not  a  problem,  but  if
    there was material reliance, the analysis under Article 8 must stop  at
    that point and the finding that the decision was not in accordance with
    the law had to be made.  Since  the  Secretary  of  State  had  clearly
    materially relied on the  new  rules  in  this  case,  in  reliance  on
    Edgehill her decision was unlawful and the judge should have so held.

Ground 2

46.  The  second  limb  of  Mr  Malik's  submissions  concerns  the  proper
    application of Nagre and Gulshan.

47. At paragraph 21 of Gulshan Cranston J set out the test at paragraph  29
    of Nagre as follows:

         "Nonetheless the new rules do provide better explicit  coverage  of
         the factors identified in case  law  as  relevant  to  analysis  of
         claims under Article 8 than was formerly the position, so  in  many
         cases the main points for consideration in relation  to  Article  8
         will be addressed by decision-makers applying the new rules.  It is
         only if after doing that there remained an arguable case that there
         may be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside the  rules
         by reference to Article 8 that it will be necessary for  Article  8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the  new  rules  to
         require the grant of such leave."

48. The test was endorsed in Gulshan where Cranston J concluded as follows:

         "After applying the requirements of the rules  only  if  there  may
         arguably be good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them
         is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether
         there are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
         under them: Nagre."

49. Mr Malik submitted that Gulshan could not stand following the  decision
    in MM & Others where the Court of Appeal said at paragraph 129:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate as a preliminary to a consideration  outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the rule then there either is or is not  a
         further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be  determined  by  the
         relevant decision-maker."

50. Mr Malik submitted that this comment was not obiter, as argued  by  the
    Respondent because it was said as a part of a  review  of  all  of  the
    leading Article 8 authorities from paragraph 94 to paragraph 135.

51. At paragraph 135, the court clearly rejected the decisions in Nagre and
    Gulshan in stating:

         "Where the relevant group of Immigration Rules  upon  their  proper
         construction provide a complete code for dealing  with  a  person's
         Convention rights in the context of a particular  Immigration  Rule
         or statutory provision such as in the  case  of  foreign  criminals
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with  that  code,  although  references  to  exceptional
         circumstances in the code will nonetheless entail a proportionality
         exercise.  But if the relevant group of Immigration  Rules  is  not
         such a complete code then the proportionality test will be more  at
         large, albeit guided by the Huang test and UK and  Strasbourg  case
         law."

52. Finally Mr Malik took us to Patel &  others  v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  72,
    handed down on 20th of November 2013 after the cases of both Nagre  and
    Gulshan. At paragraph 54 of the judgment Lord Carnwath  held:

         "The difference between the two positions may not be  as  stark  as
         the submissions before us have suggested.  The  most  authoritative
         guidance on the correct approach  of  the  Tribunal  to  Article  8
         remains that of Lord Bingham in Huang.  In  the  passage  cited  by
         Burnton LJ, Lord Bingham observed that the Rules  are  designed  to
         identify those to whom  on  grounds  such  as  kinship  and  family
         relationship and dependants leave to enter should  be  granted  and
         that such ties "to be administratively  workable,  require  that  a
         line be drawn somewhere....

         Such a rule which does not lack irrational  basis,  is  not  to  be
         stigmatised as arbitrary  or  objectionable.   But  an  applicant's
         failure to qualify under the Rules is for the present purposes  the
         point at which to begin not end consideration of  the  claim  under
         Article  8.   The  terms  of  the  rules  are  relevant   to   that
         consideration but they are not determinative."

53. Mr Malik submitted that that was a clear indication that  the  Tribunal
    in Gulshan was wrong in holding that non-compliance with the Rules was,
    more or less, the end of the matter, and that the analysis of Nagre and
    Gulshan was undermined and should not be followed.





The Respondent's Case

54. At the end of the legal submissions, before the lunch  adjournment,  Mr
    Melvin made an application  for  an  adjournment.   He  said  that  the
    Appellant raised questions of general importance  which  had  not  been
    flagged up in the grounds and he was not in a position to  make  proper
    submissions on them.

55. Mr Malik opposed him on the basis that he had not relied upon any point
    which had not been raised in the  grounds  and  the  Respondent  should
    always have been aware  that  these  cases  raised  issues  of  general
    importance.   His  clients  were  paying   privately   and   would   be
    disadvantaged by an adjournment at this stage.

56. We refused the request.  We observe that it was made  at  an  extremely
    late stage of the proceedings, after Mr Malik had  made  his  principal
    submissions.  It should have been plain  to  the  Respondent  what  the
    issues in both these cases were, since they were clearly set out in the
    grounds and most, if not all of the decisions relied upon by  Mr  Malik
    today were cited in  the  grounds.   Mr  Melvin  was  given  the  lunch
    adjournment to consider his submissions.

57. After lunch Mr Melvin repeated his request for  further  time  to  make
    written submissions.  He relied on the points made by his colleagues in
    the replies and submitted that Edgehill did not apply because they were
    in relation to a different Rule, namely the significant  change  for  a
    stay based on fourteen years under the old Rules and twenty  under  the
    new.  Gulshan and Nagre remained good law.

58. We decided to allow Mr Melvin fourteen days  to  make  further  written
    submissions and seven  further  days  for  Mr  Malik  to  respond.   We
    consider that there is no proper basis for the  Respondent  to  contend
    that she has been taken by surprise by any of the arguments but on  the
    other hand are conscious that we would be  assisted  by  full  argument
    from the Respondent in this matter.

The Respondent's written submissions

59. They are as follows;

      i) "Article 8 Transitional Arrangements

         When the family and private life  Immigration  Rules  entered  into
         force  on  9  July  2012,  they  were  accompanied  by  a  set   of
         transitional provisions.  The transitional provisions preserved the
         effect of the previous version of the rules in those cases in which
         the material application had been made before the new rules entered
         into force.  Accordingly, an application made pursuant to the rules
         would be determined in accordance with the rules in force when  the
         application was made.

         The transitional provisions  do  not  apply  to  applications  made
         outside the rules, which rely  simply  upon  Article  8.   In  such
         cases, there being no reliance on the rules by the applicant, there
         are no old rules to preserve and the transitional  provisions  have
         no effect.

         When considering an application made under Article 8, the Secretary
         of State is required to undertake a proportionality  assessment  by
         balancing the applicant's right to respect for  his  private/family
         life against the public interest in removal.  The  current  version
         of the rules  sets  out  the  framework  for  that  assessment  and
         contains the considerations material  to  it.   The  current  rules
         reflect the view of the Secretary of State as to  how  the  balance
         between the rights of  the  individual  applicant  and  the  public
         interest should be struck.  They have been endorsed by Parliament.

         As explained in MF (Nigeria), the new rules concerned with striking
         the Article 8 proportionality balance do not  seek  to  change  the
         law.  They properly reflect the Article 8 jurisprudence  (including
         the Strasbourg case law) and have been designed  to  achieve  clear
         and consistent decision making which pays due regard to the  public
         interest in deciding how  the  Article  8  proportionality  balance
         should be struck.  In light of the public interest  in  removal  or
         deportation reflected in the new rules,  it  will  only  be  in  an
         exceptional case that that public interest will  be  outweighed  by
         the Article 8 rights of the individual.

         So, Article  8  proportionality  assessments  conducted  after  the
         coming  into  force  of  the  new  rules  should  be  conducted  in
         accordance with the framework provided by those rules.  The date on
         which the application is made is immaterial.  The new rules provide
         caseworkers, and the Court, with a  structure  for  conducting  the
         proportionality  assessment  which  properly  reflects  the  public
         interest, as the Secretary of State (and Parliament) have expressed
         it to be.

         This does not amount to a  retrospective  application  of  the  new
         rules to cases commenced before 9 July 2012.  It simply means that,
         whenever  the  proportionality  assessment  is  conducted,  it   is
         conducted with proper regard to the public interest.

         The importance of having regard to the material provisions  of  the
         new rules when conducting the Article 8 proportionality assessment,
         including in cases where the material application was  made  before
         the new rules came into force,  was  recognised  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558.  In that case the
         Appellant's application for ILR had been made on 28 February  2012.
         The question of whether the Appellant qualified for leave under the
         rules was addressed, correctly, by applying the rules as they stood
         at the time of the application.  But when it came to the subsequent
         question of the merits of his Article 8 claim, the Court found that
         the FTT had fallen into error  by  not  conducting  the  Article  8
         assessment with proper regard to the new rules and  the  policy  of
         the Secretary of State contained within them.  The Court noted  the
         endorsement of the new rules in both Nagre  and  MF  (Nigeria)  and
         found that the FTT had failed to identify anything  exceptional  or
         compelling about the Appellant's  case  sufficient  to  render  his
         removal disproportionate.  Haleemudeen stands, therefore, as  clear
         authority for the  proposition  that,  when  addressing  Article  8
         proportionality, that assessment  must  be  conducted  with  proper
         regard to the new rules and the public interest they reflect.

         There is no inconsistency between that proposition and the  earlier
         judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Edgehill.   Edgehill  was
         concerned with a situation where the Appellant could argue  that  a
         provision in the old rules applied to her  circumstances,  and  the
         question it addressed was a narrow one: "Is it lawful to reject  an
         Article 8 application made before 9 July 2012 in reliance upon  the
         applicant's failure to achieve 20 years' residence, as specified in
         the new rules".  In JE's case, she had accrued 14 years' continuous
         residence, which would have been enough under  the  rules  as  they
         stood at the time of her application, had she  applied  under  that
         provision.  In dismissing her appeal  the  UT  placed  'substantial
         weight'  on  the  fact  that  the  new  rules  required  20  years'
         continuous residence.  By contrast, HB had accrued  only  8  years'
         continuous residence and so would not  have  met  the  requirements
         under the old rules either.  Her appeal was dismissed  as  she  was
         unable to point to  a  material  change  in  the  rules  which  had
         materially affected her case.  It is clear  from  the  judgment  in
         Edgehill that the transitional provisions  will  be  relevant  only
         when there is some equivalent provision in the old rules which,  if
         applied to the case in question, would have a material  bearing  on
         the outcome, to the applicant's advantage.

         Edgehill  has  no  effect  in  the  context   of   an   Article   8
         proportionality  assessment  undertaken   for   the   purposes   of
         determining whether the application should be granted  outside  the
         rules.  In such a case there is no equivalent provision in the  old
         rules  (whether  more  generous  or  otherwise)  setting  out   the
         framework for the Article 8 proportionality assessment.   So,  when
         caseworkers are considering whether an application which  does  not
         meet the requirements of the rules should nonetheless be granted on
         Article 8 grounds, they should have regard to the new rules and the
         public interest that they reflect.

         The  point  is  conveniently  illustrated  by   Haleemudeen.    The
         Appellant is that case did not qualify under the rules in force  at
         the time of his application by virtue of  his  unspent  conviction.
         There was, therefore, no question of him seeking to rely on a  more
         generous old rule, in force at the time of his  application,  which
         would have had a material bearing on  his  application.   In  those
         circumstances the transitional provisions were simply not  relevant
         to his case.  The relevant question was simply whether the  Article
         8 proportionality assessment had been properly  conducted  for  the
         purpose of determining whether his application  should  be  granted
         outside  the  rules.   As  observed  above,  the  Court   correctly
         identified that the assessment should be  conducted  'against'  the
         policy reflected in the new rules (see para.40).







         The General Position on Article 8

         In regard to the state of the law on the status and function of the
         family and private life Immigration Rules, the Secretary  of  State
         continues to rely on in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192,
         Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and Gulshan (Article 8  -  new
         Rules - correct approach) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC).   The
         Secretary of State has always accepted that no set  of  Immigration
         Rules can cater for all conceivable  circumstances  arising  in  an
         Article 8 claim in a non-criminal case, and that where an applicant
         has failed  in  such  a  case  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules, it is necessary to go on to consider whether  to
         exercise her residual discretion.

         The High Court has endorsed this approach,  saying  in  Nagre  that
         'the immigration control regime as a whole (including the Secretary
         of State's residual discretion) fully accommodates the requirements
         of Article 8'.  Nagre found that it was only in circumstances where
         there is a remaining 'good arguable case' after the  applicant  has
         failed  to  meet  the  rules  that  a  further   consideration   of
         proportionality under Article 8 ought to be  undertaken.   However,
         since then the case of R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD EWHC 2712 at paras 10-
         11 and MM & Ors, R v SSHD (Rev 1) [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paras 128-
         129 have found that an assessment of whether or not the decision is
         proportionate under Article 8 ought to be undertaken in every case.

         This accords exactly with the Secretary of  State's  policy,  which
         has, since the implementation of the family and private life  rules
         on 9 July 2012, always been to consider in every non-criminal  case
         that  falls  for  refusal  under  the  Rules  whether   there   are
         exceptional  circumstances  in  which  refusal  would   result   in
         unjustifiably harsh consequences for the individual or their family
         such that refusal of the application  would  not  be  proportionate
         under Article 8.  The way this discretion is exercised is  set  out
         in  the  relevant  guidance,  the  importance  of  which  is   well
         recognised in the case law and that case law is summarised in  para
         15 of Ganesabalan.  This guidance is in the terms which  were  held
         in Nagre to 'fully accommodate the requirements of Article  8'  and
         Nagre itself has been cited with approval by the Court  of  Appeal,
         e.g. in Haleemudeen at para 17."

The Appellants' written response

60. In  summary,  the  Appellant's  position  is  as  follows.  First,  the
    submission  that  the  transitional  provisions   do   not   apply   to
    applications made outside the rules, which rely  upon  article  8,  was
    expressly rejected by the Court of Appeal in Edgehill.

61. Second, the  submission  that  Article  8  proportionality  assessments
    conducted after the coming into  force  of  the  new  Rules  should  be
    conducted in accordance with the  framework  provided  by  those  rules
    produces the bizarre result that the new rules impact upon applications
    made before 9 July 2012 even though the transitional provisions  states
    that they do not (Edgehill).

62. Third, the Upper Tribunal is  required  to  decide  whether  to  follow
    Edgehill or Haleemudeen and Edgehill should be followed.

63. Four, the Secretary of State appears to have accepted  that  Nagre  and
    Gulshan are no longer good law.

64.  Finally, the Secretary of State did not engage with the submission  as
    to the third question in Razgar and as to the  effect  of  the  Supreme
    Court's judgement in Patel.

Findings and conclusions

The Transitional Provisions Issue

65. The Secretary of State argues that Edgehill is confined to cases  where
    there is an equivalent provision in the old rules which  would  have  a
    material bearing on the outcome of the  case,  such  as  the  14  years
    continuous residence rule, and has no  effect  in  the  context  of  an
    Article 8 proportionality assessment, undertaken  for  the  purpose  of
    deciding whether an application should be granted  outside  the  rules.
    Where there is no equivalent provision in the old  rules  it  is  their
    position that caseworkers should have regard to the new rules  and  the
    public interest they reflect. We reject her submission.

66. This has most recently been considered by the  Vice  President  of  the
    Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber), Mark Ockleton, sitting
    as a Deputy High Court Judge in  Jallow  v  SSHD  (CO/3862/2013).    He
    observed that the argument raised before him on behalf of the Secretary
    of State was the same as that in Edgehill where Mr Bourne, on behalf of
    the Secretary of State is recorded as submitting as follows:

         "An  application  for  leave  to  remain  under  ECHR  is  not   an
         application under the Rules.  Therefore, the  second  paragraph  of
         the transitional provisions does not apply to it."

67. Mr Ockleton concluded:

         "The Court of Appeal therefore rejected the argument which is in my
         view that advanced now by Ms Rowlands on behalf of the Secretary of
         State, and which she advanced by reference to what she described as
         the standard submission.  It is a submission which in  my  judgment
         fails."

68. Mr Ockleton  considered  the  effect  of  the  subsequent  decision  in
    Haleemudeen.  He wrote as follows:

         "In Haleemudeen however there is no discussion of the  transitional
         provisions themselves and it  is  clear  that  in  that  case,  for
         reasons which are not given in the judgment, the view was taken  by
         Beatson LJ who gave the lead judgment; the  other  members  of  the
         court who agreed with him, that the relevant provisions of Appendix
         FM came into effect on 9 July 2012 without there being any need  in
         that case to advert to any reservations to that judgment.

         There is no doubt that in Haleemudeen's case  the  application  was
         made before 9th July 2012 and I do not know because  the  Court  of
         Appeal do not tell me why it was that in Haleemudeen's case it  was
         so clear that the post 9th July amendments  to  the  rules  applied
         both to the Secretary of State's consideration of the  application,
         and indeed as the later paragraphs of Beatson  LJ's  judgment  make
         clear to any reconsideration that  the  Secretary  of  State  might
         apply if her decision challenge were quashed.

         Both Edgehill and Haleemudeen turn  on  questions  under  paragraph
         276ADE and it may well be that a proper analysis  of  paragraph  91
         and the paragraphs which it introduces  to  the  Immigration  Rules
         demonstrate exactly why those results were achieved.  I am  however
         not concerned with paragraph 276ADE.  I am concerned with paragraph
         284.  When I read the implementation provision at the beginning  of
         HC 194 I find that an application made before 9 July 2012 is to  be
         decided in accordance with the rules in force on 8 July 2012  which
         does not include Appendix FM.

         I then find that I am told that Appendix FM applies to applications
         made on or after 9th July 2012 which the  present  application  was
         not  and  that  its  application  is  governed  by  paragraph   91.
         Paragraph 91 introduces Appendix FM and deals with the  interaction
         between Part 8 and Appendix FM.

         Paragraph A277  indicates  that  Appendix  FM  will  apply  to  all
         applications except some and of those some it looks as  though  the
         claimant's application is within paragraph A280(c).

         Whether or not that last point is right however it seems to me that
         so far as the application of Appendix FM to spouse applications  is
         concerned, the meaning of  the  implementation  provisions  at  the
         beginning of the Immigration Rules is clear.  Appendix  FM  is  not
         part of the rules applicable to the decision on an application that
         was made before 9 July 2012."

69. The main issue with  which  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  considered  in
    Edgehill was the effect of the transitional provisions, and  the  exact
    argument which was rejected there is the same as that  which  is  being
    put forward here. We consider that we should, as in  Jallow, follow the
    Court of Appeal's reasoning in Edgehill.

70. The case of Ruhul Amin was decided only under the Immigration Rules and
    UK Border Agency policy applicable as at the  date  of  decision,  i.e.
    Article 8 by applying paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM for family life and
    paragraph 276ADE for private life.  We adopt the comments of Jackson LJ
    cited  above  and  agree  that  the  natural  interpretation   of   the
    transitional provisions is that the new rules  would  not  impact  upon
    applications made before 9th July 2012.

71. We conclude that the Secretary of State's reliance on the new rules  in
    Amin was an error and, similarly, the FTT Judge was in error in  basing
    his  decision  solely  on  whether  the  Appellant  had  satisfied  the
    requirements of Appendix FM with regard to  family  life  or  paragraph
    276ADE with regard to private life.



The effect of the error

72. Mr Malik  has  argued  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision,  in
    materially relying on the new rules, was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law. The First-tier Judge should have so found and allowed  the  appeal
    outright without any consideration of proportionality.

73. In support of his argument he relies on the Tribunal  decision  in  SC.
    However  SC  is  not  authority  for  the  proposition  that  error  in
    assessment inevitably leads to a decision that it is not in  accordance
    with the law.

74. Blake J said:

         "We recognise that there are cases where a decision  to  refuse  an
         extension of stay or remove a  person  may  be  so  contrary  to  a
         requirement contained in an established policy or practice as to be
         not in accordance with the law.  In such a case the  analysis  does
         not move on  to  justification  for  Article  8  purposes  and  the
         decision must be re-made in accordance with the law either  by  the
         Secretary of State or the judge.  However in our judgment this  was
         not such a case."

75. Whilst in Patel the Tribunal  held  that  the  decision  was  not  made
    fairly, and thereby not in accordance  with  the  law,  the  underlying
    question in deciding whether the consequence of error  should  be  that
    the decision by the Secretary of State has to be considered afresh,  is
    whether injustice was caused.

76.  The crucial issue is whether the result would have been the  same  had
    the new rules not been applied, because if it was the same, reliance on
    the new rules could not be a  consideration  materially  affecting  the
    decision.

77. Ruhul Amin has been in the UK unlawfully for many years.
    The judge concluded that the wife's business  had  only  very  recently
    been established and at  the  time  of  the  hearing  it  was  not  yet
    operational.  The effect of removal would not mean that an  established
    business would be unable to continue.   He  also  considered  the  best
    interests of the children.  The older child was only 4  years  old  and
    the main focus of his life was his parents and  younger  sibling.   The
    children speak Bengali.  They have relatives in Bangladesh, namely  the
    Appellant's mother and two of his three brothers.  The  judge  did  not
    find the evidence of a lack of contact with either his  family  or  his
    wife's family to be at all credible.  He  concluded  that  family  life
    would continue on return to Bangladesh, and whilst there would be  some
    disruption and hardship, it would not present any  great  difficulties.
    The Appellant  had  entered  illegally  and  has  continued  to  breach
    immigration law in remaining here and working, and his  wife  has  only
    ever had temporary leave.  Both will have acquired  some  skills  which
    could be put to good effect in Bangladesh and enhance  their  prospects
    here.

78. The position is even clearer in  relation  to  Rafaqat  Begum.  A  full
    Razgar analysis was undertaken both in the original decision and in the
    judgment of the First-tier Tribunal. There was no material reliance  on
    the new rules. The Respondent set out the Appellant's case  both  under
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and also considered  the  claim  using
    the five stage test outlined in Razgar.  The First-tier Judge similarly
    conducted the five stage Razgar test.  Whether or  not  the  judge  had
    referred to the new Rules in making her decision, or used the  language
    of the new rules is immaterial since on any view this was  not  a  case
    which could ever have succeeded.  The Appellant has a poor  immigration
    history.  She has  been  untruthful  during  the  application  process,
    significantly misrepresenting her situation.   She  has  used  the  NHS
    inappropriately.  On the judge's unchallenged findings,  the  Appellant
    had significantly more contact with her children and sister in Pakistan
    than she was willing to  disclose.   She  has  an  adult  daughter  and
    grandchildren who can visit her in Pakistan, and, if she wishes to make
    an application to settle in the UK, she can apply for  entry  clearance
    through the proper channels.

79. In both cases, whether or not the  appellants  could  comply  with  the
    provisions of the new rules is immaterial to the decision  because  the
    result on any view would be the same. No injustice has been  caused  so
    as to render the decisions unlawful.

The proper Application of Nagre and Gulshan

80. In her response the Respondent endorsed the approach of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MM & Others, relied upon by Mr Malik, in the sense  that  she
    agreed  that  an  assessment  of  whether  or  not  the   decision   is
    proportionate under Article 8 ought to be undertaken in every case.  It
    was not argued that failure to qualify under the rules is  the  end  of
    the consideration of whether removal would breach Article 8 rights.

81. Michael  Fordham  QC  sitting  as  a  Deputy  High  Court  Judge  in  R
    (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) said:

         "There is no prior threshold which dictates whether the exercise of
         discretion  should  be  considered;  rather  the  nature   of   the
         assessment and the reasoning which are called for are  informed  by
         threshold considerations, those threshold circumstances include -

         (a)  whether an arguable basis for the exercise of  the  discretion
             has been put forward;

         (b)  whether the relevant factors have already been assessed;

         (c)  whether a repeat evaluation is unnecessary.

         Para 33 of Green J's judgment in  Ahmed  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  300
         (Admin)  in  my  judgment  very  clearly  recognises  that,  having
         addressed the Immigration Rules and reached  conclusions  on  their
         application, there is a duty by reference to the  guidance  on  the
         decision-maker then to step back and formulate a  view.   The  need
         for a view is not triggered  by  there  being  some  good  arguable
         basis.  Rather, as Green J there explains, one of the  questions  -
         indeed the first question - to be considered  in  formulating  that
         view is the question whether there might be a good arguable case."

82. In R (On the application  of)  Oludoyi  (JR/3674/2013)  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Gill wrote as follows:

         "There is nothing in Nagre, Gulshan or Shahzad that suggests that a
         threshold test was being suggested as opposed to  making  it  clear
         that there was a need to look at the evidence to see if  there  was
         anything which has not already been adequately  considered  in  the
         context of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  which  could  lead  to  a
         successful Article 8 claim.  If for example there is  some  feature
         which has not been  adequately  considered  under  the  Immigration
         Rules but which cannot  on  any  view  lead  the  Article  8  claim
         succeeding  (when  the  individual  circumstances  are   considered
         cumulatively) there is no need to go any further.   This  does  not
         mean that a threshold or intermediate test is being applied.  These
         authorities must not be read as seeking to qualify  or  fetter  the
         assessment of Article 8.   The  guidance  given  must  be  read  in
         context and not  construed  as  if  the  judgments  are  pieces  of
         legislation."

83. We adopt the same approach. The issue here is whether the answer to the
    question of proportionality would have been the same whether or not the
    judge applied  the  Article  8  Razgar  analysis.  There  has  been  no
    intention to introduce a new step in the process, but there has  to  be
    something over and above the matters already considered in order for it
    to be necessary to consider Article 8 outside the rules. In so  far  as
    the judge was purporting to apply a threshold test he  was  misapplying
    the case law which, properly read, simply states that  in  cases  which
    cannot on any view lead to success in an Article 8 claim, there  is  no
    need to go further than saying that there  is  no  arguable  basis  for
    considering Article 8 under the Razgar test.

84. The Secretary of State said that the application  had  been  considered
    exceptionally outside the Rules.  Whilst some issues as a basis  for  a
    claim of exceptionality had  been  raised  they  had  been  dealt  with
    elsewhere in the letter and it was not considered  that  these  or  any
    other  factors  offered  sufficiently   compassionate   or   compelling
    circumstances for discretion to be exercised in this case. On the facts
    it was not necessary for her to go any further. Furthermore it was open
    to the judge to conclude that there was  nothing  in  the  facts  which
    would require him to conclude that there was any feature  in  his  case
    which had not been adequately considered under the Immigration Rules so
    as to require a full Article 8 analysis.

85. Whether or not  a  simple  statement  that  there  are  no  exceptional
    circumstances is sufficient will depend on  the  circumstances  of  the
    case.  Certain cases will require more reasoning than others. If  there
    is an arguable  basis  for  the  exercise  of  discretion  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, a full Article 8 assessment will be necessary. It is
    certainly possible to conceive  of  circumstances  in  which  making  a
    decision  by  reference  to  the  new  rules  when,  according  to  the
    transitional provisions, they do not apply, and not conducting  a  full
    Razgar test, would  give  rise  to  injustice.   In  such  a  case  the
    proportionality decision would have to be remade. However that  is  not
    the case here.

86. Accordingly there is no material error in  the  decisions  which  shall
    stand.



Signed                              Date 1st October, 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


