
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47856/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 August 2014                           |On 12 August 2014          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MISS MASHAL JARRAL
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr S Kandola a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: the respondent attended but was not legally
represented

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  ("the
      Secretary of State"). The respondent is a citizen of Pakistan who  was
      born on 19 January 1987 ("the claimant"). The Secretary of  State  has
      been given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Seifert ("the FTTJ") who allowed the claimant's  appeal
      against the Secretary of State's  decision  of  12  November  2013  to
      refuse to vary her leave to remain in the UK and to remove her by  way
      of  directions  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
      Nationality Act 2006.


   2. On 6 September 2011 the claimant entered the UK with  entry  clearance
      as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  for  a  period  expiring  on  7
      November 2012. On 25 October 2012 she applied for indefinite leave  to
      remain as a dependant relative of her brother, Mr R B Ullah.


   3. The Secretary of State refused the application because the Immigration
      Rules (formerly paragraph 317) no longer contained a  provision  which
      might allow  her  to  remain  as  a  dependant  of  her  brother.  The
      application was considered outside the  Rules  and  the  Secretary  of
      State concluded that the  claimant  had  not  shown  that  there  were
      compassionate or  compelling  circumstances  justifying  granting  her
      leave exceptionally. She had the option of returning to  Pakistan  and
      applying for entry  clearance  from  there.  Article  8  human  rights
      grounds were considered under the Rules but the claimant did not  have
      a partner or child in the UK so that the application  was  refused  on
      family life  grounds.  Private  life  grounds  were  considered  under
      paragraph  276ADE.  However,  the  claimant  did  not  have  20  years
      residence. She was born and raised in Pakistan and had  not  lost  all
      social, cultural or family ties with that country.


   4. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard her appeal on 19 March  2014.
      The claimant attended but was not legally represented.  The  Secretary
      of State was represented by counsel. The FTTJ heard evidence from  the
      claimant. The FTTJ found the claimant to be a  credible  witness.  Her
      brother is a British citizen and lives here  with  his  wife  and  two
      young children. The claimant came here as a  student  on  6  September
      2011 with leave until 25 October 2012. She completed her  course.  She
      was offered a job but did not work as she did not have  permission  to
      do so. In 2012 her mother and father came to the UK. Her mother is  56
      and her father 66 years of age. Her father suffers from mental  health
      problems, dementia and has had two heart attacks. Her  mother  suffers
      from anxiety and depression. Initially, the claimant  lived  with  her
      brother and  his  family  and  later  her  parents  joined  them.  The
      accommodation was insufficient and the claimant is  now  living  at  a
      different address with her parents, a short distance from her brother.
      The claimant is not working and looks after her parents.


   5. The FTTJ accepted that the claimant had no  family  in  Pakistan.  Her
      brother lived permanently in the UK and she had another brother living
      in Canada. Since her parents came to this country she has had no  home
      in Pakistan. It was accepted that she would not be able to find a  job
      there in the tourism industry.


   6. The FTTJ found that the claimant met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
      276ADE(vi) of the Rules. She said; "Looking at her circumstances as  a
      whole, all of her family, apart from her brother in Canada, are in the
      UK. In Pakistan she lived with her parents. Her parents are now living
      in the UK and she continues  to  live  with  them  here.  She  has  no
      relatives in Pakistan, no job there and her evidence was that all  her
      connections and family are now in the UK. Although she initially  came
      here as a student for a  temporary  period  during  her  studies,  her
      circumstances had changed by  the  time  that  leave  expired.  Having
      considered the evidence I am satisfied that she has no ties, including
      social cultural and family ties with Pakistan."


   7. The FTTJ went on to find that, had she concluded that the claimant did
      not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) she would have  gone
      on to find that, considering the Article 8 grounds outside the  Rules,
      the claimant had established a family life with her parents in the  UK
      and  that  to  remove  her   would   constitute   a   disproportionate
      interference with her right to respect for her family life.  The  FTTJ
      was satisfied that the  relationship  between  the  claimant  and  her
      parents extended beyond normal emotional ties.


   8. The Secretary of State applied  for  and  was  granted  permission  to
      appeal. There are three grounds of appeal all of which argue that  the
      FTTJ erred in law. The first  submits  that  the  FTTJ  erred  in  her
      interpretation of "no ties (including social, cultural or family) with
      the country to which he would have to go if required to leave the  UK"
      and had failed to apply the guidance contained in Ogundimu (Article  8
      - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60  (IAC)  (18  February  2013).  The
      second ground argues that the FTTJ misdirected herself  in  concluding
      that there was a family life between the claimant and her parents. The
      third submits that if,  as  the  Secretary  of  State  contended,  the
      claimant had no right to remain on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds
      under the Rules then she had failed to apply the two stage test as  to
      whether there were arguably good grounds for granting leave to  remain
      outside  the  Rules  and  if  so   whether   there   were   compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.


   9. Since the hearing before the FTTJ the claimant has  submitted  to  the
      Tribunal a bundle of original documents which she tells me were handed
      up to the FTTJ but returned after inspection. At the hearing before me
      the appellant was accompanied by her brother  and  I  allowed  him  to
      assist her, although most what was said  came  from  the  claimant.  I
      explained the procedure to them, what I was required to  do  and  said
      that I would  assist  her  as  best  I  could  within  the  limits  of
      impartiality.


  10. Mr Kandola relied on the grounds of appeal and provided me with a copy
      of Ogundimu.  He  drew  my  attention  to  the  explanatory  note  and
      paragraph 125. The test was an exacting one. The FTTJ had not referred
      to Ogundimu and had failed to conduct  a  rounded  assessment  of  the
      claimant's circumstances. The decision was a  remarkable  one  in  the
      light of this authority.


  11. In relation to the alternative conclusion  reached  by  the  FTTJ,  Mr
      Kandola submitted that she  had  failed  to  have  regard  to  Gulshan
      (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640
      (IAC) (17 December 2013) principles. I was asked to find that the FTTJ
      had erred in law, to set aside her decision and to remake  it  without
      the need for an adjournment  or  further  evidence.  In  reply  to  my
      question Mr Kandola accepted that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
      challenged the  FTTJ's  findings  of  credibility  or  fact.  He  also
      accepted that "no ties" could not mean absolutely no ties at all;  for
      example the mere fact that an individual had retained the  nationality
      of the country to which it was argued he or she  should  return  would
      not be a bar.


  12. The claimant and her brother emphasised that before she left  Pakistan
      to come here as a student she had lived with  her  parents  in  rented
      accommodation. They were supported by her brother in this country. She
      had made it clear to the FTTJ that it would not be safe  for  a  young
      single woman to go and live on her  own  in  Pakistan.  When  she  was
      living there she never went out without her mother. She no longer  had
      any ties in Pakistan and her only family contacts were her brother  in
      the UK and her other brother in Canada who was married with  children.
      When she lived in Pakistan she had two close female friends  but  both
      had left the country, one to Canada and the other  to  Australia.  She
      had never worked in Pakistan. When she  came  to  this  country  as  a
      student she had intended  to  go  back  and  live  with  her  parents.
      However, after she came here,  her  parents  came  here  as  visitors.
      Whilst they were here her father suffered two  serious  heart  attacks
      and also had dementia.  She  said  that  her  understanding  was  that
      normally the Secretary of State would not consider an application  for
      leave to remain by a visitor but exceptionally  in  her  parents  case
      their applications for indefinite leave  to  remain  were  granted  in
      March 2012. At the hearing before the  FTTJ  she  had  handed  in  the
      bundle of  original  documents  which  contained  evidence  about  her
      parents'  state  of  health.  These  had  been  handed  back  to  her.
      Subsequently she had resubmitted them to the Tribunal


  13. I reserved my determination.


  14. The relevant portion of paragraph 276ADE of the  Rules  is  subsection
      (vi) which, in the version in force at the date  of  the  application,
      provided that one of the requirements to be met by  an  applicant  for
      leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK was  that  he
      or she is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for
      less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no
      ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country to  which
      she would have to go if required to leave the UK.


  15. The explanatory note to Ogundimu which is part of the determination of
      Blake J states;


        1. The expectation is that it will be an exceptional case in  which
           permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  should  be  granted
           where the lodging of the application for permission is more than
           28 days out of time. Where, in such a case, a judge is minded to
           grant  permission,  the  preferable  course  is  to  provide  an
           opportunity to the  respondent  to  make  representations.  This
           might be achieved by listing the permission application for oral
           hearing.


        2. The introduction of the new Immigration Rules (HC 194)  does  not
           affect the circumstance that when considering Article  8  of  the
           Human Rights Convention "for a settled migrant who  has  lawfully
           spent all or the major part of his or her childhood and youth  in
           [this] country very  serious  reasons  are  required  to  justify
           expulsion." The principles derived from Maslov v Austria [2008]
           ECHR 546 are still be applied.


        3. Paragraph 399(a) of the  Immigration  Rules  conflicts  with  the
           Secretary of State's duties under Article 3 of the UN  Convention
           on the Rights of the Child 1989 and section 55  of  the  Borders,
           Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  Little  weight  should  be
           attached to this Rule when consideration is being  given  to  the
           assessment of proportionality under Article 8 of the Human Rights
           Convention.


        4. The natural and ordinary meaning of the word 'ties' in  paragraph
           399A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  imports  a  concept  involving
           something more than  merely  remote  or  abstract  links  to  the
           country of proposed deportation or  removal.  It  involves  there
           being a connection to life  in  that  country.  Consideration  of
           whether a person has 'no ties' to such a country must  involve  a
           rounded assessment of all of the relevant  circumstances  and  is
           not to be limited to 'social, cultural and family' circumstances.


  16. Paragraph 125 of Ogundimu states;


         "Whilst each case turns on its own facts, circumstances relevant to
         the assessment of whether a person has ties to the country to which
         they would have to go if they were required  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom must include, but are not limited to: the length of time  a
         person has spent in the country to which he would have to go if  he
         were required to leave the United Kingdom, the age that the  person
         left that country, the exposure that person has had to the cultural
         norms of that country, whether that person speaks the  language  of
         the country, the extent of the  family and friends that person  has
         in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and  the
         quality of the relationships that person has with those friends and
         family members.


  17. Paragraph 123 of Ogundimu states:


         "The natural and ordinary meaning of the word  'ties'  imports,  we
         think, a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
         abstract links to the country of proposed deportation  or  removal.
         It involves there being a continued  connection  to  life  in  that
         country; something that ties a claimant to his or  her  country  of
         origin. If this were not the case  then  it  would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless."


  18. I find that there were a number of elements which were relevant to the
      question of whether the claimant had ties to Pakistan. On the one hand
      she is a citizen of that country; she has lived there for most of  her
      life, much longer than she has been in the UK (she  lived  there  from
      birth until 2011); the language  she  spoke  was  her  mother  tongue,
      although she now speaks excellent English;  she  was  steeped  in  and
      accustomed to the culture of Pakistan and was mostly  educated  there.
      On the other hand whilst she had close family ties  to  Pakistan  when
      she left the country mainly  to  her  mother  and  father  these  have
      ceased. Her mother and father are now  living  in  this  country  with
      indefinite leave. She is living  with  and  looking  after  them  and,
      because of their ill-health, they need to be looked after. One brother
      is living nearby with his wife and children and her other  sibling,  a
      brother, is living in Canada with his  wife  and  children.  The  FTTJ
      found and was entitled to find that she no longer had any relatives or
      connections in Pakistan. The family home in Pakistan was rented and is
      no longer available for her. She never worked in Pakistan  and,  as  a
      single woman, would only go out if accompanied  by  a  member  of  the
      family. As a single woman living on her own with no  family  or  other
      relatives she would not be safe.

  19. In Ogundimu Blake J explored one aspect of the  natural  and  ordinary
      meaning of the word "ties"  concluding  that  it  involved  more  than
      merely remote and abstract links to the country of  proposed  removal.
      Another related aspect is important.  I  consider  that  "ties"  imply
      something more than factors which may associate an individual  with  a
      particular country. Put another way, they must connect, link  or  bind
      an individual to that country. I follow the guidance in Ogundimu  that
      ties are "a concept involving something more than  merely  remote  and
      abstract links to the country of proposed deportation or  removal.  It
      involves there being a continued connection to life in  that  country;
      something that ties a claimant to his or her country of  origin."  The
      factors which  associate  the  claimant  with  Pakistan;  nationality,
      language, length of residence and familiarity with the culture are  in
      the light of her changed  circumstances  merely  remote  and  abstract
      links to that  country.  The  factors  which  bound  the  claimant  to
      Pakistan, most importantly her mother and father, no longer  exist  in
      that country.  The  same  strong  family  ties,  particularly  for  an
      unmarried daughter who is now looking after her parents,  are  in  the
      UK.


  20. I find that the FTTJ reached  conclusions  open  to  her  on  all  the
      evidence and that in relation to her primary conclusion  there  is  no
      error of law.


  21. In the light of this conclusion it is not strictly necessary for me to
      make findings as to the claimed errors  of  law  in  relation  to  the
      FTTJ's subsidiary conclusion. However, had I come  to  the  conclusion
      that it was not open to  her  to  allow  the  appeal  under  paragraph
      276ADE(vi) of the Rules, I would have found  that,  following  Gulshan
      principles, and in relation to the first test there were arguably good
      grounds for granting leave to remain outside the Rules. In relation to
      the second test there were compelling circumstances  not  sufficiently
      recognised under the Rules. It was open to the FTTJ to find  that  the
      relationship between the claimant and her mother and father did amount
      to a family life because in her case the links between  adult  members
      of the family amounted to more than normal  emotional  ties.  She  was
      living with her mother and father. Because of  their  ill-health  they
      needed her care and she provided it.


  22. I cannot see any evidence which supports the suspicion set out in  the
      reasons for the grant of permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      that  "the  facts  are  all  indicative  of  a  carefully  manipulated
      migration to this country". In reply to my question, Mr  Kandola  said
      that the Secretary of State did not rely on or adopt this.


  23.  I  find  that  the  FTTJ  did  not  err  in  law  and  I  uphold  her
      determination.










      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 7
      August 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

