


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal  Number:
IA/47351/2013

                                         IA/47344/2013

                                         IA/47359/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th March 2013                            |On 2nd April 2014            |
|                                              |                             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             GURJIT SINGH DHIMAN
                                 DALJIT KAUR
                            NORPREET SINGH DHIMAN
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mahmud; S Z solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant (hereafter the SSHD) appeals a decision of the First-
        tier Tribunal which allowed an appeal on human  rights  grounds  by
        the respondents (hereafter the claimants) against a decision of the
        SSHD on the grounds that the removal of the claimants from  the  UK
        was disproportionate and in breach of Article 8. It was accepted by
        the claimants that the finding by the judge that claimants did  not
        meet  the  requirements  of   the   Immigration   Rules   was   not
        challengeable.


     2. Permission to appeal had been granted on  the  basis  that  it  was
        arguable that all the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal  were
        arguable.

     3. The grounds seeking permission assert that the judge erred  in  the
        following matters:
              A.  having regard to the comparative quality of healthcare in
                 India and the UK;
              B.  having regard to the comparative quality  of  educational
                 provision for the third appellant as compared to the UK;
              C.  failed to have regard to the respondent's submission that
                 the third     appellant's requirement for medical care and
                 educational attention is    low;
              D. erred in finding that there would be significant obstacles
                 to   the   family        accessing   special   educational
                 resources;
              E. had regard to  an  irrelevant  consideration  in  supposed
                 difficulties in    accessing potential medical  negligence
                 litigation from the UK;
              F.  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  failure  to  meet  the
                 requirements of the    Immigration Rules;
              G. failed to have regard to the public interest in  immigrate
                 control.

     Immigration background

     4. The first appellant sought and was granted  entry  clearance  as  a
        student in 2003. He married his  wife,  the  second  appellant,  in
        India in 2005 and she arrived in the UK with valid entry  clearance
        in 2006. Their leave to remain in the UK expired in  May  2006  and
        they have remained in the UK unlawfully since then. In October 2006
        their child was born, the third appellant. The family sought  leave
        to remain on  medical  grounds,  such  application  being  refused,
        subjected to judicial review, retaken and refused again. It is that
        refusal dated 25th October 2013, taken pursuant to s10  Immigration
        and Asylum Act 1999 that is the subject of these proceedings.

     Factual background

     5. The undisputed facts are as follows:
        a. the child was receiving medical treatment by way of two
           appointments a year for neurological problems which may in the
           future be the subject of litigation for negligence against the
           NHS;
        b. such medical assistance may be required until he is aged 16;
        c. that the child had recently started school and was receiving
           part of two days SEN assistance per week;
        d. that his parents help him a lot with his homework;
        e. that the standard of medical care available in India is lower
           than that available in the UK;
        f. there are Special Educational Needs facilities in Gwalior which
           is in a different province to that from which they come;
        g. Punjabi (the appellants' language) is a minority language in
           Gwalior;


     6. The SSHD was unable to comment on the assertion that the couple had
        been informed by telephone that they  could  switch  categories  ie
        that the second appellant could switch from being  a  dependant  to
        being a student although there was a letter on file that  indicated
        there had been telephone conversations. It  remained  the  position
        however that such a  switch  was  not  permitted  under  the  Rules
        although it was of course open to the SSHD to exercise discretion.

     7. It was not accepted by the SSHD  that  there  were  no  or  limited
        educational or medical facilities in the appellants' home province;
        no evidence to that effect had been  produced  by  the  appellants,
        upon whom the burden of proof lay,  and  the  judge  had  given  no
        reason for accepting the appellants' evidence to that effect.

     8. It was not accepted by  the  SSHD  that  it  was  not  possible  to
        undertake the possible litigation from abroad - there were  medical
        experts, the possibility of video link evidence  and  communication
        methods permitted such actions to proceed.

     9. It was not accepted by the SSHD that the family would not  be  able
        to obtain the assistance of their  family  in  India.  Nor  was  it
        accepted that the family would suffer language,  discrimination  or
        employment problems.

     Error of law

    10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made unassailable findings as regards
        the inability of the family to meet the requirements of the  Rules.
        He self directed himself to Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and  in
        particular refers to "only if there may be  arguably  good  grounds
        for granting leave to remain outside [the Rules]  is  it  necessary
        for Article 8 purposes to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are
        compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  [the
        Rules]: Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)."  In [29]  the  judge  found
        that  there  may  be  arguably  good   grounds   because   of   the
        circumstances of their son (the third appellant) and he states that
        he  then  went  on  to  consider  whether  there   are   compelling
        circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.

    11. The judge then set out the five stage test of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
        27. The judge, in purporting to assess the proportionality  of  the
        removal decision, referred to the factors he had found in favour of
        the claimants. He failed totally to give any credence or even refer
        to the weight to be given to the public interest  in  reaching  his
        assessment. He failed to pay any regard to his own  self  direction
        as to the need to find whether there were compelling  circumstances
        that were not sufficiently recognised under the Rules. Although  he
        refers to Patel [2013] UKSC 72 as establishing  that  education  is
        not in itself a right protected by  Article  8,  he  considers  the
        third appellant's education as "a significant reason why his family
        should be able to stay".

    12. The judge failed to give reasons why it  was  a  compelling  reason
        that the claimants had to remain in the UK in order to  access  two
        medical appointments a year; why parts of two days SEN teaching was
        a compelling reason to remain in the UK when there were  facilities
        available in India, albeit not in the same province; he  failed  to
        give reasons why family living some hundreds of miles away but with
        no evidence that they would not be  able  to  help  amounted  to  a
        compelling reason to remain in the  UK  given  that  there  are  no
        family members here in  the  UK;  he  fails  to  give  reasons  why
        possible future litigation (not pending as he states)  against  the
        NHS could not be exercised from abroad and being abroad amounted to
        compelling reasons to remain in the UK; he failed to  give  reasons
        for his  finding  that  there  are  significant  obstacles  to  the
        appellants accessing available medical and  educational  facilities
        in India.

    13. I am satisfied that the judge erred in  law  in  failing  to  apply
        relevant jurisprudence and failing to give adequate or any  reasons
        for his findings. I set aside the decision to be remade.

     Consideration and findings

    14.  I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  and,  with  no
        objection raised by Mr Walker from Mr Dhiman. Mr  Dhiman  explained
        the approaches made to the SSHD and through  his  MP  in  order  to
        attempt to resolve the family's immigration status. I am  satisfied
        , as I expressed to him during the course of the hearing,  that  he
        and his wife have attempted to ensure that they remained within the
        Rules and that there had been some delay by  the  SSHD  in  dealing
        with their application. The fact remains however that they did  not
        meet the requirements of the Rules and any decision by the SSHD  to
        enable them to remain was a matter of discretion to be exercised by
        her outside the Rules. I  expressed  my  sympathy  for  the  family
        because of the worry  that  must  be  caused  by  the  neurological
        problems suffered by their son and their desire to do what was best
        for him.

    15. Mr Mahmud's submission concentrated upon the best interests of  the
        child and he referred to the hardships that would  be  suffered  by
        the  child  in  the  event  of  removal;  that  any  shock  may  be
        detrimental to his well being; that the cost of treatment in  India
        was prohibitive; that the family would have no home  to  return  to
        and no jobs. He said that it would not be financially possible  for
        the family to seek medical treatment visas to return to the UK  for
        the child to attend the two medical treatments he required and they
        did not know the cost in India of such additional educational needs
        as were required. He stressed the best interest of  the  child  and
        that this was a matter to be taken very seriously; that  the  child
        was very vulnerable; that the family met the  requirements  of  the
        "old fashioned' Article 8. Although acknowledging  that  the  child
        had not been in the UK for seven years past his 4th  birthday,  the
        particular   vulnerabilities   of    the    child    rendered    it
        disproportionate for him to be removed. He relied in particular  on
        ZH (Tanzania).

    16. Mr Walker reiterated the points made about the lack of evidence and
        that although the  best  interest  of  the  child  were  a  primary
        consideration, when considered in the round this  appeal  fell  far
        short of showing the compelling circumstances required  for  it  to
        succeed outside the Rules.

    17. I have taken careful note of the submissions made and am of  course
        very aware of the distress caused to the family  when  their  child
        suffers as this child is doing. There  is  however  scant  evidence
        that  adequate  treatment  is  not  available  in  India.   It   is
        acknowledged that there are educational facilities available  in  a
        province in India albeit not the family's home province. There  was
        no  evidence  before  me  that  research  had  shown  that  similar
        facilities were not available in their home province. There was  no
        evidence why or how the family would sustain  language,  employment
        or race discrimination if they moved province. The burden lies upon
        the appellants and they have not discharged that burden. Of  course
        the best interests of this child are that he lives with his  family
        and receives their care and support. It is not axiomatic that  such
        care and support can only be provided in  the  UK  and  nor  is  it
        axiomatic that without UK medical  and  educational  treatment  the
        child's best interest would be undermined  in  any  way.  There  is
        adequate medical treatment available (albeit at a cost)  and  there
        are adequate educational facilities  in  India;  there  are  family
        members in India who have not been  shown  to  be  unavailable  for
        assistance. Possible future litigation can  be  carried  out  at  a
        distance through the medium of international communication methods.
        The family were granted entry on a temporary basis and  could  have
        had no expectation that they  would  be  granted  leave  to  remain
        outside the Rules. Issues of cost do  not  render  compelling  that
        which is otherwise available; see Akhulu [2013] UKUT 400 (IAC). All
        of these factors when balanced against the public  interest  result
        inevitably in a finding that removal is not disproportionate.

    18. I dismiss the appeal by the  claimant's against the decision of the
        SSHD dated 25th October 2013 to remove them from the UK.


               Conclusions


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it







                                    Date 1st April 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
