
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47984/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 August 2016                    |On 01 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MRS SANA ARSHAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Waithe, Counsel instructed by Calices
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

1.   The Secretary of State appeals with permission against  a  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole who in a  determination
    promulgated on 4 February 2016 allowed the appeal of Mrs  Sana  Arshad,
    the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made on 11 November 2014  refusing  her  application
    for leave to remain and giving  directions  under  Section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  1999  for  her  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   In this determination although the Secretary of State is the  appellant
    before me, I will for ease of reference refer to her as the  respondent
    as she was the respondent before the First-tier and  similarly  I  will
    refer to Mrs Sana Arshad as the appellant as she was the  appellant  in
    the First-tier.

3.   The central issue in this case before the judge was  an  allegation  by
    the Secretary of State that the appellant had studied at  a  particular
    college when in fact the appellant  had  claimed  to  have  studied  at
    another college the respondent alleged  therefore  that  the  had  been
    deception.  The Secretary of State had no evidence before her to  prove
    that the appellant had not studied at the college at which she  claimed
    to have studied but had studied at the college where the  Secretary  of
    State said that she had studied.

4.   In order to obtain evidence that the respondent was correct  in  making
    the allegation as to where the appellant  had  studied  the  Presenting
    Officer applied for an adjournment.  The  application  for  adjournment
    was refused by Judge Wellesley-Cole  who  gave,  I  consider,  adequate
    reasons for so refusing the application.  She referred quite clearly to
    the interests of justice in this case.  Indeed she clearly had in  mind
    the relevant Procedure Rules which emphasised the importance of  timely
    consideration of issues in appeals and decisions being made as soon  as
    practicable provided the duty of fairness was met.

5.   The grounds of appeal  before  me  refer  only  to  the  issue  of  the
    adjournment.  I consider that the judge was quite entitled to reach the
    conclusion which she did reach and I am fortified in that decision when
    I consider  the  chronology  in  this  case  in  that  the  appellant's
    application was made on 18 November 2013, the refusal was  in  November
    the following year and the appeal hearing was on 19 January 2016.   The
    respondent therefore had had over two  years  to  obtain  the  relevant
    evidence which would be required  to  show  that  deception  had  taken
    place.

6.   Moreover, Mr Walker has informed  me  today  that  there  is  still  no
    evidence on the file  which  could  support  the  allegation  made.   I
    therefore  consider  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to   refuse   the
    application and on that  basis  I  dismiss  the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal.

7.   I would add that there are clear Article 8 issues in  this  case  given
    that the appellant is the mother and wife of British  citizens  and  it
    could well have been the case that the judge would have  been  entitled
    to allow the appeal on that basis but however that  is  not  the  issue
    before me which, as I have said is solely relating to the issue of  the
    adjournment. The decision of  the  judge  in  that  respect  was  quite
    clearly open to her  and  was  proportionate  and  fair.   I  therefore
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the Judge in the First-tier allowing  the  appeal  contained
no error of law and shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
