
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47662/2014
                                                               IA/47651/2014
                                                               IA/47652/2014
                                                               IA/47653/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th January 2016                 |On 27th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Rowena Ruth Dimayuga (FIRST respondent)
                 Andrei Niqoule Dimayuga (SECOND respondent)
                           ARD (THIRD respondent)
                           AD (FOURTH respondent)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss K Reid of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Oakley  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 8th June 2015.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FTT and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The Claimants are citizens of the Philippines.  The  first  and  second
    Claimants are married and are the  parents  of  the  third  and  fourth
    Claimants who were born in August 2005 and July 2008 respectively.

 4. The Claimants appealed against the Respondent's decision  made  on  7th
    November 2014 to remove them from the United Kingdom following  refusal
    of their applications for further leave to remain based upon family and
    private life.

 5. The appeals were heard together on 2nd June 2015 and allowed under  the
    Immigration Rules, specifically paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi).

 6. This caused the Secretary of State to apply for permission to appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  In summary it was contended that the FTT had erred
    in law in allowing the  appeals  pursuant  to  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
    because the third and fourth Appellants could not be  considered  under
    that paragraph, as they were not 18 years of  age.   They  should  have
    been considered pursuant to paragraph 276ADE(1)(iv) which had not  been
    considered by the FTT.

 7. In addition, the FTT  had  erred  in  law  when  considering  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) by considering the test of significant obstacles,  rather
    than considering the correct test  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
    integration.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chohan of  the  FTT  on  18th
    August 2015.  There was no response from the Claimants pursuant to rule
    24 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 9. Directions were subsequently  issued  that  there  should  be  an  oral
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  ascertain  whether  the  FTT  had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

10. Mr Bramble relied upon the grounds contained within the application for
    permission to appeal.

The Claimants' Submissions

11. Miss Reid accepted that the FTT had referred to a significant obstacles
    test rather than very significant obstacles,  but  submitted  that  the
    error was not material.  It was also accepted that the third and fourth
    Claimants could not satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and  that  their
    appeals could only succeed under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  Nevertheless Miss Reid submitted that the  FTT  had  not  erred
    materially, because consideration had been given to the best  interests
    of the third and fourth Claimants who are minors, and the FTT  had  not
    erred in deciding that their best interests would be to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

My Conclusions and Reasons

12. I announced at the hearing that the FTT had materially erred in law and
    that the decision must be set aside for the following reasons.

13. The FTT allowed the appeals of all four Claimants under the Immigration
    Rules and this was wrong in law.  The FTT erred in considering all four
    Claimants under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) which was wrong  in  law.   The
    third and fourth Claimants could not be considered under that provision
    because to satisfy (vi) an individual must be aged 18 years  or  above,
    and both the third and fourth Claimants are under 18 years of age.

14. The FTT applied the wrong test when  considering  the  appeals  of  the
    first and second Claimants pursuant to (vi).  The correct  test  is  to
    decide whether there would be very significant obstacles to integration
    into the country to which the individuals would have to go if  required
    to leave the UK.  The FTT did not demonstrate that this test  had  been
    applied, referring throughout the decision to 'significant  obstacles',
    which is a lower test and is wrong in law.

15. The third and fourth Claimants could  not  succeed  under  any  of  the
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE(1), not being able to succeed under (iv)
    because they had not lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  seven
    years.

16. Therefore their appeals could only succeed under Article 8 outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  This would have entailed considering  section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The FTT  did  not
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules, nor was there  any  consideration
    of section 117B.

17. The FTT  decision  is  therefore  set  aside.   Neither  representative
    submitted that it would be appropriate to preserve  any  findings.   No
    findings are preserved.

18. Miss Reid submitted that there needed to be extensive fact-finding, and
    indicated that there would be  five  witnesses  to  give  evidence  and
    therefore it would be appropriate to remit this appeal to the FTT.   Mr
    Bramble did not oppose that suggestion.

19.  I  considered  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
    Statements which for ease of reference I set out below:
         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that;
             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or
             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision and the  appeal  to
                  be remade is such that, having regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. In my view the extent of the judicial fact-finding that  is  necessary,
    means that it is appropriate for this appeal to be remitted to the FTT.



21. The appeal before the FTT will take place at the Hatton  Cross  hearing
    centre.  The parties will be advised  of  the  time  and  date  in  due
    course.  An indication has been given that there are five witnesses  to
    give oral evidence and the time estimate is three hours.  An indication
    has been given that no interpreter is required.  If it transpires  that
    an interpreter is required  the  Claimants  must  notify  the  Tribunal
    immediately.  The appeal is to be heard by a First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    other than Judge Oakley.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeals are allowed to the  extent  that
they are remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  no  findings  of  fact
preserved.

Anonymity

The FTT did not make an anonymity  direction.   There  was  no  request  for
anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.


Signed   Date 19th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to  be  considered  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.


Signed   Date 19th January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
