
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47294/2014
                                                               IA/47303/2014
                                                               IA/47310/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2015                   |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                            HARPREET KAUR BOPARAI
                           HARPREET SINGH BOPARAI
                           JEEWANJOT SINGH BOPARaI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss S Pinder, Counsel, instructed by Theva
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   The first appellant, Mrs Harpreet Kaur Boparai is  the  main  appellant
    and her husband and son were dependants on her application for  further
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant.    Mrs  Boparai
    applied for further leave to remain to  study  towards  a  postgraduate
    diploma in health and  social  care  management  at  Meridian  Business
    School.  The course was due  to  start  on  13  October  2014  and  was
    expected to end on 13 October 2015.

2.   The respondent refused her application for further leave to  remain  on
    the ground that the specified evidence she produced in support  of  the
    application was not of the right  type  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 13 of Appendix C  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Mrs  Boparai
    produced  bank  statements  as  evidence  to  show  that  she  met  the
    maintenance requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  and  there  is  no
    dispute that the amounts shown in  those  bank  statements  were  at  a
    sufficiently level to meet the requirements.  However, the  application
    was refused because the bank statements were not in her name but in her
    husband's name.  As such the evidence did not meet the requirements  of
    paragraph 13 of Appendix C of the Immigration Rules.

3.   The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain. The appeal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell on 9  June  2015.  He  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 3 July 2015.  At paragraph 10 the judge noted  that  the
    appellant's representative conceded that she could not meet the  strict
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and the  case  was  argued  under
    Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

4.   In paragraphs 11 to 16 the judge set out  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant. Later in his decision it is quite  clear  that  he  accepted
    that  it  had  been  an  innocent  mistake.   She   misunderstood   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for the funds to be in an account
    in her own name.

5.   In paragraphs 29 to 31 of the decision the  judge  set  out  the  legal
    framework  relating  to  the  assessment  of  Article  8  outside   the
    Immigration Rules. His summary of the relevant case law is correct.  He
    went on to make his findings in paragraphs 34 to 36  of  the  decision.
    In paragraph 34 he correctly stated that he needed to follow  the  five
    stage approach outlined by the House of Lords in  R  v  SSHD  ex  parte
    Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58. In  making  the  assessment  he  also  directed
    himself to the case of Patel & Others v SSHD [2013]  UKSC  72,  and  in
    particular to the comments made by Lord Carnwath, which admittedly  are
    obiter to the central issues in the case:

         "It is important to remember  that  Article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human rights. The merits of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: Section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for common  sense  in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the  UK  for  some  years  (see
         paragraph  47  above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by
         themselves provide grounds of appeal  under  Article  8,  which  is
         concerned with private or family life, not education as such.   The
         opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in  this
         country, however desirable in general terms, is  not  in  itself  a
         right protected under Article 8."

6.   The judge also noted that there was authority from the  Upper  Tribunal
    in the case of CDS  (Brazil)  [2010]  UKUT  305,  which  found  that  a
    student's right to private life  was  engaged  on  the  facts  of  that
    particular case. He therefore had  in  mind  the  relevant  authorities
    relating to private life and how it  might  apply  in  cases  involving
    students.

7.   In paragraph 35 of  the  decision  the  judge  concluded  that  if  the
    appellant and her husband had to return to India it would not interfere
    with their right to family life. That finding has not  been  challenged
    and was clearly correct given that  the  family  members  could  return
    together.  It is the judge's findings  in  [36]  that  are  really  the
    subject of the challenge in  this  appeal.  The  judge  concluded  that
    requiring the appellant to return at that stage of her studies in  June
    2015 would cause a significant interference with her right  to  private
    life and he concluded that the appellant's rights  under  Article  8(1)
    were sufficiently engaged. He then went on to consider whether  or  not
    the decision to refuse leave to remain and any consequent removal would
    nevertheless be proportionate to the legitimate aim of  maintaining  an
    effective  system  of  immigration  control.  He  made  the   following
    findings:

         "Proportionality would then need to be considered on the  basis  of
         affirmative findings to the other questions posed by  Lord  Bingham
         in Razgar prior to reaching the assessment of  proportionality.  It
         is undoubtedly the case that ample funding was, and  is,  available
         to sustain  the  first  appellant  and  her  dependant  appellants.
         However such circumstances do not mean  that  where  an  individual
         fails to meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  this
         Tribunal can take what might be termed a broad brush  approach  and
         find therefore that it will  be  disproportionate  to  require  the
         appellants to leave this  country.  Parliament  through  procedures
         amending the Immigration Rules, has very clearly set  out  specific
         provisions. In relation to a student wishing to continue to  remain
         on that basis in this country such provisions are clear.  They  are
         specific and the first appellant needed to satisfy them.  The  fact
         that her husband, here the second appellant,  could   provide  that
         funding, does not mean that under Article 8 leave in effect  should
         be granted on that finding by this Tribunal  when  I  have  clearly
         found that the specific Immigration Rule provisions  could  not  be
         satisfied."

8.   I have been referred to the decision of the Court of Appeal in  SSHD  v
    SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  In that case the Court of Appeal  made
    quite clear that the Immigration Rules are  main  point  of  assessment
    under Article 8 and it is only where they do not sufficiently cover the
    particular circumstances relating to an individual applicant  that  one
    might turn to consider whether there are any circumstances  that  would
    justify granting leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

9.   In  this  case  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  admittedly  strict
    requirements of  Appendix  C  of  the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    maintenance. In relation to Article 8 neither she, nor any other member
    of her family, meet the private or family life  requirements  contained
    in paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM respectively.  What  the  Court  of
    Appeal made clear in SS (Congo) was that it would only be in compelling
    circumstances that an infringement of Article 8 would be  found  if  an
    appellant did not otherwise meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

10.  While the points-based system scheme contains fairly strict  evidential
    requirements it has been found in a number of cases that it is open  to
    the respondent to introduce such requirements in order  to  enable  the
    effective administration of immigration control.  Some  flexibility  in
    relation to evidence has been incorporated into the  Immigration  Rules
    in paragraph 245AA but it is accepted on behalf of the  appellant  that
    none of the  particular  circumstances  that  might  engage  evidential
    flexibility apply in this particular case.

11.  While the complexity of the Immigration  Rules  does  mean  that  there
    will be occasions where an the appellant  makes  an  innocent  mistake,
    perhaps  not  fully  understanding  the  importance  of  some  of   the
    evidential requirements, it is still the case that there is unlikely to
    be  a  breach  of  Article  8  in  the  absence   of   any   compelling
    circumstances. In this case the appellant and her family have lived  in
    the UK since 2013 and there is no argument to suggest that Article 8 is
    engaged in relation to particularly strong ties to the UK. The evidence
    suggests that the appellant is likely to have completed the  course  of
    study so any alleged infringement would now be academic.

12.  While it is clearly the case that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    some sympathy for the appellant's situation, which is evidenced by  his
    remarks at the end of the decision, I find that there is  no  basis  on
    which to set aside his findings relating to Article 8,  which  were  in
    accordance with the relevant case law and were open to him to  make  on
    the particular facts of this case.

13.  I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The First-tier Tribunal decision
    shall stand.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's decision did not involve the making  of  an  error
on a point of law.

The First-tier Tribunal's decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]    Date  07 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
