
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47145/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10th June 2014                             |On 23rd June 2014            |
|Prepared 10th June 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                               Ardian Beqiraj

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonarero of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Ardian Beqiraj, the appellant, against the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet in a determination
    promulgated on the 24th of March 2014.  Mr Beqiraj, born on the 13th of
    February 1989, a citizen of Albania, had applied for a residence card
    as the partner of an EEA national.  From the refusal letter of the Home
    Office, the document which is dated the 27th of October 2013, it was
    noted that documents had been provided for use stated in the letter
    that declarations from family and friends cannot be accepted to support
    any application as they are not official documents.  The other evidence
    the appellant has provided only dates from November 2012 to January
    2013.  This is an insufficient period of time for the Home Office to
    establish the appellant's relationship is durable.  The appellant has
    not provided sufficient documentation to suggest that he is in a
    durable relationship.  Due to the lack of evidence submitted, the Home
    Office department cannot accept that the appellant is in a durable
    relationship for the purposes of the EEA Regulations.  It indicated
    that there was a right of appeal.  It also indicated that if an Article
    8 application were to be made under the Rules that a separate
    application would be required.

 2. At the hearing the Judge heard evidence from the appellant and from his
    sponsor, Stella Bencze, and having set out the evidence at paragraphs
    13 to 23, set out the findings that were made.  In setting out the
    determination it was correctly noted that the burden of proof is on the
    appellant and that it was the balance of probabilities as the standard
    of proof, and the European Economic Area Regulations of 2006 were also
    properly referred to.


 3. In the course of the determination the Judge noted a series of
    differences between the evidence of the appellant and the sponsor.  The
    Judge also noted that documentation that might have been expected was
    absent.  That would include a tenancy agreement and evidence that the
    rent had in fact been paid.  The Judge also noted that phone bills were
    not present and a number of people who might have been able to give
    evidence, including the sponsor's sister, had not attended despite the
    length of time that had been available and in which alternative
    arrangements to cover her work commitments could have been made.


 4. The issue of durability raised of course the issue of general
    credibility.  The Judge did not find that there was no relationship.
    The Judge found that because of the inconsistencies it could not be
    found that the relationship was said to be durable.  Having regard to
    the evidence that was given, the consideration given to it in the
    determination, and the reasons given by the Judge in the determination
    which are set out and reasoned, I am satisfied that that was a decision
    that was open to the Judge on the evidence that had been provided.
    Quite simply, the details can be used to assess the strength of the
    relationship, and since it was the strength of the relationship that
    was in issue, details such as their future plans or where they were
    working were clearly relevant to the issues that the Judge had to
    decide.  I am satisfied that in that respect the Judge made no error in
    the approach to the evidence overall and that the determination overall
    read fairly and was sustainable.


 5. There is a technical error within the determination and that is that
    the Judge did not consider the position under Article 8.  For the sake
    of completeness and the avoidance of doubt it would have been better if
    the determination had contained such a reference, however, having found
    that the relationship was not durable it would be inevitable under
    Kugathas that the Judge would have found that Article 8 was not engaged
    and that the decision therefore could not place the UK in breach of its
    obligations under Article 8, so although there is a technical error it
    is not material to the decision that was made.


 6. The point I should have made at the start of this determination, which
    I did not, is that the permission given by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Osborne, appeared to indicate that the permission was limited to the
    issue of Article 8.  Having been referred to the relevant case of
    Ferrer, I am satisfied it was appropriate not to limit the
    consideration of the error of law to that issue, which is why I have
    accepted submissions from both parties with respect to the basic
    findings that were made.


CONCLUSIONS


For the reasons given the determination contained no error of law and the
decision stands.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

