
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47142/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 May 2015                               |On 22 June 2015               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE EDIS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Miss Emmah Tawona
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Hulse, Counsel instructed by Oliver & Hasani
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hussain,  which
    was promulgated on 28 August 2014.   The  respondent  is  a  Zimbabwean
    national who is the mother of a child born in  2009  who  is  a  United
    Kingdom national.  She seeks a residence card to permit her  to  remain
    in this country as a third country national upon whom a British citizen
    is dependent in the United Kingdom on the basis of the Court of Justice
    of the European Union judgment in the case of Ruiz Zambrano.  Hers is a
    claim for a derivative right of residence.

 2. The appeal is framed in writing on the basis that the judge adopted  an
    inappropriate construction of the requirement in Regulation  15A(4A)(c)
    of the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  which
    provides "the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the
    United Kingdom or in another EEA state if P were  required  to  leave".
    The argument is that as a matter of  law  the  judge  did  not  address
    himself  properly  to  the  requirement  that  the  applicant  for  the
    residence card, the respondent to this appeal, had to demonstrate  that
    if she were removed from the United Kingdom her child would  be  unable
    to reside in the United Kingdom.  The factual case  being  advanced  by
    the Secretary of State before the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  was
    that there was no reason why the child could not remain in  the  United
    Kingdom with his father, perhaps with  additional  support  from  other
    members of the extended families both of the respondent,  Miss  Tawona,
    and also of the father  of  the  child.   In  essence,  the  appeal  is
    predicated upon the assertion that the FTT  Judge  rejected  this  case
    applying the wrong test in law.

 3. That appeal having been lodged it came before a Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal to review it and to decide whether or not to grant  permission
    to appeal.  On  31  October  2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hollingworth gave permission to  appeal,  not  on  the  basis  that  he
    thought that any of the arguments advanced in the notice of appeal were
    arguable but on a different basis altogether, namely that  the  reasons
    given by the judge for his conclusion were unclear because of  the  way
    in which they had been expressed and therefore it was unclear  how  the
    relevant criterion had been applied by the judge in this case.  We will
    set out the last two paragraphs of the decision of the judge.

         "34. The appellant appears to have the benefit of support from  her
             extended family members.  Since being given permission to work
             she has to her credit been working full-time.  When she is not
             at home the child is looked after by her brother and his wife.
              I find that the suggestion that  these  individuals  will  be
             willing  to  assume  permanent  and  full-time  care  of   the
             appellant's child sustainable.  It must be recalled that it is
             only when the appellant is not at home doing shift  work  that
             they have to step in.  I assume that it will be at night  when
             the appellant is not at home that the  brother  and  his  wife
             step in.  The role they would play would be limited.   I  also
             note that the child is  approaching  school  age,  his  future
             needs would therefore be greater.   He  would  require  to  be
             woken up, clothed, fed and then taken to  school  and  brought
             back home.  I do not accept the Home  Office  suggestion  that
             these responsibilities can  be  assigned  to  the  appellant's
             extended relatives.

         35.  In summary, I find that the  appellant  has  always  been  her
             child's primary carer.  She remains his primary carer.  If she
             is not permitted to remain in the  United  Kingdom  the  child
             would be unable to reside here simply because there is  no-one
             else to care for him in this country."

4.   The confusion noted by the First-tier Judge  when  granting  permission
    arises from the use of the word "sustainable" in paragraph 34.  In  our
    judgment, reading paragraph 34 in a way so that it makes sense,  it  is
    perfectly obvious that that is a misprint and that the First-tier Judge
    in drafting his decision meant to write "unsustainable"  and  left  out
    the prefix "un".  That is the only way in which that paragraph  can  be
    given any sense because otherwise, having accepted the  representations
    being made on behalf of the Secretary of State by  describing  them  as
    "sustainable", he then rejected what  she  had  said  and  allowed  the
    appeal.

5.   After the grant of permission the  matter  was  referred  back  by  the
    Upper Tribunal to the FTT Judge Hussein with a request that  he  should
    clarify what in fact he meant and he confirmed that  our  understanding
    of his judgment which we have just recorded is in fact correct and that
    it should have read "unsustainable".  It  therefore  follows  that  the
    basis on which  permission  was  actually  granted  affords  no  ground
    whatever for allowing the appeal and as a matter of fact the  Secretary
    of State has never suggested that it did.  It  forms  no  part  of  her
    grounds of appeal, either in writing or now.  Therefore the only  basis
    on which permission has been granted to appeal against this decision is
    wholly without merit and the appeal cannot be allowed on that basis.

6.   We have gone on to consider the points which are made in the notice  of
    appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  which  technically  it  seems
    permission has not been granted to  determine  whether  they  have  any
    merit.  In our judgment they do not.  As appears from paragraphs 34 and
    35 of the decision, which we have set out in full above, the judge  had
    heard evidence.  He heard evidence from Miss Tawona and  other  members
    of her family and the import of that evidence was that  the  father  of
    the child had shown no interest in him since his  second  birthday  and
    had had no contact with him since that time; that he  had  participated
    in the preparation of  his  case  before  it  came  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by taking part in a DNA test which proved that he was in  fact
    the father of the child but otherwise nothing had been  heard  of  him,
    according to the evidence, by Miss Tawona or by the Tribunal or  indeed
    by the Secretary of State.  In other  words,  before  First-tier  Judge
    Hussain there was no evidence to suggest that the father of this  child
    had any interest in him at all or was willing or able to care  for  him
    if he were to find himself in the  United  Kingdom  without  his  other
    parent, his mother, Miss Tawona.  That is why the  judge  came  to  the
    conclusion that he did.  The suggestion that he applied the wrong  test
    in law is in our  judgment  unsustainable.   At  paragraph  27  of  the
    decision he said this:

         "27.  The  relevant  Regulation  governing  rights  of   derivative
             residence is to be found in Regulation 18(a) which requires an
             applicant to show that they are the primary carer of a British
             citizen child and that child would be unable to reside in  the
             United Kingdom or another EEA state if she  were  required  to
             leave this country."

8.   That actually recites the Regulation which he was  concerned  to  apply
    and contains the word "unable" which, as we  have  recorded  above,  is
    also repeated in the very final sentence of the decision at the end  of
    paragraph 35 which is "If she is not permitted to remain in the  United
    Kingdom the child would be unable to reside here simply  because  there
    is no-one else to care for him in this country."  This suggests that he
    had the test created in the Regulation well in mind.  The word "unable"
    has received a considerable  amount  of  consideration  by  the  higher
    courts in this country and by the  European  Court  of  Justice.   Most
    recently the Court of Appeal Civil Division  in  the  case  of  Maureen
    Hines v London Borough of Lambeth [2014]  EWCA  Civ  660  reviewed  the
    authorities since the decision of the  European  Court  of  Justice  in
    Zambrano and applied them in a way which provided  an  opportunity  for
    that court to restate the proper approach  to  be  taken  to  the  word
    "unable".  Having referred to a  previous  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal Civil Division in Harrison [2012] EWCA Civ  1736  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Hines v Lambeth said this at paragraph 21:

         "21. Accordingly, in my judgment, the  judge  was  right,  applying
             Harrison, to conclude  as  he  did  in  paragraph  21  of  his
             judgment that the appellant was only entitled to accommodation
             if Brandon would be effectively compelled to leave the  United
             Kingdom if she left.  He was also right to point out that what
             amounts to circumstances of compulsion may differ from case to
             case.  As Lord Justice Elias said:

                  'To the extent that the quality or standard  of  life  [of
                  the EU citizen] will be seriously  impaired  by  excluding
                  the non  EU  national,  that  is  likely  in  practice  to
                  infringe the right of residence  itself  because  it  will
                  effectively compel the EU citizen to give up residence and
                  travel with the non-EU national'.

             It is for this reason that the welfare of the  child  in  this
             case comes into play, again as the judge held.

         22.  In my judgment, however, the welfare of the  child  cannot  be
             the paramount  consideration  because  that  would  be  flatly
             inconsistent with the statutory  test  which  is  whether  the
             child would be unable to reside in the UK if the mother  left.
             It will, in normal circumstances, be contrary to the interests
             of a child for one of its parent carers, whether  the  primary
             carer or not, to be taken away from  him  or  her.   It  would
             certainly be contrary to Article 24(3) of the Charter.  But Mr
             Berry  shied  away  from  contending  that   the   Immigration
             Regulations were inconsistent with EU law or that they  should
             be read down so as to comply with it.

         23.  I have no doubt that  the  test  applicable  under  Regulation
             15A(4A)(c)  is  clear  and  can  be   given   effect   without
             contravening EU law.  The reviewer has to consider the welfare
             of the British citizen child  and  the  extent  to  which  the
             quality or standard of his life will be impaired if the non-EU
             citizen is required to leave.  This is all for the purpose  of
             answering the question whether the child would, as a matter of
             practicality, be unable to remain in the UK.  This requires  a
             consideration, amongst other things, of the impact  which  the
             removal of the primary carer would have on the child, and  the
             alternative care available for the child."

9.   At the end of the following paragraph, paragraph 24  of  the  decision,
    the Court of Appeal said this:

         "I do not, however, think that all things being equal  the  removal
         of a child from the care of one responsible parent to the  care  of
         another responsible parent would normally be expected so  seriously
         to impair his quality  and  standard  of  life  that  he  would  be
         effectively  forced  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom.   Apart  from
         anything else, he would, even if he did leave, still only have  the
         care of one of his previously two joint carers."

10.  In argument before us Ms  Fijiwala  accepted,  in  our  judgment  quite
    rightly in the light of that authority,  that  if  the  effect  of  the
    removal of Miss Tawona was to deprive the child of the care of both  of
    his natural parents if he were to remain in the United Kingdom, because
    the father would not in fact care for him, then he was for the purposes
    of the test to be applied in considering  the  Regulation  "unable"  to
    live in the United Kingdom.

11.  It seems therefore to us that the judge applied  the  right  test,  and
    the finding of fact he made fully justified  the  result  to  which  he
    came.  He carried out the necessary careful enquiry into  the  evidence
    to determine whether compulsion arose on the facts  of  this  case  and
    reached the conclusion that on the evidence  before  him  removing  the
    child from his mother's care would not mean that he would be cared  for
    by his father.  It would mean that no-one had any idea who was going to
    care for him or in what circumstances.  On that finding of fact he  was
    entitled to conclude that for the purposes of the Regulation the  child
    was unable to exercise his right to reside in an EU state  without  the
    care of his mother, and in those circumstances he was  right  to  allow
    her appeal against the Secretary of State's initial determination,  and
    for those reasons therefore we dismiss her appeal against the notice of
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

COSTS

11.  Having dismissed the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
    substantive decision in this case we have now heard an  application  on
    behalf of the respondent for her costs  under  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as now in force since last October which by
    amendment includes Rule 10 which permits the Upper Tribunal to make  an
    order for  costs  in  various  circumstances  including,  relevant  for
    present purposes, if the Upper Tribunal considers that a party  or  its
    representative  has  acted  unreasonably  in  bringing,  defending   or
    conducting the proceedings.  These proceedings, as our judgment on  the
    substantive issue made clear, have an unusual history.  The appeal  was
    set out in writing in the same way precisely  as  it  has  been  argued
    today before us.  The judge granting permission granted permission on a
    ground of his own devising without expressing a view about whether  the
    substantive merit of the appeal warranted a grant of permission or not,
    but in the end permission was granted and the appeal has come here  and
    it has been determined.  We are unable to say  that  the  Secretary  of
    State has acted unreasonably in bringing, defending or  conducting  the
    proceedings in these circumstances.

12.  It is extremely unfortunate for Miss Tawona that this has involved  two
    hearings but that was not the fault of the Secretary  of  State  except
    insofar as she wanted a determination of the argument that  she  wished
    to pursue which is one of her responsibilities.   The  reason  for  the
    duplication of hearing costs was the lack of clarity, or confusion,  in
    the  initial  judgment  which  required  to  be  interpreted  and   the
    consequent lack of clarity in the mind of  the  reviewing  judge  about
    whether there had been an error of law or not, and that  certainly  was
    not the fault of the Secretary of State, who  never  sought  to  pursue
    that point, appreciating no doubt that there was not a  great  deal  in
    it.

13.  In those circumstances, although we have a good deal  of  sympathy  for
    Miss Tawona, who has been put to a good deal of expense as a result  of
    these proceedings, we do not feel able to  make  a  decision  that  the
    Secretary of State has behaved unreasonably in any respect in regard to
    these proceedings and in those circumstances we have no jurisdiction to
    grant costs to the respondent.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Mr Justice Edis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Date

Mr Justice Edis
