
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47460/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 18 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     LM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Harris, Counsel instructed by Cleveland Law
Ltd.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Claimant, who is a national of Jamaica, was born on 3  April  1969.
    He applied for leave to remain on the basis of  his  relationship  with
    his partner, MS, and her daughter A, who was born on 24 November  2007.
    The Respondent refused his  application  on  7  November  2014  and  he
    appealed against this decision.  His appeal came before  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Majid on 20 May 2015 and in a decision  promulgated
    on 22 May 2015 the appeal was allowed.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  sought  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal and the grounds of  appeal  dated  1  June
    2015 raised essentially three grounds, the first of which is  that  the
    Judge completely failed to engage with the Reasons for  Refusal  Letter
    issued by the Respondent and  yet  at  paragraph  21  of  his  decision
    purported to allow the appeal on the basis  that  the  Appellant  comes
    within the law and can benefit from  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules.
    The Respondent submitted: "It  is  impossible  to  understand  how  the
    Appellant can succeed under the Immigration Rules when no findings were
    made at all to the provisions of Appendix FM and the judge  appears  to
    only consider the matter outside of those Rules."

 3. The second ground of appeal was that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  make
    findings on material matters and in particular the Judge had failed  to
    engage at all with the fact that the Appellant's relationship  did  not
    meet the definition required in GEN.1.2 or the specific criteria of  E-
    LTRPT.2.2 to 2.4 with the consequence  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    benefit from EX.1 by virtue of R-LTRPT(d).

 4. A number of further points were raised as factors that should have been
    held against the Appellant, i.e. his former use of a  counterfeit  Home
    Office stamp  and  the  fact  that  there  were  extensive  periods  of
    overstaying in the UK were also relied upon,  and  the  fact  that  the
    judge did not appear to have had any regard to Section 19 of  the  2014
    Act, i.e. the criteria set out in Section 117B and C of the  NIAA  2002
    as amended.

 5. The third ground makes the assertion  that  the  judge  was  guilty  of
    judicial bias. This was based  on  comments  that  the  judge  made  at
    paragraph 17 of his decision and it was asserted  that  these  comments
    show a political dislike for the Rules as  implemented  since  HC  194,
    partly predicated on a misunderstanding that these Rule changes are non-
    compliant with Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.

 6. Permission to appeal was  granted  in  respect  of  all  grounds  in  a
    decision dated 31 July 2015 where Upper Tribunal Judge  Martin  stated:
    "It is arguable that the judge made errors of law in the decision.   He
    appears to have failed  completely  to  engage  with  the  reasons  for
    refusal and allowed the appeal on the basis of  his  own  private  life
    views rather than the evidence and applicable law."

 7. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by Ms Harris  of
    Counsel and the Respondent by  Mr  Staunton.   In  his  submissions  Mr
    Staunton relied on the grounds of appeal and essentially reiterated the
    points made therein.

 8. In response Ms Harris drew attention to her  skeleton  argument  before
    Judge Majid dated 19 May 2015 to make clear  that  it  had  never  been
    suggested that the case falls within the Immigration Rules and  it  was
    completely proper for the judge to have sought to allow it outside  the
    Rules.

 9. In respect of paragraph 21 she submitted that the judge here was taking
    a broad brush approach and it was clear from paragraphs 2 and  11  that
    the judge has carefully considered  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter.
    She drew my attention to paragraph 10 where the judge had  given  clear
    reasons as to why he had allowed the appeal and those included at (a) a
    letter from a social worker pointing out that the Appellant is the main
    carer of his partner and her daughter and at (b) the issue of the  best
    interests of Aaliyah.  She submitted that this was  an  unusual  family
    set-up and that  this  constituted  exceptional  circumstances  as  the
    Immigration Rules do not  cover  the  type  of  circumstances  of  this
    particular Appellant.

10. In respect of paragraph 17 and  the  assertion  of  judicial  bias  she
    submitted that in fact it is quite a  factual  paragraph  and  all  the
    judge does is refer to the European Convention on Human Rights and then
    go on to find that the Respondent's decision was disproportionate under
    Article 8.

11. Having considered the  submissions  and  the  Respondent's  grounds  of
    appeal I find that Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Majid  did  make
    material errors of law in his decision, essentially for the reasons set
    out in grounds 1 and 2 of the Respondent's grounds of  appeal.   It  is
    not clear from the Judge's decision that he did engage properly  or  at
    all with the relevant paragraphs of Appendix FM or even to  the  extent
    of stating that the appeal was not argued under the Rules and that this
    was a case where consideration needed to be given outside the Rules for
    exceptional circumstances.

12. Ground 2 is also made out in that there is a paucity of clear  findings
    of fact as to why in fact the Appellant's  appeal  should  succeed.   I
    have taken into account the findings at paragraph 10 but the Respondent
    has reasonably pointed out  that  there  is  essentially  no  balancing
    exercise as to the points in favour of the public interest  and  it  is
    clearly necessary  to  conduct  that  exercise  in  order  to  reach  a
    sustainable  finding  in  respect  of  the   proportionality   of   the
    Respondent's decision.

13. In respect of the issue of judicial  bias  I  do  not  find  that  this
    assertion is made out and I accept Ms Harris' submission that paragraph
    17 is essentially factual.  However, it is unwise for judges to include
    such statements in their decisions and reasons as they are clearly open
    to misinterpretation and are essentially irrelevant  in  terms  of  the
    individual facts of the appeal that needed to be decided.

14. For those reasons  I  allow  the  Respondent's  appeal  and  remit  the
    Claimant's appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal in order  for  proper
    consideration to be given  to  his  application  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules and for a clear and full  proportionality  assessment
    to be made taking into account his evidence and that of his partner.

15.  Ms Harris made an application for costs  given  that  the  Claimant  is
    privately funded and the fact that the Secretary of State's appeal  had
    been allowed meant that a further  hearing  was  necessitated.  I  have
    considered rule 9 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    however, given my decision it does not appear to me appropriate to make
    an award of costs in respect of the proceedings in the Upper  Tribunal.
    However, it may be appropriate for the  Claimant's  representatives  to
    write to the Resident Judge at Taylor House attaching a  copy  of  this
    decision, along with the decision of the First Tier Tribunal Judge, the
    grounds of appeal and the grant of permission and drawing his attention
    to the discretion of the First Tier Tribunal to make a costs award with
    regard to rule  9  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 and section 29(1)(a) of the
    TCEA 2007.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed and the appeal  is  remitted
for a hearing de novo before the First Tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

