
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/47197/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 September 2016                      |On 31 October 2016               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Ali Raza khan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brockesby-Weller


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent Mr  Khan,  to  whom  I  shall  refer  hereafter  as  the
    appellant as he was  before  the  judge,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the respondent's decision of 14 November 2014 refusing
    to issue him with a residence card as an extended family member of  his
    partner Ms Zulangel.  The judge allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary  of
    State sought and was granted permission to appeal against that decision
    on the basis that as she had not applied her discretion  in  this  case
    the correct course of action would be to allow the appeal owing to  the
    extent that it was not in accordance with the law and remit it back  to
    her in order that she might consider the exercise of her discretion.

2.   In the interim a panel of the Upper Tribunal  consisting  of  the  Vice
    President and Upper Tribunal Judge had promulgated a decision  in  Sala
    [2016] UKUT 411 (IAC) in which it was held that a person who is refused
    a residence card as an extended family  member  under  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006  has  no  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Regulation 26 of those Regulations.   In  the  light  of
    that Mr Bellara, who appeared on behalf of the appellant,  argued  that
    it may be that in light of the basis upon which permission was  granted
    it would be appropriate for the matter to be sent back to the Secretary
    of State to reconsider.  He  accepted  that  Ms  Brockesby-Weller,  who
    appeared on behalf of the Secretary of State, was of the view that  the
    appeal fell to be dismissed outright.

3.   I stated that I would follow  the  decision  in  Sala  and  that  as  a
    consequence there was no jurisdiction in the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    to hear the appeal.  The disposal of this case is that the decision  to
    allow the appeal is set aside and for it is substituted a decision that
    there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              31 October 2016





