
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47190/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On  24th June 2015                   |On 30th June 2015                    |


                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR SAJJAD AHMED
                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, Counsel instructed by BAssured Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the  decision  of
       First-tier Tribunal Hindson to allow the appeal of  Mr  Sajjad  Ahmed
       against refusal of his application for a European Economic  Community
       Residence Card in recognition of his status as  the  extended  family
       member of a citizen of the  European  Union  who  is  exercising  his
       Community Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.

    2. For ease of reference, I shall hereafter  refer  to  the  parties  in
       accordance with their status in the First-tier Tribunal: that  is  to
       say, I shall refer  to  Mr  Ahmed  as  "the  appellant"  and  to  the
       Secretary of State as "the respondent".

    3. It was not disputed in the First-tier Tribunal that  the  appellant's
       sponsor (his cousin, Mr Kashif Baig Mirza) was an EEA citizen who was
       exercising his Community Treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
       sole issue in the appeal was whether the appellant had proved,  on  a
       balance of probabilities, that he had been financially dependent upon
       his cousin whilst residing  in  Pakistan  immediately  prior  to  his
       arrival in the United Kingdom. This was a purely factual question. If
       it was resolved in the appellant's favour, then he  qualified  as  an
       'extended family member' within the scope  of  Regulation  8  of  the
       Immigration (European Economic Community) Regulations 2006. If it was
       resolved against him, then he would not be eligible to be  considered
       for an EEA Residence Card.

    4. The respondent's second ground of appeal is that even  if  the  judge
       had adequately explained why he resolved this factual  issue  in  the
       appellant's favour (the issue at the heart of the  first  ground)  he
       was nevertheless wrong to allow the appeal outright. Mr  Hussain  did
       not contest the merits of this ground. He was right  not  to  do  so.
       This is because, although 'family membership' entitles  an  applicant
       to an EU Residence Card, the granting of such a card to an 'extended'
       family member is one that falls entirely within the discretion of the
       respondent [compare and contrast the wording of Regulation 17(1) with
       Regulation 17(4)]. It follows from this that (at most) the First-tier
       Tribunal ought only to have allowed the appeal on the limited  ground
       that the respondent's decision was "not in accordance with the  law",
       thus  affording  the  respondent  the  opportunity  to  exercise  her
       discretion as to whether this was an appropriate  case  in  which  to
       issue a Residence Card.

    5. By contrast, the first ground of appeal strikes at the very heart  of
       the basis upon which the Tribunal allowed the appeal.  If  the  judge
       was wrong to resolve the factual issue in the appellant's favour,  or
       gave inadequate reasons for doing so,  then  this  will  vitiate  the
       entirety of its decision. I therefore turn now to consider the  first
       ground of appeal.

    6. The appellant's factual case is encapsulated at paragraph 11  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal's decision:

           "While he was living in Pakistan he was financially supported by
           his cousin, who is a Dutch national, because  his  parents  were
           impoverished. His cousin has a property in  Pakistan  which  was
           rented out and the appellant received that rent. He came to  the
           UK in 2011 as a student and was  financially  supported  by  his
           cousin. During his studies he was supported by  his  cousin  but
           did not live with him because his studies were in Birmingham. He
           did however spend  the  weekends  and  holidays  with  him.  The
           appellant has lived with his cousin since 2014. The two men have
           a joint bank account. Mr Mirza pays money into the  account  the
           appellant has unfettered access to it."

    7. The reasons that the judge gave for resolving the  factual  issue  in
       favour of the appellant can be found at paragraphs 13 to  16  of  his
       decision:

           "13    Both the appellant and his cousin  gave  cogent  evidence
           that  remained  consistent  throughout,  including   in   cross-
           examination. I found the appellant's account  to  be  inherently
           plausible.

       14. The appellant applied to extend his student visa  in  2013.  His
           application was refused on 21/10/2013 because his  bank  balance
           fell below the required amount during the  28  day  period.  His
           appeal against that refusal was dismissed by Judge Kelly for the
           same reason. Mr Mirza  provided  a  witness  statement  in  that
           appeal in which he asserted  that  his  is  providing  financial
           support for the appellant. A copy of their  joint  bank  account
           statement was alos provided, this covered the  month  of  August
           2012. I am satisfied therefore that the two men  have  had  this
           joint banking arrangement since at least then.

       15. Further documents provided by the appellant are his mobile phone
           bill and a letter from his cousin's landlord which provide  some
           limited corroboration of his account.

       16. Taking all of the evidence together, I  am  satisfied  that  the
           appellant has given a truthful account. I  accept  that  he  was
           dependent on his cousin while still living in Pakistan and  that
           has remained the  case  whiles  he  has  been  in  the  UK.  The
           appellant is  now  living  with  his  cousin  and  his  cousin's
           family."

    8. The respondent's first ground of appeal refers to the reason that she
       gave for refusing the appellant's application in  a  letter  that  is
       addressed to the appellant and which is dated the 1st November  2014;
       namely, that the appellant had failed to provide any evidence of  his
       dependency upon his cousin in either Pakistan or the UK.  The  kernel
       of the related argument is in the last sentence of paragraph 5 of the
       grounds. This concludes by stating  that,  "...  the  Judge  has  not
       sufficiently  explained  why,  in  the  absence  of  any  documentary
       evidence, he finds the appellant was dependent on the  sponsor  prior
       to arrival in the UK".  It  is  further  argued  that  "there  is  no
       breakdown explaining how, if any money was provided, it was  utilised
       by the appellant to meet his essential needs".

    9. Judge Landes granted permission to argue both grounds of appeal.

   10. The first limb of the first ground of appeal (that the  judge  failed
       to explain how he was able to find in the appellant'  favour  without
       documentary evidence) depends for  its  validity  upon  the  relevant
       evidence having been  readily  accessible  and  the  appellant  being
       expected to explain its absence. Judge Landes rightly  observed  that
       there is no legal  requirement  for  documentary  corroboration.  She
       however considered it was arguable that documentary evidence of  land
       ownership and/or rental receipts would  ("on  the  face  of  it")  be
       relatively easy to obtain, and that the reasons  for  refusal  letter
       was sufficient to place the appellant on  notice  that  he  would  be
       expected to provide such evidence on appeal or, at the very least, to
       provide an explanation for its  absence.  I  do  not  however  accept
       either premise.  This is principally because Mr Diwnycz was unable to
       satisfy me that either matter had been investigated during the course
       of cross-examination of the  appellant  or  of  his  sponsor.  In  my
       judgement, the Tribunal was only required to deal with the absence of
       documentary evidence if the appellant had been asked about the matter
       in cross-examination and had been unable to  provide  a  satisfactory
       explanation for it. Moreover, I do not accept that  the  reasons  for
       refusal letter sufficed to create the expectation that the  appellant
       would produce such documents on appeal. That letter  merely  referred
       to the absence of any evidence to support  the  contention  that  the
       appellant had  been  dependent  upon  his  cousin  when  residing  in
       Pakistan. It  thus  entirely  left  open  the  possibility  that  the
       evidential defiency in his application might be cured  on  appeal  by
       him giving oral testimony; oral testimony that would, of  course,  be
       subject to cross-examination. Therefore,  whilst  the  appellant  may
       have been well advised to provide documentary proof on appeal (if  it
       was indeed available), he could not in  my  view  be  criticised  for
       failing to do so in the absence an express caution  that  failure  to
       provide documentary corroboration of his oral testimony may harm  the
       prospects for his appeal  being  successful.  In  the  absence  of  a
       caution in such terms or of the matter being investigated  in  cross-
       examination, the judge could only have speculated  upon  the  reasons
       for the absence of documentary  evidence.  Moreover,  he  would  have
       risked being criticised for arbitrarily imposing  a  requirement  for
       documentary corroboration of oral testimony given  by  the  appellant
       and his witness.

   11. The other limb of the first ground of appeal is that the judge failed
       to provide a breakdown of the appellant's dependency upon his  cousin
       whilst the former was still residing in Pakistan. This, it is argued,
       was necessary in order to demonstrate that the dependency was one  of
       necessity rather than choice. However, as is clear from paragraph  11
       of the decision in particular, it had been the appellant's case  that
       he was wholly financially dependent upon his cousin. It is also clear
       that the judge had accepted that case. In those circumstances, it was
       quite unnecessary for the judge to make specific findings about  such
       matters as (to quote Judge Landes)  "the  level  of  the  appellant's
       needs, what if any needs were  met  by  his  parents,  the  level  of
       support from his cousin, or the amount  that  the  support  from  the
       sponsor was used to meet the appellant's essential needs". The  judge
       in effect found  that  the  sponsor  had  met  both  the  appellant's
       essential needs and any costs and liabilities that arose in excess of
       those needs.

   12. I therefore reject the basis of  the  respondent's  first  ground  of
       appeal in its entirety. I do however note that the  appellant's  Rule
       24 Notice does not address the respondent's second ground of  appeal.
       This is no doubt because it is unanswerable. This appeal is therefore
       allowed only and to the extent that the Tribunal  erred  in  allowing
       the appeal "under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations",  and  ought
       instead to have allowed  it  on  the  ground  that  the  respondent's
       decision was 'not in accordance with the law'.

  Notice of Decision

   13. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed. The decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal "under the Immigration  (EEA)
       Regulations" is set aside and is substituted by a decision  to  allow
       the appeal on the ground that the Secretary of  State's  decision  is
       not in accordance with the law.

  Anonymity is not directed



Signed   Date

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

