
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2015                  |On 3 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                   YAO YU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Haywood, Counsel instructed by Stephen and
Richard Sols.
For the Respondent:    Mr B. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant entered the UK on 10 May 2008 with entry clearance as  a
    student that was valid until 28 February 2009. On 02 February  2009  he
    applied for further leave to remain as a student. The respondent states
    that the application was refused on 16 August 2010 with a full right of
    appeal. The appellant asserts that he didn't receive the decision. As a
    result no appeal was lodged. He was served with notices  informing  him
    of his liability to removal on  31  May  2012.  On  06  July  2012  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds.   On  08
    August 2013 the respondent refused the application  with  no  right  of
    appeal because the appellant was deemed to have had no leave.

2.     The  appellant  sought  to  challenge  the  decision  by  way  of  an
    application for judicial review filed on 08 November 2013. The  grounds
    of challenge argued that the decision to deny him an  in-country  right
    of appeal was unlawful because his application  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a student  was  outstanding.  Permission  to  bring  judicial
    review proceedings was granted on 22 May 2014 in the following terms:

         "The Claimant says, and in  her  Acknowledgement  of  Service,  the
         Defendant does not deny, that he made an in  time  application  for
         extension of leave in 2009. The letter copied at  pages  148a-b  of
         his bundle provides some  support  for  that  assertion.  The  most
         recent letter of refusal does not record either that application or
         its refusal: see the penultimate paragraph on page 2 of the  letter
         of 08 August 2013. If the Claimant is right (and I repeat that  the
         Defendant does not say that he is wrong) it looks  as  thought  his
         most recent application ought to have been treated as  a  variation
         of this 2009 application, and its refusal would  have  carried  the
         right of appeal. In the circumstances his claim is arguable."

3.    The claim was settled by way of a Consent Order dated 11 July 2014  in
    which the respondent agreed to reconsider the application, and if leave
    was not granted, undertook to grant an in-country right of appeal.  The
    respondent reconsidered the application but refused leave to remain  on
    human rights grounds in a further decision dated 06 November 2014.  The
    respondent continued to treat the appellant as an overstayer and issued
    a notice of immigration decision notifying  him  of  his  liability  to
    removal under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  ("the
    IA 1999").

4.    First-tier Tribunal Judge North ("the judge") dismissed his appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 05  March  2014.  The  judge  considered  the
    medical records and other evidence relating to the  appellant's  mother
    (who is now a British citizen) in some  detail  [12-14].  He  concluded
    that the evidence didn't show that his mother was physically  dependent
    on him and that there was  nothing  associated  with  her  health  that
    required the appellant to remain with her in the UK [15].  He  went  on
    to consider whether the appellant's mother would  face  any  particular
    difficulties if she chose to return to China with the appellant and his
    wife but concluded that she lived there with him before coming  to  the
    UK without any significant difficulties. The judge was  satisfied  that
    if she remained in the UK they would be able to keep in contact through
    visits, telephone calls and other means of communication and that there
    were no unusual elements  of  dependency  that  required  consideration
    [16].

5.    The judge went on to make findings relating to the  immigration  rules
    and concluded that the appellant did not meet  any  of  the  family  or
    private life requirements contained in Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE
    [18-19]. He then turned to consider whether there were  any  compelling
    or exceptional circumstances to  show  that  removal  would  breach  of
    Article 8 outside the immigration rules. He considered the  letters  of
    support from friends in the UK but considered that they could  keep  in
    contact from abroad. He noted that the appellant had studied in the  UK
    and could return to China with additional skills.  He  considered  that
    there would be no significant consequences for the appellant on return.
    The judge went on to consider public  interest  issues  and  noted  the
    normal practice of removing "those who have  remained  unlawfully".  He
    concluded that removal would proportionate to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    maintaining an effective system of immigration control [19].

6.    In considering whether there were any  exceptional  circumstances  the
    judge noted that the appellant did not have a criminal record in the UK
    but went on to say:

         "I find however, that he has shown a disregard for the  immigration
         regulations having remained in the UK  after  his  application  for
         further leave was refused on 16/08/2010. The appellant asserts that
         he has been waiting for that decision; however, he  has  not  shown
         that he or anyone on his behalf made enquiries as to  the  progress
         of that application or that there are any circumstances for example
         change of address or course provided, which  might  have  prevented
         the respondent's decision reaching him. On balance, I  find  he  at
         least acquiesced in the non-arrival of  the  decision  notice.  The
         appellant has not shown that there were  any  circumstances  beyond
         his control that prevented him from returning to China. I  conclude
         therefore that his length of residence is not a  factor  in  itself
         which requires that he be allowed leave to remain under  the  rules
         or on a discretionary basis."

7.    The appellant seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal  decision  on
    the following grounds:

    (i)    The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his assessment of Article
         8 outside the immigration rules and failed to  conduct  a  step  by
         step assessment in accordance with the principles outlined in  R  v
         SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58. In particular, the First-tier
         Tribunal failed to make  findings  as  to  whether  there  was  the
         requisite level of dependency to establish  family  life  with  his
         mother.

    (ii)   The First-tier Tribunal erred in failing to consider the  public
         interest factors outlined  in  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the NIAA 2002").

    (iii)  The First-tier Tribunal failed to make adequate findings  as  to
         whether the appellant was an overstayer, which was material to  the
         issue of whether the immigration decision was  in  accordance  with
         the law.

Decision and reasons

8.    After having considered the grounds of appeal and oral arguments I  am
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

9.    I set out the history of  the  case  in  some  detail  because  it  is
    apparent from the chronology why the appellant's assertion that he  did
    not receive a decision refusing leave to remain as a student in 2010 is
    significant to the lawfulness of the decision currently under appeal.

10.   The  appellant  produced  evidence  to  show  acknowledgement  of  the
    application he made for leave to remain  as  a  student  in  2009.  The
    chronology supports his assertion that  he  was  still  waiting  for  a
    decision from the respondent because it is apparent that he  only  made
    the application for leave to remain on  human  rights  grounds  shortly
    after he was served with notice of  his  liability  to  removal  as  an
    overstayer in 2012 i.e. at that point he  understood  the  respondent's
    position was that a decision had been made in relation to  the  student
    application. It is difficult to see how the appellant could produce any
    other evidence to prove a negative.

11.   The respondent initially refused the human rights application  without
    a right of appeal because it was understood that he was an  overstayer.
    However, it must have been quite clear by  the  time  of  the  judicial
    review proceedings that the appellant asserted that he  never  received
    the refusal of leave to remain as a student. This formed the  heart  of
    the argument as to why he should have been granted an in-country  right
    of appeal. The respondent settled the proceedings by consent and issued
    a further  decision  refusing  the  human  rights  application,  again,
    treating the appellant as an overstayer.  The  appellant's  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal made quite clear that he continued to
    dispute that he was an overstayer and that as a consequence the section
    10 IA 1999 removal decision was not in accordance with the law.

12.   Despite being on notice both in the judicial  review  proceedings  and
    First-tier Tribunal appeal that  the  lawfulness  of  the  decision  to
    remove the appellant under section 10 was in issue it appears that  the
    respondent has at no  point  produced  any  evidence  to  show  that  a
    decision to refuse leave to remain as a student was made  in  2010  and
    properly  served  in  accordance   with   The   Immigration   (Notices)
    Regulations 2003 (as amended). Even if the appellant had moved  address
    the regulations make provision for service to the last known address or
    deemed service if an address is not known. The respondent asserts  that
    a decision to refuse leave to remain as a student was made on 16 August
    2010 but has failed to discharge the evidential burden of proof to show
    that it was properly served.

13.   The First-tier Tribunal proceeded  to  determine  the  appeal  without
    making any clear finding as to whether the appellant's evidence on this
    point was accepted or not. The judge proceeded to make his findings  on
    the assumption that the appellant was an overstayer although it appears
    from the judge's comments in paragraph 20 (see paragraph 6 above)  that
    he accepted the  appellant's  assertion  that  he  didn't  receive  the
    decision. The judge's failure to make a clear finding in relation to  a
    material fact  that  went  to  the  heart  of  the  lawfulness  of  the
    immigration decision is capable of amounting to an error of law.

14.   The other two grounds of appeal are  less  persuasive  because  it  is
    apparent from the judge's findings that he took into account the nature
    of the appellant's relationship with his mother and whether there  were
    any unusual elements of dependency. While the five  step  approach  set
    out in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58 was not set  out  in  a
    formal or structured  way  the  wording  of  paragraphs  19-20  of  the
    decision shows that all the relevant elements were considered including
    the strength of the appellant's ties to the UK,  length  of  residence,
    familial relationships  and  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  an
    effective system of immigration  control.  Although  he  did  not  make
    specific reference to the public interest factors outlined  in  section
    117B NIAA 2002 he considered most of the relevant issues. While  it  is
    arguable there were other issues that the judge  specifically  did  not
    consider such as English language, financial self-sufficiency  and  the
    precarious nature of his immigration status,  I  find  that  that  this
    failure does not, in itself, amount to a material error.  The  Tribunal
    in AM (Malawi) v SSHD [2015] UKUT 0260  made  clear  that  no  positive
    benefit is likely to  accrue  from  the  factors  outlined  in  section
    117B(2) (English language) and 117B(3) (financial self-sufficiency).

15.   However, it is clear that the  initial  error  regarding  the  judge's
    failure to make clear findings as  to  whether  the  appellant  was  an
    overstayer infected his overall assessment of  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules. He made quite clear reference to the public interest
    in removing those who have remained "unlawfully" and of  the  appellant
    having "shown a disregard for the immigration regulations" after having
    remain in the UK after the application for leave to remain as a student
    was refused. This is  likely  to  have  coloured  the  judge's  overall
    assessment of the proportionality of removal. As such the  first  error
    undermined the sustainability of his other findings.

16.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law and I set aside the decision.

17.   After further  discussion  at  the  hearing  it  was  agreed  that  in
    remaking the decision the  consequence  of  my  finding  was  that  the
    respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law. There  is  no
    evidence to  show  that  the  respondent  properly  served  a  decision
    refusing leave to remain as a student  in  2010  thereby  demonstrating
    that the appellant  was  an  overstayer  and  the  section  10  removal
    decision was lawful.  The effect of this finding is that the appeal  is
    allowed to the limited extent that the human rights application remains
    outstanding before the Secretary of State.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal to the limited extent  that  the
respondent's decision is not in accordance with the law


Signed      [pic]      Date 26 November 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
