

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47509/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |   Determination issued      |
|on 16 June 2015                               |    on 23 June 2015          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               MUHAMMED IRFAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr C H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Handley, promulgated on 11  March  2015,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against refusal of a residence card  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The determination contains what are on the face of it sound reasons for
    rejecting the evidence from the appellant and  the  sponsor,  based  on
    significant discrepancies arising from their interview.  Perusal of the
    interview  record  discloses  discrepancies  going  even  beyond  those
    founded upon in the refusal letter and in the determination.

 3. The grounds of appeal take issue with points  which  are  made  in  the
    determination, some of which plainly  have  more  weight  than  others.
    They also take issue with the Judge's failure to consider evidence that
    the appellant and sponsor had been cohabiting since November 2013 in  a
    household which included their daughter born on 12 August 2014, as well
    as the sponsor's older child.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  Judge  arguably
    failed to take into account that other evidence.  A  Rule  24  response
    says  that  there  was  no  error,  based  on  paragraph  30   of   the
    determination where the Judge says "having carefully considered all the
    evidence before me I conclude that the marriage is not a genuine  one".
    However, Mr Matthews conceded that the phrase at paragraph  30  is  the
    only  reference  to  the  other  evidence,  and  that  it  is  of  such
    significance and extent that failure to  consider  it  was  a  material
    error.

 5. The respondent made no concession on the eventual merits of the case.

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  None of its
    findings are to stand.  Under section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007  Act  and
    Practice Statement 7.2 the nature and extent of  judicial  fact-finding
    necessary for the decision to be remade is such that it is  appropriate
    to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.   The  member(s)  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the case are  not  to  include
    Judge Handley.


            [pic]


            18 June 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




