
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47666/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |On 23 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   between

                           CHINEDU KEVIN UDEBUALA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nwaekwu of Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria and he was born on 9 June 1985.

 2. The appeal is against the decision promulgated on 29  January  2014  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet which dismissed the appeal against  the
    respondent's decision of 29 October 2013 to refuse to issue a residence
    card as confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom (UK) as
    the spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.

 3. Judge Sweet found that the appellant had entered  into  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

 4. The grounds can be summarised thus:

          a. Procedural unfairness arose where the allegation of a  marriage
             of convenience was made only in the  submissions  of  the  Home
             Office Presenting Officer (HOPO)

          b. The First-tier Tribunal  judge did not apply the correct  legal
             tests from Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of  convenience)
             Greece [2012] UKUT  00038(IAC)  for  assessing  a  marriage  of
             convenience

 5. The appellant is correct to indicate that the first formal notice  that
    the respondent's position was that the marriage was one of  convenience
    came in the oral submission of the HOPO; see [33] of the determination.



 6. In our view that does not give rise to procedural unfairness,  however.
    Where a new issue arises at a hearing, from the evidence given  or  for
    other reasons, it is open to both sides to seek  to  reformulate  their
    case. If that occurs, the other party can object or ask for time  or  a
    longer adjournment to deal with the new  point.   Mr  Nwaekwu  conceded
    that here there was no application for an adjournment or any  objection
    to the submission made by the  HOPO.  On  the  contrary,  [35]  of  the
    determination shows that counsel for the appellant took the  point  and
    made submissions on it. Both parties addressed the judge on  whether  a
    marriage of convenience had taken place and it was manifestly  open  to
    him to proceed to determine the issue.

 7. Mr Nwaekwu's reliance on RM (Kwok On Tong: HC395 para 320) India [2006]
    UKAIT 00039 to support his arguments on procedural unfairness  appeared
    to us to be misconceived given that it confirms that an "appeal is  not
    limited to the issues raised in the Notice of Refusal" and reflects our
    thinking above regarding the potential for  an  adjournment  if  a  new
    issues arises at a hearing.

 8.  As regards the second ground, the appellant is also correct  to  point
    out that the First-tier Tribunal did not set out in terms that part  of
    the ratio of Papajorgji relating to the burden of proof in cases  where
    the question of a marriage of convenience arises. At [14] of Papajorgji
    the Tribunal expressed it thus:

        "Not every applicant needs to prove that his marriage is not one of
        convenience. The need to do so only arises where there are  factors
        which support suspicions for  believing  the  marriage  is  one  of
        convenience. Translated into the technical language of the  English
        law of  procedure  and  evidence,  that  means  that  there  is  an
        evidential burden on the respondent. If there is no  evidence  that
        could support a conclusion that the marriage is one of convenience,
        the appellant does not have to deal with the issue.  But  once  the
        issue is raised, by evidence capable of pointing  to  a  conclusion
        that the marriage is one of convenience, it is for the appellant to
        show that his marriage is not one of convenience."

 9. Mr Nwaekwu was not able to take us to any part of the consideration  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Sweet, however, that shows that  he  did  not
    have the correct framework in mind when deciding on whether a  marriage
    of convenience had taken place. Mr Nwaekwu conceded  that  the  general
    statement of the burden and standard and proof set out at [36] was  not
    objectionable. There was clearly evidence supporting  the  respondent's
    concern that a marriage of convenience had  taken  place  and,  indeed,
    paragraph 21 of the grounds goes as far  as  to  concede  that  another
    judge could have reached the same decision on the evidence. We did  not
    find that a material error had been identified.

Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.


Signed:  [pic]                               Date: 15 May 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt








