
 [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  IA/47270/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard Field House, London                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 9 October  2014                            |On 30 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

               The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey &
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins


                                   Between

                   Mr ahmed el dessouk abd rabbou ibrahim
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:    Mr A Berry (of Counsel), instructed by David Tang and Co
Respondent:   Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

   1.     The appeal to this Tribunal has its origins in the  decision  made
      by the Secretary of State on 26 November 2013, whereby the Appellant's
      application for a derivative residence card was refused.

   2.     In the grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  (hereinafter
      the "FtT") it was contented, inter alia, that  the  impugned  decision
      infringed the Appellant's rights under Article 8 of the  Human  Rights
      Convention.  The appeal was refused. In the application for permission
      to appeal the grounds focussed particularly on  regulation  15A(7)  of
      the EEA Regulation 2006 which,  we  emphasise'  prescribes  two  quite
      separate bases whereby a person can qualify for the status of  primary
      carer   The central issue upon the hearing of the  appeal  before  the
      FtT  was  whether,  within  the  meaning  of  regulation  15A(7),  the
      Appellant was a primary carer.

   3.     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  because,  according  to  the
      permission  Judge,  there  were   contradictory   findings   regarding
      regulation 15(7).  The Judge  noted  that  in  paragraph  10  the  FtT
      concluded that care for the British citizen child was very much shared
      between the Appellant and the British citizen mother of the child, but
      then proceeded to find the appeal could not succeed as  the  Appellant
      was not the primary carer. The permission Judge suggested this defeats
      the provisions in Regulation 15(7)(b)(ii).

   4.     The substance of the first ground of appeal to  this  Tribunal  is
      that the Judge erred in law in failing to give  effect  to  the  tests
      enshrined in regulation 15A(7),  specifically and particularly that in
      sub-paragraph (i):  this follows from Mr Berry's correct acceptance of
      the suggestion on the part of this Tribunal that the  case  was  being
      advanced under that limb of the Regulation and not  under  the  second
      limb, namely the shared responsibility provision.

   5.   Our resolution of the first ground of appeal  places  the  spotlight
      firmly on paragraph 10 of the FtT determination.  We note that  herein
      there is a series of specific findings of fact.  We commend the  Judge
      for articulating with such clarity  the  material  findings.   We  are
      conscious also that there appears to have  been  very  little  dispute
      about the  basic  facts.    We  conclude  that  paragraph  10  of  the
      determination, which is the key passage, suffers  from  the  following
      legal defect.  It was, in our judgment , incumbent upon the  Judge  to
      rehearse the not less than challenging test  enshrined  in  regulation
      15(7A)  of  the  Regulations,  to  display  an  alertness  to  and  to
      demonstrate an unawareness of the distinction  between  sub-paragraphs
      (i) and (ii)  and, having done so, to apply the governing test to  the
      findings made. That exercise was not carried out and we conclude  that
      this constitutes an error of law.

   6.   We accept that there is some scope for the argument where  an  error
      of this kind is found it made no difference to the outcome because the
      latter is, in a sense free standing and, hence,  sustainable  in  law.
      That is the essence of the  argument  articulated  on  behalf  of  the
      Secretary of State by Mr Jarvis.  We have reservations about  acceding
      to this argument because of the very precise and  intricate  terms  in
      which the regulation 15A(7) regime is formulated.  It raises questions
      which, for Judges, are, as we have said, not less than challenging  in
      every case without exception.  We are not satisfied that this  was  an
      error of law of no moment. We consider that its avoidance  could  have
      produced a different outcome. Accordingly  we  conclude  that  it  was
      material.

   7.      The  second   ground  of  appeal  resolves   to   the   following
      proposition:   did   the   Judge,   in   effect,   abdicate   judicial
      responsibility for determining the specific ground of  appeal  to  the
      FtT which complained that the Secretary of State's decision  infringed
      the Appellant's rights under Article 8  ECHR  ?    As  the  permission
      Judge noted, this was contrary  to  Section  86  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  We concur with this assessment.   We
      consider further that this was in contravention of the  free  standing
      obligation imposed upon the FtT by Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
      1998.  In short, a public authority, a term which  includes  a  court,
      must not act incompatibly with a Convention right,.  In our  judgment,
      , the incompatible act which occurred here was an outright refusal  to
      consider the case that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was  in
      contravention of a protected Convention right, namely Article 8.   The
      materiality of that error has not been contested, properly so.

   8.     For these two reasons we conclude that the decision of the FtT  is
      unsustainable in law and must be set aside.  Given the nature  of  the
      errors of law found, we order remittal to  a  differently  constituted
      FtT.









                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Date:   23 October 2014
