
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47206/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Faizan Usman Kazi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Rothwell, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
Greenwood


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant is a national of  India  born  on  18  October  1986.   He
    appealed against a decision by the Respondent dated  10  November  2014
    refusing his application made on 4 April 2012 for leave to remain as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant and to remove him by way of directions
    under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act  2008.
    He lodged an appeal on 21 November 2014  and  his  appeal  came  before
    Judge Steer of the First-tier Tribunal for hearing on 5 June 2013.

 2. Following a concession by the claimant's representative  at  that  time
    which was that his claim was on all fours with  that  in  the  case  of
    Nasim (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013] UKUT  00610  (IAC)  it  was
    conceded that he  could  not  succeed  under  paragraph  245FD  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Instead the claimant pursued  a  claim  based  upon
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights and this  was  due
    to the fact that he had been living with his partner since  2009.   His
    partner was also a national of India but  has  been  granted  leave  to
    remain until 2018 as a student.

 3. The judge heard evidence from the claimant and also  from  his  partner
    and she concluded that they were  living  together  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship since 2009; that they were  credible  and  that
    the Appellant otherwise met the requirements for leave to remain  as  a
    partner under the family life  provisions  in  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Therefore, she allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on  3  July
    2015.

 4. On 8 July 2015, the Respondent sought permission to appeal  in-time  to
    the Upper  Tribunal.   The  grounds  in  support  of  that  application
    submitted that Judge Steer had made a material misdirection of  law  in
    that she had allowed the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  claimant's
    relationship satisfied the requirements of LTR-P.1.1, i.e. cohabitation
    for two  years  prior  to  the  application.   However,  this  did  not
    establish that the other  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  had  been  met,
    including  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE,  nor  had  it   been
    established  that  the  financial  requirements  were  satisfied   with
    specified evidence or why paragraph EX.1 was decided in his favour.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 7 October 2015 on the basis that it is arguable  that  the
    judge has misdirected herself in allowing the appeal under Appendix  FM
    LTR-P.1.1 on the basis of the claimant's two year relationship with his
    partner, without considering  the  financial  requirements  or  in  the
    alternative why paragraph EX.1 falls in his favour.

 6. At the hearing before me the claimant was represented by  Ms  Rothwell,
    who very fairly conceded at the outset that there had been  a  material
    error of law.  Although she had not had sight of the grounds of  appeal
    she pointed out that in any event the claimant could not qualify  as  a
    partner under the Immigration Rules as his partner upon whom  his  case
    rests is not settled.  At the current time she has Tier 4 leave.

 7. She further stated that there were other  errors  in  that  whilst  the
    judge had referred to the claimant  and  his  partner  being  different
    castes, in fact it was more complex than that in that the claimant is a
    Muslim youngest son and his partner is a Sikh, and the judge failed  to
    make any findings upon this material issue.

 8. It was agreed by both parties that due to the fact that the errors were
    fundamental to the decision  of  Judge  Steer  that  essentially  there
    needed to be a de novo hearing.  The  only  findings  I  consider  that
    could be preserved from that decision are at [35] and that is that  the
    claimant and his partner are credible and that they  have  been  living
    together in a genuine and subsisting relationship since 2009.



Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Respondent is allowed and is remitted back to  the  First-
tier Tribunal for a further  hearing,  with  the  finding  at  [35]  of  the
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Steer set out at [8] above  preserved.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 7 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

