
ST
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47139/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15th October 2014              |On 28 November 2014               |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                                   HARRIES


                                   Between

                                     A R
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr C Yeo, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Details of the Appellant and Proceedings


 1. The appellant was born on 12th October 1968 and is a citizen of Canada.
     He entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on 3rd May 2012 with  leave
    until 3rd November 2012. On 20th June 2012 he married the sponsor,  Mrs
    A, a British citizen, born on 17th February 1971. On 16th October  2012
    the appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside
    the Immigration Rules on the basis of his private and family life under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The respondent refused the application on  24th
    October 2013 under Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration
    Rules. She found no exceptional circumstances to engage Article  8  and
    considered the matter no further.   A  further  decision  was  made  to
    remove the appellant from the United Kingdom by way of directions under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The  appellant  appealed  against  these  decisions  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Troup (the Judge) at a hearing in  Newport  on  6th  May
    2014.  In a determination promulgated on 12th May 2014 he dismissed the
    appeal under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.  The  appellant  was  ultimately
    granted permission in the Upper Tribunal on 2nd August 2014  to  appeal
    against the Judge's decision. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chalkley  for  the
    following reasons:

         Having found compelling circumstances to engage Article 8 (but  not
         having identified them (do they include the matters referred to  in
         paragraph 34, for example?)), the Judge appears not to have applied
         Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL27 and does  not  say  what  he  finds  in
         relation  to  his  consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
         children.


 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley directed that, subject to any submissions
    from the parties within the following 14 days, he proposed to find that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  materially  err  in  law  in  his
    determination and to set aside the determination without preserving any
    findings and to list the appeal for hearing before himself  without  an
    oral hearing.  Given that the evidence heard by the First-tier tribunal
    is recorded in the determination,  he  did  not  propose  to  hear  any
    further evidence.

 4. In a written response, dated 13th August 2014, under  Rule  24  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 the respondent indicated
    opposition to the appeal and requested  an  oral  hearing.  The  matter
    accordingly came before me for an initial hearing to determine  whether
    the making of the decision in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

Background Facts and Evidence

 5. The Judge set out a full record of the background facts in  the  matter
    before him as follows, referring  to  the  appellant  as  "H"  and  the
    sponsor, his wife, as "W".   The Appellant Husband ("H"), a citizen  of
    Canada, is 45 years old. H is married to his Sponsor Wife ("W") Mrs  A,
    a British citizen born on 17 February 1971. H and W  live  together  in
    Newport. W has two children by her first marriage, namely, Miss I R who
    was born on 29 July 1994 in Islamabad; T R who was born on 19  November
    1997 in Lahore. H & W have between them  two  children  of  their  own,
    namely, R R born in Newport on 20 June 2007 and E R born in Newport  on
    6 April 2010. All four children are British citizens.

 6. The relevant chronology is therefore as follows:

           . 29th July 1994, I R born in Pakistan
           . 19th November 1997, T R born in Pakistan
           . June 2005, the sponsor arrived in the UK with her 2 children
             and was granted asylum
           . September 2005, the relationship between the appellant and
             sponsor began
           . 16th September 2006, the parties entered an Islamic marriage
           . 20th  June 2007,  R R born
           . 6th  April 2010,  E R born
           . 2012, the sponsor became naturalised as a British citizen
           . 3rd  May 2012 H arrived in the UK as a visitor
           . 20th  June 2012 Civil marriage
           . 16th  October 2012, appellant makes application
           . 24th  October 2013, the respondent refuses the application


 7. The appellant, the sponsor and the two older children gave oral
    evidence before the  Judge which he sets out as follows in his
    determination:

         The Evidence of the Appellant ("H")


         9.    H  produced  his  Witness  Statement  at  pages  1-5  of  the
             Appellant's Bundle of 826 pages.


         10.  He said that he had known W since 1986  when  they  were  both
             living in Pakistan.


             He migrated to Canada in 1995 and became  a  citizen  of  that
             country in 2001.


             He has been visiting W in the UK since September  2005  on  an
             annual basis.


             It was not possible for W and the  children  to  join  him  in
             Canada whilst she was a refugee and, conversely, she could not
             sponsor his entry to  the  UK  whilst  she  had  that  status.
             However, his intention has always  been  to  join  W  and  the
             children in the UK.


             W was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK in 2011 and
             British citizenship in 2012.


         11.  H is very close to all four children.  He has an  active  role
             in their  upbringing  and  they  rely  on  him  for  emotional
             support. The children are well settled here.  English is their
             first language.  T R and R R attend school and H has  attended
             parents' meetings  at  the  schools  whenever  he  is  in  the
             country.


             Relocation to Canada would be very disruptive to the lives  of
             all members of the family.


             I R is in the second year of a law degree at the University of
             Coventry in London.


             The stepchildren regard H as their own father.


             H has not claimed state benefits at any  time  and  wants  the
             opportunity to provide for his family.  He  has  an  offer  of
             employment from M and R Parts Limited of Rainham, Essex and he
             produced a confirmatory letter from that company dated 6 March
             2014 (page 703 of the Bundle).


         12.   In  cross  examination  H  said  that  he  had  not  made  an
             application for entry clearance to the UK whilst in Canada  as
             the process would take too long.  He conceded that he had made
             no enquiries about  the  actual  length  of  the  process  but
             accepted Ms Jones' assertion that it would take no  more  than
             40 days.  He said that in any event an application  for  entry
             clearance as a spouse would fail  as  W  could  not  meet  the
             financial requirements of the Rules.


         13.   In  Canada  since  2000  he  has  worked   variously   as   a
             warehouseman, taxi driver, taxi dispatcher, and driver and  in
             the last four months before leaving the country as  a  kitchen
             hand in a restaurant.  He has never sent money to W  but  said
             that he has savings of  about  �700.   He  is  living  on  his
             savings and financial contributions from his  brother,  as  to
             which he produced his brother's "financial documents" at pages
             735-750 of the bundle,  including  a  bank  statement  with  a
             closing balance on 7 March 2014 of E20,450.99


         14.  H has no property or accommodation in Canada  and  had  always
             rented when there.  He said it would be possible to  obtain  a
             job in Canada to support W and the children but his concern is
             what is to become of the stepchildren.


         15.  On arrival in May 2012 it  was  H's  intention  to  marry  and
             settle here.  W had been in receipt of benefits but is now  in
             receipt of Job Seeker's  Allowance  and  is  undertaking  some
             voluntary work at a school.


         16.  The job offer that has been made to him (page 703) comes  from
             Mr A R, a Director of the company.  He is W's cousin.  The job
             involves answering the telephone and  dispatching  orders;  he
             would be paid the minimum wage.


         The Evidence of Aisha Ashi ("W")


         17.  W produced her Witness Statement at pages 6-9 of  the  Bundle.
             She recited her immigration history, H's arrival here and  the
             marriage.


         18.  The Respondent's Decision means that W would  have  to  go  to
             Canada to remain with H.  It would  upset  the  lives  of  the
             children considerably.  They are British citizens and this  is
             their permanent home.  The two younger children were born here
             and have not lived anywhere else.


             The two elder children are dependent upon W for emotional  and
             physical support.  H is a guiding  figure  in  the  children's
             lives.


         19.  W is gaining work experience as a  teaching  assistant  at  an
             infant school  in  Newport  and  voluntary  work  at  a  local
             charity.  As the children grow older, she hopes to  engage  in
             fulltime paid work.


         20.  In cross examination W said that the marriage had been planned
             before H's arrival here.  It was agreed between her and H that
             he would come to the UK, they would marry and  he  would  stay
             permanently.


         21.  W is in receipt of Job Seeker's Allowance, Child  and  Housing
             Benefit and Child Tax Credits.


         22.  H has visited every year since 2005.   In  his  absence,  they
             keep in touch by telephone, Skype and FaceTime.


              As W does not work, she is unable to sponsor H as she does not
             meet the financial requirements of the Rules.


         23.  W was asked if H had to return to  Canada  whether  she  would
             join him there. She replied:-


             "Circumstances do not allow for me to go".


             The two younger children were born here.   Removal  to  Canada
             would disturb their lives.  I R is at university and  T  R  is
             taking GCSEs this year.


         24.  The children are  used  to  having  H  with  them.   They  are
             disturbed by the thought of  him  returning  to  Canada.   His
             removal would disturb them emotionally.  They would  miss  him
             and his absence would affect their education.


             W said that she has registered with two agencies in  her  hunt
             for work.


         The Evidence of T R


         25.  T R produced his Witness Statement at pages 10-11.  He  is  16
             years old. He first met H, his stepfather,  in  2005.   He  is
             distraught at the thought of W having to leave for  Canada  to
             be with H for even  a  short  period  of  time.   He  is  very
             attached to W and is not independent in any way.  H is  a  key
             figure in his life.


             He would be distraught by H's removal.  He needs his  guidance
             and "If he goes, mum has to go with him, which would affect my
             education.  It would destroy our relationship".


         26.  He said that there is no contact with  his  biological  father
             who is in Pakistan.


             T R is taking GCSEs this year and wants to undertake A  levels
             and wishes to attend university.


             His preference is to remain here but if H and W were to go  to
             Canada, he would join  them  albeit  reluctantly.   Moving  to
             Canada would mean starting a new life.  There would  be  delay
             in his education.  It is better for the family  to  remain  in
             the UK where they are all settled.


             T R was born in Pakistan and came to the UK when he was seven.
              He is settled at school where he has friends.


         The Evidence of I R


         27.  I R produced her Witness Statement at pages 12-13.  She is  19
             years old, was born in Pakistan and came to the UK with  W  in
             2005.  She regards H as her father, having first  met  him  in
             2005.


         28.  I R is studying for a law degree in London and plans to return
             to the family once she has  graduated.   She  has  never  been
             independent and is very dependent upon H and W.   She  returns
             home most weekends.  The family is all that she  has  and  she
             will be forever dependent on her parents.


         29.  In cross examination she said that her mother has  cousins  in
             the UK who she sees about once a year at family gatherings  in
             London.


 8. Having considered the evidence and submissions the Judge  accepted  for
    the purposes of Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules- correct approach [2013]
    UKUT 00640 (IAC) that Article 8 is engaged and that family life  exists
    between the appellant, the sponsor and all the children.  He found that
    the key issue was of  proportionality,  namely  whether  the  competing
    interests of each member of the family on the one hand is outweighed by
    the public interest in maintaining  a  fair  and  effective  system  of
    immigration control on the other.

 9. The Judge took  into  account  that  both  the  appellant  and  sponsor
    conceded in evidence that when applying for a visit visa  in  2012  the
    appellant's  intention was not to limit his stay to a few  months,  but
    to marry and to settle here permanently.  It was  therefore  a  blatant
    attempt to circumvent the Immigration Rules.  They  recognised  that  a
    settlement application as a  spouse  could  not  succeed  on  financial
    grounds and the appellant arranged travel to the UK  as  a  visitor  in
    order to make an Application under Article 8. The Judge found that  the
    appellant should not be rewarded for that.

10. The Judge directed himself that the children's interests are  indeed  a
    primary consideration  and  the  two  younger  children  were  born  in
    Newport.  He reminded himself that the older children, I R,  then  aged
    19 years, had been in the UK since she was 9 or 10; T R, then  aged  16
    years, had been in the UK since he was 5 or 6  years  old.   The  judge
    reminded himself that all the children are  British  citizens  and  the
    three minor children are at school.  The Head Teacher  of  the  primary
    school described the two younger children as polite and courteous.  The
    Judge had no doubt that all three are prospering and are well settled.

11. However, the judge went on to find that this is not a case in which  it
    is inevitable that the family unit will be divided.   The  sponsor  had
    said in evidence: circumstances did not allow her to go to  Canada  but
    she indicated that she would accompany her husband  to  Canada  if  the
    children remained with her; the witness statements  of  T  R  and  I  R
    mentioned their mother accompanying the appellant to Canada. The  Judge
    took into account T R evidence that he would  accompany  the  appellant
    and his mother to Canada, albeit reluctantly.

12. The Judge then found that, notwithstanding  the  respondent's  decision
    and the appellant's removal, the family can remain together.  He  found
    that I R is no longer a minor; she was in her second year of university
    and living in London.  She did not regard herself  as  independent  but
    the Judge found her to be so for all practical purposes.  He found that
    her relationship between I R and her parents does  not  go  beyond  the
    usual emotional ties between parents and their daughter; he  took  into
    account that Canada is a western, English-speaking country.

13.  In  paragraph  45  of  his  determination  the  Judge  recognised  the
    disruption involved were the family to migrate to  Canada  because  the
    children would leave behind familiar surroundings, friends and  school.
    He found, however, that the upheaval would not be long term;  he  found
    that the family  would  remain  together  and  would  settle  into  new
    surroundings over time. He attached considerable weight to  the  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control, the economic wellbeing  of
    the country and the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

14. The Judge returned to his finding that the  appellant  had  flouted  UK
    Immigration control and had set out on a course designed to secure  his
    residence in the UK regardless; "He has, as it were, 'jumped the queue'
    ahead of legitimate applicants.   He  has  not  demonstrated  that  his
    presence here is in the country's economic interest." In conclusion, at
    paragraph 47 of his determination, the  Judge  found  that  the  public
    interest prevailed in the light of his  finding  the  family  unit  can
    remain together in Canada.  He found the respondent's  Decision  to  be
    proportionate and he dismissed the appeal under Article 8.

Submissions and Finding on Error of law

15. The respondent's Rule 24 opposition to the appeal is on the basis  that
    the Judge is submitted to  have  directed  himself  appropriately;  the
    grounds are submitted  to  amount  to  a  mere  disagreement  with  his
    findings.  The respondent states that the Judge was  entitled  to  find
    that there  were  compelling  circumstances  to  warrant  consideration
    outside the Rules and the decision is not  flawed  by  any  failure  to
    identify these. The  Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's adverse immigration history  in  the  Article  8  balancing
    exercise; he was entitled to take the view that in the light of  Canada
    being an English speaking country it would not be disproportionate  for
    the family to relocate there.  The Judge was further entitled  to  find
    that the disturbance to family life  would  not  constitute  long  term
    upheaval.  He may not, in the  respondent's  submission,  have  applied
    Razgar, however, this is not necessarily a material error of law.

16. In his submissions to me Mr Yeo said that although the Judge had stated
    the children's best interests to be a paramount consideration,  he  had
    paid no deference to their status as British citizens  or  presence  in
    the UK for 7 years.  The public interest had  been  found  to  outweigh
    those of the children without any reference to 7 years of residence  in
    the UK. The family had not been considered as a  whole  and  the  Judge
    took no account at all of the sponsor's status as a  refugee;  she  and
    her children have suffered  trauma  in  the  past  and  no  weight  was
    attributed to this factor in expecting them all to relocate in  Canada.



17. Mr Yeo relied upon the grounds of appeal stating  that  the  Judge  has
    failed to take any account of relevant case law including  Chikwamba  v
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 40, ZH (Tanzania) -v- The Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2011] UKSC 4 and Beoku-Betts v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  39.
    The decision of the Judge runs counter to the  best  interests  of  the
    children which are clearly shown by the evidence not to  be  served  by
    going to live in Canada.

18. The Judge is submitted to have erred in the proportionality  assessment
    by misunderstanding or  ignoring  the  strong  evidence  and  important
    factors in the appellant's favour. He has failed to take account of the
    strong possibility that the appellant will  have  great  difficulty  in
    future in gaining entry to the United Kingdom as a visitor  which  will
    have a strong and negative impact upon the children. Mr Yeo  relied  on
    the grounds of appeal asserting that the basic factual evidence has not
    been taken into account, in particular, the upheaval to the sponsor and
    the children, as British citizens, having to move to Canada.

19. Mr Yeo agreed that the respondent had correctly refused the application
    under EX 1 which might otherwise apply to the appellant in the light of
    the respondent's acceptance  that  he  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with the children.  EX  1  cannot  apply  as  the
    appellant  fails  to  meet  the  necessary  additional  and   mandatory
    eligibility requirements by virtue of his status as a  visitor  in  the
    United Kingdom.  At the time of the marriage Mr Yeo submitted that  the
    Rules then in force did not permit a refugee, such as  the  sponsor  in
    this case, to sponsor a spouse. When the Rules subsequently changed  in
    2011 it would have been an astute applicant who knew that  new  spouses
    were then allowed to be sponsors.  Mr Yeo returned to the crux  of  his
    submissions, namely that the decision of the judge fails  to  recognise
    the best interests of the children  in  this  case,  all  of  whom  are
    British citizens.

20. Mr Yeo submitted that the judge had erred by finding that the  children
    can relocate because of parental misdemeanours; they  should,  however,
    not be punished for the mistakes of their parents  in  accordance  with
    the case of ZH (Tanzania) -v- The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 4.  The judge had taken no account of this case.

21. In his response on behalf of the respondent Mr  Richards  asked  me  to
    find that the decision of the Judge contains no material error of  law.
    He refuted the suggestion in the permission to appeal  that  the  Judge
    had failed to apply Razgar v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL27;  he  had  done  so,
    following the appropriate steps and finding a legitimate aim. The Judge
    had considered the case of Gulshan and had arrived at a proportionality
    assessment taking account of the competing interests on either side. In
    paragraph 40 of the determination the Judge had taken  account  of  the
    children's length of residence in the United Kingdom and their  British
    citizenship. He had directed himself that the children's best interests
    are a primary consideration and he had thoroughly analysed the relevant
    issues.

22. Mr Richards submitted that the Judge had properly directed himself  and
    had been mindful of the consequences of removal;  he  was  entitled  to
    come to the finding in paragraph  39  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant had flouted the requirements  of  immigration  control  in  a
    blatant attempt to circumvent the Rules; he found  that  the  appellant
    had "jumped the queue".  The Judge was entitled to balance  the  rights
    of individuals against the wider public interest in the maintenance  of
    fair and firm immigration controls.  In paragraph 46  the  Judge  found
    that the job offer relied upon was not genuine and he had  in  all  the
    circumstances  reached  a  conclusion  properly  open  to   him   after
    appropriate analysis. Mr Richards invited me to dismiss the  appeal  in
    the Upper Tribunal.

Decision on Error of Law

23. At the conclusions of the submissions I reserved my decision  which  is
    as follows. The  Judge's  determination  is  detailed  and  contains  a
    carefully-written, full record of the evidence. It is accepted that  he
    was entitled, after considering the case of Gulshan, to move to a free-
    standing consideration of the appeal under Article 8 of the  ECHR.    I
    find that he did not fall into error by failing  to  adopt  the  5-step
    Razgar approach. The case is not referred to by name but the Judge  has
    nonetheless adopted a staged consideration  of  the  issues  concluding
    that proportionality is the key question.  He properly directed himself
    that the interests of the children are a primary consideration.

24. I do, however, find that  the  Judge  fell  into  error  thereafter  by
    failing to make a finding about the best  interests  of  the  children.
    Those interests were not identified  and  were  accordingly  not  given
    primary consideration. I find error in the absence of consideration  of
    the findings or principles of case law, specifically, Chikwamba v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 40 and in particular ZH (Tanzania)  -v-  The  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC 4. I accept the  respondent's
    submission that the Judge did refer  in  the  determination  under  the
    proportionality consideration,  at  paragraph  40,  to  the  children's
    British citizenship but the weight  attached  to  this  factor  is  not
    identified.

25. The Judge did not direct himself in  accordance  with  ZH  when  taking
    account of the immigration history of the appellant or  direct  himself
    that the sins of the parent must not be visited on the child.  ZH  also
    established that it is not enough to say that a young child may readily
    adapt to life in another country.   The  Judge  in  my  view  erred  by
    placing weight on the fact that the upheaval to the family would not be
    long term if they go to Canada without taking account of  the  loss  to
    the children of all the intrinsic values of their British citizenship.

26. Whilst their British nationality is not a trump  card  and  their  best
    interests  can  be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative  effect  of   other
    considerations, the best interests of the children must  be  identified
    and considered first,  including  their  community  links  here,  their
    unqualified right of abode  in  the  United  Kingdom,  their  right  to
    education, childcare facilities,  health  care,  medical,  social,  and
    economic support. A proportionality  assessment  should  reflect  as  a
    primary consideration that these rights  cannot  be  exercised  if  the
    children move to another country. I find that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal does not identify these best interests  of  the  children
    and falls to be set aside and remade.


The Law


27. Article 8 of the ECHR provides that:
         1. Everyone has the right to respect for  his  private  and  family
         life, his home and his correspondence.
         2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with  the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of  the
         country,  for  the  prevention  of  disorder  or  crime,  for   the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others.
28. The burden of proof in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR lies with  the
    appellant to prove on the balance  of  probabilities  that  private  or
    family life is established and will be interfered with as a  result  of
    the respondent's decision.   Once he has  established  that  he  enjoys
    this protected right which is  threatened  with  violation  the  burden
    shifts to the respondent to show that the interference is lawful and in
    pursuit of a  legitimate  aim.   The  respondent  must  show  that  the
    violation is justified and that it does not impair the right  any  more
    than  is  necessary;  in  other  words,  whether  the  interference  is
    proportionate.

29. On 28th  July  2014  section  19  of  the  Immigration  Act  2014  made
    amendments to the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by
    introducing a new Part 5A which contains sections 117A, 117B, 117D  and
    117D. These statutory provisions apply to all appeals heard on or after
    28 July 2014, irrespective  of  when  the  application  or  immigration
    decision was made. Part 5A applies where the Tribunal considers article
    8(2) ECHR directly.  Section 117A is as follows:

         117A Application of this Part


          1) This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and
             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.
         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and
             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.
         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).


    Section 117B is as follows:

         117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in  all
         cases


         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.
         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English-
             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.
         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-
             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and
             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.
         (4)  Little weight should be given to-
             (a)  a private life, or
             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.
         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.
         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where-
             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and
             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.



Remaking of Decision


30. At the conclusion of the submissions in relation to the  error  of  law
    the representatives agreed that should the  decision  fall  to  be  set
    aside it could appropriately be remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  without
    the need for further evidence or another oral hearing. I heard  further
    submissions from the parties about the remaking of the  decision  which
    are set out in the record of  proceedings  and  are  fully  taken  into
    account by  me,  along  with  all  the  other  evidence  and  documents
    submitted. I carry forward my findings in relation to the error of  law
    and the decision is remade as follows.

31. The appellant  fails  to  meet  the  eligibility  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules because of his status as  a  visitor  in  the  United
    Kingdom; he fails for the  same  reason  to  come  within  EX  1.   The
    respondent accepts that the appellant may have a genuine and subsisting
    relationship with his wife, although at the date of decision there  was
    a lack of supporting documentary  evidence of, for instance, their  co-
    habitation. The genuine and subsisting relationship with  the  children
    was, however, accepted.

32. The appellant fails to meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    under the parent route; he does not have sole  responsibility  for  the
    children and  at  the  time  of  application  he  failed  to  meet  the
    immigration status requirement because of his status as  a  visitor  in
    the United Kingdom; the requirements of E-LTRPT.2.3 and E-LTRPT.3.1 are
    not met. The requirements of paragraph 276ADE are not met  in  relation
    to private life because the  appellant  has  not  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least 20 years; he is not aged under 18 years and nor is
    he between the ages of 18 years and 25 years having lived for  half  of
    his life continuously in the United Kingdom. He  clearly  retains  ties
    with Canada in the light of his residence there  from  2001  until  his
    departure for the United Kingdom as a visitor in May 2012.

33. The respondent explicitly accepted in the Rule  24  response  that  the
    judge had properly  applied  the  case  of  Gulshan  and  was  entitled
    thereafter to undertake a free-standing Article 8 consideration of  the
    case.  Mr Richards maintained this position in his  submissions  to  me
    and  I  am  satisfied  that  such  consideration  is   warranted.   The
    application was made outside the Rules from the outset  and  there  are
    grounds for such consideration because aspects of  the  claim  are  not
    encompassed by the Rules, particularly in relation  to  the  children's
    situation and the primary importance of their best interests. There are
    arguably good grounds for granting leave outside the Rules which do not
    provide a complete code in this case.

34. The appellant is now aged 46 years of age; his wife is aged 43 and  her
    older children, I R and T R, were  aged  20  years  and  16  years  old
    respectively at the date of hearing before me.  T R is  still  a  minor
    and has been in the UK for a period of 9 years, since 2005.  Rayyan  is
    now 7 years old and Eshaal is 4 years old; they were born in the UK and
    have never lived elsewhere. I am satisfied from the consistent evidence
    of the appellant, his wife and their children set out above that  there
    is a genuine and subsisting relationship between them all. The evidence
    was tested under cross-examination at the  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I accept the existence of family life between  the  appellant
    and sponsor and their minor children.

35. The respondent challenges the existence of family life with the  oldest
    child, I R, who is now aged 20 years and  attends  university.  She  is
    submitted by the respondent to be to  be  living  independently  as  an
    adult, notwithstanding her evidence that she plans  to  return  to  the
    family once she has graduated.  She states  that  she  has  never  been
    independent and is very dependent upon the appellant  and  her  mother;
    she returns home most weekends; the family is all that she has and  she
    will be forever dependent on her parents.   I  find  that  family  life
    arguably continues with Iqua in these circumstances, but I if I proceed
    on the basis that it does not I find that the outcome of the appeal  is
    no different.

36. The 5-step approach set out in Razgar poses the following questions:

         (1)  Will the proposed removal  be  an  interference  by  a  public
         authority with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for
         his private or (as the case may be) family life?


         (2)  If so,  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
         gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


         (3)  If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


         (4)  If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society
         in the interests of national security, public safety or the
         economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder
         or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the
         protection of the rights and freedoms of others?


         (5)  If so, is such interference proportionate  to  the  legitimate
         public end sought to be achieved?


37. I find  that  the  answer  to  the  first  four  questions  is  in  the
    affirmative. The legitimate end to be achieved is the  public  interest
    in  maintaining  effective  immigration  controls  and   the   economic
    wellbeing of the country. The importance of the public interest is  now
    enshrined in statute and I necessarily  attach  significant  weight  to
    that interest.   In accordance with the case of  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4, I now consider the best interests of the children as a  primary
    consideration.

38. In accordance with the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197(IAC) it  is,  as  a
    starting point, in the best interests of children to be with both their
    parents. The evidence is that the three younger  children  are  all  in
    education and T R's evidence is that he is distraught at the thought of
    the appellant having to leave for Canada to be with his mother for even
    a short period of time.  He is very attached to the  appellant  and  is
    not independent in any way; the appellant is a key figure in his  life.
    T R states that he needs the appellant's guidance and "If he goes,  mum
    has to go with him, which would affect my education.  It would  destroy
    our relationship".  He  states  that  there  is  no  contact  with  his
    biological father who is in Pakistan.

39. The sponsor's evidence is that removal  to  Canada  would  disturb  the
    children's lives.  She states that the children are used to having  the
    appellant with  them.   They  are  disturbed  by  the  thought  of  him
    returning to Canada.  His removal would disturb  them  emotionally.   T
    R's clear evidence was that it is better for the family  to  remain  in
    the UK where they are all settled. His preference is  to  remain  here,
    but if his parents were to  go  to  Canada  he  would  join  them,  but
    reluctantly so.  Moving to Canada would mean starting a  new  life  and
    there would be delay in his education.

40. I take account of the circumstances of T  R's  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his mother who  sought  and  obtained  refugee  status.  A
    departure from the United Kingdom would be in the wake of this  earlier
    disruption to his young  life.  The  three  younger  children  are  all
    British citizens meaning that they inevitably have community links here
    and enjoy all the intrinsic value that comes  with  their  citizenship.
    They have an  unqualified right of abode in the United Kingdom, a right
    to education, childcare facilities, health care, medical,  social,  and
    economic support. Their departure from the United Kingdom would deprive
    them of all such rights and benefits.

41. I take account of the fact that Canada is an  English-speaking  country
    but that does little to diminish the significant  level  of  disruption
    which would be caused to the lives of all the children  by  re-locating
    there. I take account of the fact that the family might be able to  re-
    locate there together but this  does  not  diminish  the  loss  to  the
    children of all their benefits of British citizenship.  I find that  in
    all the circumstances of this case it is not reasonable to  expect  the
    children to live in Canada. In reaching this conclusion I weigh in  the
    balance the level of their integration in the United  Kingdom  and  the
    length of their residence here which weighs heavily in their favour.

42. I find that the evidence shows the best interests of the  children  not
    to be served by the decision of  the  respondent.  The  consequence  is
    either of separation from the appellant and possibly their  mother,  or
    alternatively relocation to Canada to preserve the family unit, all  of
    which causes significant distress, trauma, deprivation  of  rights  and
    detriment to the children. I remind myself that these interests can  be
    outweighed  by  the   cumulative   effect   of   other   countervailing
    considerations. For all the following reasons I find that in this  case
    they are not.

43. Carrying forward the best interests of  the  children  into  the  wider
    proportionality exercise I weigh in the balance  the  fact  that  their
    mother is a British citizen settled in the United Kingdom with  refugee
    status.  I assess the impact of her leaving the United Kingdom to  live
    in Canada in order to maintain the family unit  or  to  stay  with  her
    husband, for even a short period of time, in the context of her refugee
    status and the trauma which preceded her arrival here with her children
    in the first place.

44. The sponsor's evidence is that she is  gaining  work  experience  as  a
    teaching assistant at an infant school in Newport and voluntary work at
    a local charity.  As the children grow older, she hopes  to  engage  in
    fulltime paid work. Her evidence is that circumstances do not allow for
    her  to  go  to  Canada.  The  level  of  interference  caused  by  the
    respondent's decision to the  sponsor's  family  life  is  in  all  the
    circumstances significant.

45. I take full account of the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  his
    intention to circumvent the Immigration Rules  which  does  him  little
    credit.  However, those sins should not be visited upon  the  children.
    In accordance with the case of Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL  40  it  is
    not necessarily unlawful to require an appellant who relied on a  human
    rights ground  to  return  to  their  country  of  origin  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance. The rationale behind the  Home  Office
    policy of routinely requiring appellants to apply from  abroad  was  to
    deter others from entering without entry clearance.  This  could  be  a
    legitimate objective and in certain cases could be the right course  of
    action, but only when relevant considerations in  the  particular  case
    made it so.

46. In an Article 8 family case the prospective length and degree of family
    disruption involved in going abroad for an entry clearance  certificate
    will  always  be  a  highly  relevant  factor  in  the  assessment   of
    proportionality. I find that the evidence shows the  degree  of  family
    disruption  in  this  case  would  in  these  circumstances   be   very
    significant. Only  comparatively  rarely,  certainly  in  family  cases
    involving children, should an Article 8  appeal  be  dismissed  on  the
    basis that it would be  proportionate  and  more  appropriate  for  the
    appellant to apply for leave from abroad.

47. I return to the enshrinement of the importance of the  public  interest
    in statute. I attribute significant weight to that interest and I  take
    full account of the  provisions  of  sections  117A  and  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002.   The  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest and it  is  in
    the public interest, and in particular in the interests of the economic
    well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who  seek  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom are able to speak English.  The  appellant
    is English-speaking.

48. I take account of the  appellant's  inability  to  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and the evidence  does  not  show
    him to be financially independent. His evidence is,  however,  that  he
    has been employed in Canada and has not relied  on  public  funds.   He
    gives evidence of job prospects in the United Kingdom and  the  sponsor
    expresses her intention to undertake full time work in due course.  The
    appellant's relationship formed with the sponsor was not established at
    a time when he was in the United Kingdom unlawfully. He has  a  genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with  qualifying  children  and  I
    have found that it is not reasonable to expect the  children  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

49. Taking all the relevant evidence and factors into account and  weighing
    them in the balance I find that the interference to family life in this
    case is not proportionate to the legitimate  public  end  sought.   The
    appeal succeeds under article 8 of the ECHR.

Notice of Decisions

50. The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law in the  making  of
    the decision.

51. That decision is set aside and is remade as follows.

52. The appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.

53. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal succeeds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

The direction made by the First-tier tribunal  remains  in  terms  that  the
children referred to in the determination are granted anonymity.  No  report
of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  them  or  any
member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

Janet Harries
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date 26th November 2014


Fee Award

In the light of my  decision  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing it I make a whole fee award.



Signed:

Janet Harries
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date 26th November 2014
