
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/47620/2014
                                                               IA/47621/2014
                                                               IA/47622/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th September 2016               |On 12th October 2016                 |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD


                                   Between

                       RAJWINDER [K] (FIRST appellant)
                          [M S] (SECOND appellant)
                           [S K] (THIRD appellant)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    No Attendance
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The First Appellant, along with her husband and  their  child  as  her
    dependants, appeal with permission against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Freer to dismiss  an  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse leave to remain pursuant to Tier 4 (General) Student
    Migrant of the Points Based System. This is our extempore decision.

Background

2.    The matter has a relatively unusual background which  requires  to  be
    set out in some detail.  The recent history  commences  on  11th  April
    2014 when the first Appellant, Mrs [K], had  sought  further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student for herself and for the other  two
    Appellants.  By way of decisions dated 19th November 2014 the Secretary
    of State had refused the applications.  In essence it was said that  no
    points  were  being  granted  for  Mrs  [K]'s  claims  to  satisfy  the
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies [CAS] requirements and  for  the
    maintenance requirements.   Mrs  [K]'s  dependants'  applications  were
    refused in line with that decision. The Secretary  of  State  had  said
    that when the CAS was checked on 19th November 2014 there  was  no  CAS
    assigned to Mrs [K].  The Secretary of State  said  she  was  therefore
    also unable to assess the level of funds.

Original decisions of the First-tier Tribunal in 2015

3.    There was an appeal by each of the Appellants  against  the  Secretary
    of State's decision. Those appeals had come for hearing  before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Walker as long ago as 25th February  2015  when  by
    way of a decision  promulgated  on  27th  February  2015  Judge  Walker
    dismissed each of the appeals.   On  appeal  by  the  Appellants,  that
    decision was set aside.  The reason that decision  was  set  aside  was
    because even though the  Appellants  had  originally  asked  for  their
    appeal to be considered on the papers,  they  had  then  changed  their
    minds.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keane  succinctly  set  out   the
    position. He had said in his Notice of Decision at paragraphs 5  and  6
    the following:

         "5.      In a pro-forma  notice  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
             judge's decision and reasons were sent to Mrs  [K].   Mrs  [K]
             had despatched to the First-tier Tribunal an e-mail message on
             25 February 2015 at 8.16 p.m.  Mrs [K]'s  e-mail  message  was
             acknowledged by the First-tier Tribunal in an  e-mail  message
             of 25 February 2015 despatched at 8.16 p.m.  Mrs [K] wrote:-


                  'I write further to your response of 28 January  2015.   I
                  originally opted for my appeal  to  be  heard  on  papers.
                  However, I now proposes (sic) for my appeal  to  be  heard
                  orally.  As such I humbly request my appeal  be  converted
                  to oral hearing.   I  understand  the  oral  hearing  will
                  attract further fee of �60 which I  am  willing  to  honor
                  (sic) once I receive directions from the FtT to pay such a
                  fee ...".


         6. It was not suggested by the Appellants nor was it scarcely to be
             conceived that Mrs [K]'s e-mail letter was placed  before  the
             judge either before he prepared his  decision  or  before  his
             decision was promulgated.  The judge did not make any  or  any
             arguable error of law and was plainly unaware that Mrs [K] had
             requested that the appeals be decided at an oral  hearing  and
             not on the papers.  The  conditions  stipulated  for  in  Rule
             32(2)(b) of  the  Rules  were  satisfied.   Mrs  [K]'s  e-mail
             message was not provided to the judge at an appropriate  time.
             I exercise my discretion  so  as  to  set  aside  the  judge's
             decision to dispose of the appeals.  The appeals will  be  re-
             listed for hearing on the first available date"

    and therefore the decisions of Judge Walker were set aside.

Second Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

4.    Thereafter a listing for an oral hearing followed.  That  hearing  was
    to take place before First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer sitting at  Taylor
    House on 29th January.  At the hearing though, there was no  appearance
    by or on behalf of the Appellants.  The Home  Office  was  represented.
    Judge Freer noted the basic  issue  at  the  core  of  this  matter  at
    paragraph 9,

         "... it was essential that a valid CAS  be  supplied  to  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules".


5.    Judge Freer also noted at paragraph 18  that  there  was  no  apparent
    reason for the Appellants'  failures  to  attend  the  hearing  in  the
    following way,

         "I heard no evidence from the Appellant or her family as they  were
         absent without explanation.  I heard oral submissions on behalf  of
         the Home Office and I read those  sent  from  the  Appellant.   The
         notice of hearing on file was issued on 29 May  2015.   I  conclude
         that the Appellants had more than ample time in  which  to  prepare
         for the hearing on 29 January 2016 (including arranging to submit a
         CAS) or to enquire why no hearing date had been given if  they  did
         not receive that notice of hearing.   In  either  case  I  find  no
         injustice is shown to be done by proceeding on the day.   There  is
         still no CAS before me"


    and then the judge said at paragraphs 20 and 21:

         "20.     The issue is whether there is a CAS.  At no stage has this
             Tribunal or the Respondent been provided with a CAS in support
             of the appeal or application which led to it.


         21.      I consider that the Appellant  has  had  more  than  ample
             opportunity to rectify the situation".


    The judge then set out with detailed reasoning why  he  was  dismissing
    the appeal both in respect of the Immigration Rules and also in respect
    of human rights, particularly Article 8.

Permission to Appeal

6.    The Appellants sought permission to appeal. Their  grounds  of  appeal
    were submitted by ATM Law Solicitors and state in part as follows, with
    typographical errors unamended:

         "1.      The nor appellant and neither her solicitor  were  present
             at the hearing which took place on 29  January  2016;  however
             fax was sent to the First-tier Tribunal setting out reasons of
             non-attendance, , at 21.29 a.m. on the day of the hearing.  It
             appears that  this  was  not  received  by  the  judge  at  an
             appropriate time.


         2. At paragraph 18, of the decision  the  First-tier  Judge  stated
             that the appellants were absent without explanation.  This  is
             found to be incorrect on the basis  set  out  at  paragraph  1
             above, simply the message appears  to  be  overlooked  by  the
             judge of the FTT and/or fax request was not  received  by  the
             First-tier Tribunal at an appropriate time either at the  time
             of the decision.  The First-tier  Tribunal  judged  failed  to
             consider  appellants'  request  given  no   reference   and/or
             consideration is made to appellant's  adjournment  request  in
             the Judges determination.


         3. On  4  February  2016  a  letter  was  received  from  the  FTT,
             indicating "The Solicitor should have attended or at the  very
             least telephoned on the day".  Such contention  is  incorrect;
             clearly written representations were sent  informing  the  FTT
             Judge of Appellant's personal circumstances.  The  purpose  of
             telephone call is to inform the court of absence, such purpose
             was met by sending written representations.  It  is  therefore
             puzzling to understand objective behind FTT's contention".


7.    The grounds are  not  entirely  clear  but  in  essence  suggest  that
    because a fax was sent to the  Tribunal  on  the  day  of  the  hearing
    explaining the non-attendance of  the  Appellant  then  an  adjournment
    ought to have resulted.  A copy of that  fax  was  submitted  with  the
    grounds of appeal. The fax is itself dated as 29th January  and  states
    on it, "Urgent hearing at 10 a.m. today" although  in  fact,  when  one
    looks at the fax transmission verification report stamped on  it  says,
    "sent 28/01 21.29". It can be reasonably inferred that the fax was sent
    very late on the night of 28th January at 21.29 hours.  The body of the
    fax says:

         "As the Tribunal is aware the hearing in above  appeals  is  listed
         for today  however  Appellants  are  unable  to  attend  and  seeks
         adjournment on the basis third Appellant (child) has  fallen  sick.
         We are instructed by first Appellant the 'baby is not well, she  is
         vomiting and having fever.  She is crying a lot'.  She  has  become
         very [? ] and requires care today.  The first Appellant  is  taking
         her to doctors as such is unable to attend the court.  Furthermore,
         it is not in best interest of the child to be left with third party
         for day as the child is sick.  On the  basis  of  above  we  humbly
         seeks short adjournment".  [sic]


Decisions on Permission to Appeal

8.    The First-tier Tribunal had refused  permission  to  appeal  but,  the
    Appellants made a further  application  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
    matter had come before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on the papers.  She
    noted in respect of the fax sent by ATM Solicitors to the Tribunal  the
    night before the hearing that:

         "A competent legal representative should have  been  aware  of  the
         need to telephone the First-tier Tribunal to ensure that the  judge
         is made aware of a written adjournment request made on the  day  of
         the hearing. It is obvious that it might not get  to  the  file  in
         time to be considered by the judge before the hearing starts".


9.    Judge Canavan, after noting that Judge Freer, through no fault of  his
    own had not considered the adjournment application because he  did  not
    know of it and after noting the weakness in respect of  the  merits  of
    the appeal concluded,

         "In the circumstances the Upper Tribunal proposes to find an  error
         of law and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  subject  to
         any written representations to be made by 22  August  2016  at  the
         latest. If no further representations are made by that  date,  then
         Upper Tribunal will issue a decision in those terms".


10.   The Secretary of State objected to  that  course  and  asked  for  the
    matter to be listed for an oral hearing at the Upper Tribunal to enable
    the error of law matter to be argued here.  By way of a decision  dated
    15th August 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan directed that the  matter
    be listed for oral hearing as soon as possible.

Upper Tribunal Hearing

11.   It is against  that  history  that  the  matter  came  before  us  for
    hearing.  The Appellants again did not attend. When we noted that there
    was no attendance by or on behalf of the Appellants earlier  today,  we
    caused enquiries to be made via the court clerk.

12.    Dealing  first  with  the  attempted  contact  with  the  Appellants'
    solicitors, we are aware that that the court clerk  made  a  number  of
    attempts to telephone  the  solicitors  this  morning  and  either  the
    telephone continued to ring out with no answer or there was an  engaged
    tone.

13.   Insofar  as  contact  with  the  Appellant  is  concerned,  the  first
    Appellant was spoken to by the court clerk. The First Appellant claimed
    that she was not aware of today's hearing, that she does  not  get  the
    post and that she has left the matters at the hands of  her  solicitors
    and that they will deal with everything that is necessary.

14.   We have taken the precaution of checking and making  sure  that  there
    had been proper notice of today's hearing and indeed it is quite  clear
    to us that not only was the Respondent served with  notice  of  today's
    hearing, ATM Law Solicitors of 18  Goodmayes  Road,  Ilford  were  also
    served with notice of today's hearing. Additionally, Rajwinder [K] with
    the address provided to the Tribunal in Middlesex was also informed  of
    today's hearing.  Therefore, we are quite  sure  that  there  has  been
    proper and effective service of the notice of hearing, not only on  the
    Appellants but also on her solicitors.

15.   Set against the background in respect of what has happened  with  this
    case for some two years, it was not surprising that it was submitted on
    behalf of the Secretary  of  State  today  that  the  matter  ought  to
    proceed.  We did proceed but with some caution  to  ensure  that  there
    were no difficulties in terms of documentation or the  like  which  may
    yet have to be filtered from the post to the Tribunal.

16.   We have taken into account Rule 38 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules  2008.  We  are  satisfied  that  the  Appellants  were
    properly notified of the hearing. So were their solicitors. It was  our
    conclusion that it was in the interests of justice to proceed with this
    hearing where proper notification had taken place, no  application  for
    an adjournment  was  made  and  given  the  protracted  nature  of  the
    proceedings thus far.

Respondent's submissions

17.   The Respondent has submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    made clear via properly reasoned findings why  the  appeal  had  to  be
    dismissed and it was submitted that we should uphold  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  When asked to assist us with whether or
    not  there  was  an  arguable  procedural  error  in  relation  to  the
    application to adjourn by the First-tier  Tribunal,  it  was  submitted
    that even if that was so, there could simply be no other outcome  other
    than a dismissal of the Appellants' appeals.

Error of Law

18.   There was a very late application for an adjournment before the First-
    tier Tribunal but Judge Freer was not aware of  it.  We  have  reminded
    ourselves of the Upper Tribunal's  decision  in  Nwaigwe  (adjournment:
    fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

19.   There is in the circumstances perhaps an argument  that  there  was  a
    procedural error of law  because  there  had  been  a  request  for  an
    adjournment but which was not considered. Having considered the matter,
    it is quite clear to us after a thorough perusal of the Tribunal's file
    that  these  Appellants  have  never  complied  with   the   Tribunal's
    directions in terms of the filing and service of evidence.   There  was
    simply nothing filed and served in readiness for this hearing  by  them
    and as Judge Freer pointed out in his decision of  29th  January  there
    was no compliance  with  the  directions  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    either. It is very difficult to see how Judge  Freer  could  have  been
    dissuaded from the decision which he was ultimately to make in terms of
    the merits of the case. There was no CAS.  The family and private  life
    provisions of the Immigration Rules could not  be  met.  There  was  no
    material raising compelling circumstance capable of engaging Article  8
    ECHR.  Through an abundance of caution, however,  particularly  bearing
    in mind the  relatively  unusual  background  to  this  case,  we  have
    reluctantly concluded that there is a procedural error in  relation  to
    the decision made by Judge Freer on 29th January. Namely that there was
    before the First-tier Tribunal an adjournment  application,  but  which
    through no fault of his own, Judge Freer had not considered.

20.   We go on to consider whether within our discretion  we  ought  to  set
    aside the decision of Judge Freer.  We conclude, given that  there  was
    nothing before the First-tier Tribunal that could have  allowed  for  a
    different outcome, that there is no  need  for  us  to  set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Freer.  Indeed, as Judge Freer made very clear in his
    decision at paragraphs 14 to 17 which we quote in part:

         "In Alam v Secretary of State [2012] EWCA Civ 960 Sullivan  LJ  set
         out this ruling on late evidence, with which  Maurice  Kay  LJ  and
         Moore-Bick LJ agreed.  At paragraph [45]:


             'The Immigration Rules, the policy guidance and the prescribed
             application  form  all  make  it  clear  that  the  prescribed
             documents must be submitted with the application and  if  they
             are not the application will be rejected'".


21.   There does not appear to be any other  outcome  which  could  possibly
    follow and it is for that reason that we  conclude  that  we  will  not
    exercise our discretion to set aside the decision of Judge  Freer.  The
    error  of  law  in  determining  the  case  without   considering   the
    Appellant's application for an adjournment was not material.

22.   However, again  through  an  abundance  of  caution  in  view  of  the
    background to this case, in the alternative we go on  to  consider  the
    merits of the case if the error had been material and if we had decided
    to set aside Judge Freer's decision.

23.   The position is that that there is still no CAS  document  before  us.
    It has still not been produced despite over two years  having  elapsed.
    The Court of Appeal's decision in Alam makes it abundantly  clear  that
    this case has no prospect of success  whatsoever.   Therefore,  in  the
    circumstances, even if we were to re-make  the  decision,  the  appeals
    under the Tier 4 Immigration Rules would simply have to be dismissed.

24.   Additionally, insofar as any argument in respect  of  the  Appellants'
    human rights are concerned, we analyse matters ourselves in  the  event
    that it is argued that the decision of Judge Freer should have been set
    aside. The first Appellant, Mrs [K], has always been here as a student.
    Her husband has been her dependant. Their child, [SK], having been born
    in the United Kingdom is still relatively young and is 3 years of age.

25.   Any claim to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of family  life
    and/or private life is to be assessed first  against  Appendix  FM  and
    Paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The  exceptions  in  EX1  in
    respect of the test whether it would be reasonable to expect a child to
    leave the United Kingdom or whether there are insurmountable  obstacles
    to family life continuing  outside  of  the  United  Kingdom  are  also
    considered. EX 2 defines the test further. The parents unarguably  have
    ties to India and the child can reasonably be expected  to  live  there
    without difficulty with her parents. There is nothing here that  begins
    to show that the Rules are met by these Appellants.

26.   Section 55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration 2009  requires  us  to
    consider [SK]'s best interests as a  primary  consideration.  There  is
    simply nothing which suggests that there is anything whereby [SK] would
    not have her best interests both promoted and safeguarded by continuing
    to live with her parents. [SK] has not been in the United  Kingdom  for
    more than seven years.

27.   The Appellants themselves  have  not  raised  anything  compelling  or
    exceptional about their case whatsoever, despite having had  two  years
    to do so, be that individually or collectively.  These Appellants  have
    always been in the United Kingdom on a precarious basis.    Indeed,  it
    is clear to us that this is a relatively routine type of case whereby a
    student has sought to remain in the United Kingdom with her husband and
    their child. We have carefully considered and balanced  the  rights  of
    the Appellants as against the maintenance of  immigration  control.  We
    find there is nothing compelling, exceptional, unusual or  out  of  the
    ordinary which could possibly indicate that the  appeals  ought  to  be
    allowed.

28.   There is simply no merit whatsoever in  relation  to  the  Appellants'
    appeals based on the Immigration Rules or in  respect  of  their  human
    rights appeals

DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law.

    The decision is not set aside but stands for the reasons set out above.



    Therefore, the Appellants' appeals based on both the Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights are dismissed.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood     On 12th October 2016
