
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
                                                               IA/47477/2013
                                                               IA/38691/2013
                                                               IA/47478/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 24 July 2014                           |On 13 August 2014           |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                    H A G
                                     OG
                                     AG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr L Charles of Leslie Charles Solicitors
For the Respondent: Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  An  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this appeal. There was no application to amend the direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney, promulgated  on  6  May
   2014 which dismissed the appeal s under the Immigration Rules but allowed
   the  Appellants  appeals  under  Article  8  and   held   that   it   was
   disproportionate and unlawful to remove them to Zimbabwe.
Background
3. The Appellants are citizens of Zimbabwe, a mother and her  two  children.
   On 13 January 2009 the Appellants applied for  leave  to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom on discretionary grounds  and  under  Article  8  and  the
   application was refused. On 4 March 2013  the  Respondent  was  asked  to
   reconsider the Appellant's case and did so but the original  decision  to
   refuse the application was maintained in a letter dated 9 September  2013
   and directions were made to remove the Appellant from the United  Kingdom
   under s 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and nationality Act 2006.
4. The refusal letter considered the applications by reference  to  Appendix
   FM and paragraph 276 ADE. The Appellants did not meet the requirements of
   the Rules. The letter also took into account that the  second  and  third
   Appellants were children who had been in the United Kingdom for  over  10
   years but  did  not  find  that  sufficiently  compelling  to  allow  the
   Appellants leave to remain.
The Judge's Decision
5.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge De Haney (hereinafter called "the Judge")  found  that  as
   the applications made by the Appellants were made on 13 January 2009 they
   should have been dealt with under the law as it was on 8  July  2012  and
   the Respondent had considered the applications by reference to the  wrong
   law; he considered the applications by reference to Article 8  and  found
   the first Appellant to be a witness wholly without credit but  identified
   the length of time that the two children had been in the United  Kingdom,
   at the time of the hearing 10 years and 11 months, to be the  real  issue
   in the case given that they had been 4 and 1 year old when they  arrived;
   he found that the children were integrated into  United  Kingdom  society
   and there was no evidence that they had any ties  in  Nigeria;  he  cited
   authorities that suggested that in the absence of  strong  countervailing
   factors  residence  of   7/8   years   was   likely   to   make   removal
   disproportionate; her dismissed the suggestion that the  Appellants  were
   in contact with the first Appellant's husband as speculation.
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 5 June 2014 Judge of the  First-tier
   Tribunal Ford gave permission to appeal stating it was arguable that  the
   Judge erred in failing to consider  the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
   Article 8 claims and in treating the best interests of the children as an
   overriding interest.

7. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnstone  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent  that :

   (a)The Judge had failed to consider Appendix FM.  Prior to  9  July  2012
   the Rules did not cover Article 8 and the Rules now  set  out  where  the
   balance was to be struck in such cases.

   (b) the Judge should have looked at EX.1 and engaged  with  the  test  of
   whether it was reasonable in this case for  the  children  to  return  to
   Zimbabwe.

   (c)The Judge considered old case law.

   (d) There was no consideration of the public  interest  as  part  of  the
   balancing exercise merely a focus on  the  length  of  residence  in  the
   United Kingdom as the decisive factor.

8. On behalf of the Appellants Mr Charles submitted that :

   a) He relied on the case of Edgehill and another v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 402. The new Rules did  not  apply
      to an application made prior to 9 July 2012. The decision made in 2013
      was not a fresh decision it was an upholding of the previous decision.

   b) There had been delay in this case  between  the  original  application
      made in 2009 and the final decision in 2013 and the  benefit  of  that
      delay should not be with the Respondent .

   c) He conceded that the  Article  8  assessment  was  very  brief.  Given
      however his  adverse  credibility  findings  against  the  mother  the
      central feature was the length of residence of the children.

   d) Even if it were accepted that there had been  no  balanced  assessment
      this have still resulted in a decision in favour of the children.

   e) Even had a decision been made under the new Rules taking into  account
      all of the factors the outcome would have been the same.
Finding on Material Error

9. Having  heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made  errors of law but that the errors were not material to the
   outcome of the decision.

10. The first challenge in this case was that  the  Judge  had  applied  the
   wrong law but should have looked at the application  made  for  leave  to
   remain on the basis of family and private  life  under  Appendix  FM  and
   paragraph 276ADE.

11. HC 194, the Statement of Changes in Immigration  Rules  which  sets  out
   the provisions implementing appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE states:

   "if an application for entry clearance ,leave  to  remain  or  indefinite
   leave to remain has been made before 9 July 2012 and the application  has
   not been decided, it will be decided in  accordance  with  the  rules  in
   force on 8 July 2012.

   Appendix FM applies to applications made on or after 9 July 2012  as  set
   out in paragraph 91 of this statement of changes."

12. The application in this case was made on 13 January  2009.  On  4  March
   2013 the Secretary of State was asked to  review  the  decision  and  the
   refusal letter of 9 September 2013 states:

   "We have reconsidered your application on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
   State and the decision to refuse your application has been maintained."

13. I am therefore satisfied that the application in issue was  made  before
   9 July 2012 and the application was refused on 13 August  2009  and  that
   original decision was upheld  by  the  review  therefore  the  Judge  was
   correct to apply the law as it stood prior to the implementation  of  the
   new Rules.

14.  The  grounds  argue  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his   assessment   of
   proportionality. The Article 8 assessment and  findings  are  undoubtedly
   brief though it is clear from the  evidence  set  out  by  the  Judge  in
   relation to the children's educational achievements and what he  says  at
   paragraph 7 that he took this all into account.   The Judge did not adopt
   the structured approach to Article 8 claims as set out in  Razgar  [2004]
   UKHL 27  and this would perhaps have helped to  focus  and  identify  the
   public interest which it is suggested that the Judge failed to assess.  I
   am satisfied however that in his analysis of  the  background  the  Judge
   refers to the refusal  letter  which  identifies  the  need  to  maintain
   'integrity of the immigration laws' and that no other factors relating to
   public interest were identified in the submissions of Mr Spence the  Home
   Office Presenting Officer.

15. Ultimately even if the assessment under  Article  8  was  insufficiently
   detailed I am satisfied that this made  no  material  difference  to  the
   outcome given what the Judge identified as the most  significant  feature
   in the case.  I am satisfied that the Judge was entitled to highlight the
   fact that the having come to the United Kingdom at ages 4.25  and  1  and
   having been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  nearly  11  years  the  child
   Appellants were extremely well integrated into United Kingdom society and
   it was disproportionate to remove them. He was entitled to conclude  that
   on the evidence before him there  was  no  reason  to  believe  that  the
   Appellants were still in contact with the first  Appellant's  husband  in
   Nigeria.

16. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set  out  findings  that  were  sustainable  and  based  on  cogent
   reasoning and while not being sufficiently detailed this had no  material
   effect on the outcome of the appeal.







CONCLUSION

17. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.



DECISION

18. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
11.08.2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
