
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47702/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 June 2014                                  |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                                 MRS UWANDU

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Adeolu, instructed by Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 20  February  1946.   She
    entered the United  Kingdom  on  13th  March  2013  with  a  six  month
    multivisit visa, that visa running between 14 June  2012  and  14  June
    2014.

 2. On 22 August 2013 the  appellant  made  an  application  for  leave  to
    remain.  The basis of her application was that her daughter,  whom  she
    had been visiting in the United Kingdom and whom is also a  student  of
    an MSc at the London Metropolitan University, has final stages of renal
    failure which  had  been  diagnosed  in  July  2012.   The  appellant's
    daughter has two children aged 6 and 4.  The appellant's daughter is on
    daily dialysis as a consequence of her condition.

 3. The Secretary of State refused to vary the appellant's leave  to  enter
    in a decision of 29 October 2013.  On the same date  the  Secretary  of
    State made a decision that the appellant should  be  removed  from  the
    United  Kingdom  by  way  of  directions  under  Section  47   of   the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. The appellant appealed these decisions to the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Eldridge on 6 March  2014
    and dismissed on all grounds in a determination promulgated on 20 March
    2014.

 5. During the course of his determination the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    made the following findings of fact [12-15]:

         "12. Having heard from the appellant and her  daughter  and  having
             regard to the medical evidence  provided  in  the  appellant's
             bundle, I have no doubt that  the  daughter  is  in  the  last
             stages of chronic renal failure and has been since  summer  of
             2012, when her condition was  diagnosed,  I  find  as  a  fact
             additionally that she has required to  undertake  dialysis  at
             home every night for eight hours and that this is an automated
             process that should not be disturbed.

         13.  I also find that the appellant has two young grandchildren and
             that she has been assisting  with  their  childcare.   I  also
             accept that the father of the children left the family home in
             October 2013 and has not returned to live with them.  I see no
             reason to doubt the evidence that he does  have  contact  with
             the children but it is limited and he does not play an  active
             part in their care.

         14.  I also find as a fact, because it is not in dispute, that  the
             daughter has the assistance of a neighbour who acts as a carer
             but the amount of care that she can expect from that  lady  is
             limited.  It is not in dispute that  the  daughter  works  for
             about 24 hours per week in three shifts from 2 p.m.  until  10
             p.m.  on  each  of  three  days  as  a  support  worker  in  a
             residential home.  The purpose of the study she  continues  to
             undertake  is  to  enable  her  to  achieve  less   physically
             demanding work by moving into administration  and  management.
             She told me that her  course  had  been  due  to  complete  in
             September  2014  and  because  of  her  health   problem   the
             university have now agreed to her  completing  by  about  June
             2015.  I accept this.

         15.  Finally, I  accept  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant's
             daughter that the transplant she needs might  occur  any  time
             but the typical expectation is about five years,  although  it
             could be tomorrow or in ten years' time.  This does mean  that
             situation probably will not ameliorate for some time."

 6. I shall consider the conclusions of the judge further when  considering
    whether the First-tier Tribunal erred on a matter of law such that  its
    determination requires setting aside.

 7. The appellant sought and obtained permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.   Such  permission  was  granted  by  Designated   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge French in a decision of 2  May  2014  in  the  following
    terms:

         "2.  Much of the grounds consists of disagreement with the  judge's
             finding   that   the   decisions   under   appeal   were   not
             disproportionate.   These  arguments  would  not   necessarily
             involve potential errors on points of law.   One  element  the
             judge did not expressly deal with was  the  argument  that  to
             remove the appellant would be in breach of Zambrano (and  thus
             of EEA Regulations  relating  to  derivative  rights)  as  the
             children are British whilst their mother and the appellant are
             Nigerian and it is said that if the appellant had to leave the
             children would not be able to remain.  Whether  there  is  any
             substance in this  contention  is  difficult  to  say  on  the
             documents before me but the point  is  arguable  and  was  not
             addressed by the judge, the issue having been  raised  in  the
             appellant's skeleton argument.

         3.   In  accordance  with  Ferrer  permission  is  granted  on  all
             grounds."

 8. Moving onto the hearing before me, Mr Adeolu's submissions  lacked  any
    real structure and for the most part related to grounds which  had  not
    been pleaded in the notice of application  for  permission  to  appeal.
    After having been prompted by the Tribunal in this  respect  Mr  Adeolu
    made a formal application to amend the grounds that he sought  to  rely
    upon and this application was not opposed by Mr Saunders.  Consequently
    I allowed amendments to the grounds in the form which I  will  identify
    below.

 9. I will first however deal with the grounds which were  pleaded  in  the
    notice of application.

10. Paragraph 1 of the grounds asserts that the judge erred  in  dismissing
    the appeal on human rights grounds because the appellant and her family
    members' circumstances  are  compelling  and  compassionate  so  as  to
    warrant departure from the Immigration  Rules  "as  prescribed  in  the
    recent cases of Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 640 and R (Nagre) [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin)".

11. This in reality is just a disagreement  with  the  conclusions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal as to whether  the  appeal  should  be  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds.  At its highest it is an assertion that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's conclusion on such ground is perverse.  At the  hearing
    Mr Adeolu sought to submit that encompassed within the  terms  of  this
    ground was an assertion that the judge failed to give consideration  to
    the  factual  circumstances  and  compassionate  circumstances  of  the
    appellant's case.  I do not read the ground in  that  way  but  in  any
    event neither  the  ground  that  is  originally  pleaded  nor  in  its
    stretched form lead me  to  conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination contains an error on a point of law requiring  it  to  be
    set aside.

12. As  identified  above  the  judge  made  careful  factual  findings  in
    paragraphs 12 to 15  of  his  determination.   He  concludes  that  the
    appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules,  a
    matter I shall return  to  shortly,  and  thereafter  properly  directs
    himself in accordance with the decision of Mr Justice  Sales  in  Nagre
    [18].  Having identified a number of features of the case  which  point
    in the appellant's favour the judge concludes in paragraph  21  of  the
    determination that if the appellant were to be removed that would cause
    an interference with the family life she has with her  UK-based  family
    members of sufficient severity so as to engage Article 8.  At paragraph
    22 the judge once again reminds himself that the appellant cannot bring
    herself within the Immigration  Rules.   The  core  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning on the  issue  of  proportionality  begins  midway
    through paragraph 24, and given the nature  of  the  challenge  brought
    against the Tribunal it is prudent  for  me  to  set  out  the  reasons
    identified by the judge thereafter:

         "24. ... the appellant argues that the service she is providing  to
             her daughter and grandchildren is not only part of her  family
             responsibility and to the benefit of the family but that it is
             also justified economically.


         25.  That reason would suggest, however, that in any  circumstances
             someone with health issues in this country is entitled, unless
             there are strong reasons for exclusion, to invite  a  relative
             from abroad to come and live in this country and care for them
             and any children on an indefinite basis until their health has
             improved if it can be done in a  manner  that  alleviates  the
             public purse.  Similarly, the  argument  would  run  that  any
             relative from abroad who happens to be in this country  has  a
             right to remain on a similar basis.


         26.  There are alternatives open to the family in this appeal.  The
             appellant's daughter could cease her study or work or both and
             undergo  her  dialysis  during  the  hours  her  children  are
             normally at school nursery.   A  relatively  small  amount  of
             childcare would then be needed at one  or  other  end  of  the
             school day.  She would then of course be further dependent  on
             the state.  If she has not done so,  she  could  do  something
             active to compel her partner,  who  she  told  me  was  always
             working, to  make  a  sensible  financial  provision  for  his
             children.  These are choices for the family in this country.


         27.  In  my  judgment,  although  there  are  superficial  economic
             arguments for this appellant being allowed to remain, it was a
             proportionate decision to refuse her  that  leave  to  remain.
             The person with leave to remain is not  going  to  be  without
             cost to the state if she is not working.  She will enjoy  many
             of the public benefits in the wider sense  that  those  living
             here are entitled to.  They come at a cost, too.   It  remains
             proportionate  today  notwithstanding  the  absence   of   the
             partner.   It  is  a  matter  for  the   state   to   regulate
             immigration.   The  health  difficulties  of  the  appellant's
             daughter demand compassion but they were always going to place
             her in a position of taking difficult decisions until  she  is
             restored to good health.


         28.  I have considered carefully the best interests  of  these  two
             young children.  Whilst I am sure it would  be  beneficial  to
             them to continue to  enjoy  the  care  and  company  of  their
             grandmother, I do not find there are  sufficiently  compelling
             reasons to conclude that their interests and  those  of  their
             grandmother  outweigh  the  interests  of  the  state  in  the
             maintenance  of  an  effective  and   consistent   system   of
             immigration control."


13. Looking at the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as  a  whole,  as  I
    must, I do not accept the submission that it has failed  to  take  into
    account relevant facts when coming to its conclusion on  the  issue  of
    proportionality.  The Tribunal were at pains to consider  the  position
    and interests of the UK-based family members, including the appellant's
    daughter and grandchildren, and it had well in mind the best  interests
    of the children, which I have no doubt are that the children remain  in
    the United Kingdom.  In my  conclusion  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    fully entitled to come to the conclusion,  on the facts of this case as
    they found them to  be,  that  having  regard  to  the  fact  that  the
    appellant does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  that
    her removal in any event would be proportionate.

14. Moving on, paragraph 2 of the grounds simply asserts that the appellant
    has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  her  daughter
    and grandchildren and that Article 8 is engaged.  That  paragraph  does
    not identify or particularise any error in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination and indeed appears to just  recite  findings  which  were
    made by the Tribunal.  Paragraph 3 submits that the First-tier Tribunal
    were wrong to find that the decision was in accordance with the law but
    as Judge Eldridge observes in paragraph 16 of his determination that he
    was never addressed on the basis upon  which  decisions  taken  by  the
    respondent were said not to be in accordance with the law other than on
    human rights grounds and neither does paragraph 3  of  the  grounds  of
    application make any attempt to identify the manner in which it is said
    the Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance  with  the  law
    other than asserting that the adverse decision would breach  her  human
    rights.  In other words this ground takes the appellant no further.

15.  I  shall  deal  with  paragraph  4  of  the  grounds  later   in   the
    determination, this being the ground that  relates  to  the  EU  treaty
    rights said to be derived by the appellant from her grandchildren.

16. Paragraph 5 of the grounds is merely a disagreement with the First-tier
    Tribunal's  conclusion  that   the   appellant's   removal   would   be
    proportionate.  That paragraph appears to suggest that  the  author  of
    the ground is under the misapprehension that if Article  8  is  engaged
    and that individual's removal would interfere with their family life in
    the United Kingdom, then that must lead to the decision to remove being
    disproportionate.  I need say no  more  than  that  the  submission  is
    wholly misconceived.

17. Paragraph 6 of the grounds asserts that the  First-tier  Tribunal  took
    into account the appellant's daughter's  health  difficulties  and  the
    fact that they demand compassion but failed  to  see  that  this  would
    cause  disproportionate  interference  with  the  appellant's  and  her
    daughter's and granddaughters' rights.  Again this  is  simply  another
    attempt to reargue the point put in paragraph 1 of the grounds that the
    First-tier Tribunal's conclusion was not a rational one.   Paragraph  7
    of the notice  of  application  carries  on  in  much  the  same  vein,
    asserting at  its  highest  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    identify the very compelling reasons for family  life  outweighing  the
    public  interest  "even  when   he   identified   unjustifiably   harsh
    consequences upon the appellant's daughter  and  grandchildren  if  the
    appellant was not permitted to stay in the United Kingdom".  The First-
    tier Tribunal did not  identify  compelling  reasons  for  family  life
    outweighing the public interest because it found  that  there  were  no
    such compelling family reasons which outweigh the public interest, that
    is why it dismissed the appeal.  As I indicated  earlier  the  Tribunal
    properly directed itself to the relevant  considerations  it  ought  to
    have in paragraph  18  of  its  determination,  and  in  my  conclusion
    properly applied  that  approach  in  paragraphs  19  and  onwards.   I
    therefore find no merit in paragraph 7 of the pleaded grounds.

18. Paragraph 8 of the pleaded grounds submits that the appellant's removal
    would be in breach of the Community law principle  of  proportionality.
    It does not identify however on what basis it is said the Community law
    principle of proportionality is applicable in the circumstances of this
    case, and it seems to me that if anything is to be made of this  ground
    it must bear some link, although it is not quite  sure  what  link,  to
    paragraph 4 of the grounds which relate to the decision of the CJEU  in
    Zambrano.

19. Turning then to the additional grounds  which  Mr  Adeolu  sought,  and
    obtained, permission to rely  upon  at  the  hearing.   These  were  as
    follows:

      i) the Tribunal's findings in paragraph 26 of  its  determination  are
         inconsistent with its findings in paragraph 12 therein;

     ii) the Tribunal failed to give  a  detailed  evaluation  of  the  best
         interests of the children;

    iii) the Tribunal failed to give consideration to the Article  8  rights
         of the appellant's daughter and grandchildren as required by Beoku-
         Betts.

20. Dealing with these in turn I find nothing in the  submission  that  the
    conclusions in paragraph 26 of the determination are inconsistent  with
    the factual findings in paragraphs 12  to  15.   Mr  Adeolu  sought  to
    persuade me that if the appellant's grandmother were to be required  to
    leave  the  United  Kingdom  then  the   appellant's   children   would
    necessarily be left alone in the United  Kingdom  at  the  times  their
    mother was either working, studying or in dialysis.  He says  that  the
    inference to be drawn from paragraphs 12 to 13 of the determination  is
    that this factual scenario would arise and that in paragraph 26 of  the
    determination the judge went behind that  finding.   In  my  conclusion
    there  is  nothing  in  paragraphs  12  to  15  of  the   determination
    identifying that the judge found therein that  the  children  would  be
    left alone in the United  Kingdom  if  their  grandmother  were  to  be
    removed.  Moreover I asked Mr  Adeolu  to  draw  my  attention  to  any
    evidence to support this contention and in doing so  he  pointed  to  a
    letter from a former childminder of the children indicating inter  alia
    that she would have difficulty in undertaking the  children's  care  if
    the grandchildren were to leave and he also  drew  my  attention  to  a
    letter from the Oxford Kidney Unit of the  Oxford  University  Hospital
    indicating that the appellant's daughter needs someone  around  all  of
    the  time  to  be  with  her  and  her  children,  given  her   medical
    difficulties and that she wishes this to be her mother.

21. This evidence does not  however  identify  that  if  the  appellant  is
    removed from the jurisdiction her grandchildren will  be  left  without
    care.  At paragraph 26 of the  determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    came to conclusions as to how that care could be arranged,  and  in  my
    conclusion these findings were open to the First-tier Tribunal and  are
    not inconsistent with its earlier findings of fact.

22. As to the second and third of the amended grounds,  I  reject  both  of
    these.  The Tribunal identified at paragraph 19  of  its  determination
    that the interests of the grandchildren had to be taken  into  account.
    It directed itself to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 and then thereafter gave careful consideration  to
    both the circumstances and interests of the  appellant's  grandchildren
    as well as the appellant's daughter.   In  addition  in  particular  at
    paragraph 28 of the determination the  judge  identifies  that  he  had
    considered carefully the best interests  of  the  two  young  children.
    Looking at the determination as a whole in my conclusion the judge gave
    adequate reasons for dismissing the appeal on Article 8  grounds,  took
    into account all matters which were relevant  but  did  not  take  into
    account any relevancies and came to conclusions that were open  to  him
    on the available evidence.

23. I finally turn to the "Zambrano ground" pleaded in paragraph 4  of  the
    notice of application.

24. This was not a ground pursued by the appellant in his grounds of appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal (IAFT-1), but it is a matter which is to  be
    found in the skeleton argument relied upon by the appellant before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, which is undated but  which  formed  part  of  the
    bundle received by the First-tier Tribunal  three  days  prior  to  the
    hearing.  In paragraph 9 of the skeleton the following is submitted:


         "We refer to the human rights case where the Court  of  Justice  of
         the European Union (ECJ) recently handed down judgment in the  case
         of Ruiz Zambrano (C-34/09).   This  judgment  creates  a  right  to
         reside and work for the carer of a dependent British  citizen  when
         that carer has no other right of residence in the UK  and  removing
         the carer from the UK would mean the British citizen would have  to
         leave the European Union."


25. A further reference is made to the underlying Article of  the  European
    treaties in paragraph 24 of the skeleton argument which states:

         "The decision further conflicts with Article 20 TFEU, to which  the
         UK is whereby (sic) the treaty  precludes  national  measures  that
         have the effect  of  depriving  Union  citizens  and  their  family
         members of the enjoyment of the substance of their rights."


26. The First-tier Tribunal made no reference to the decision  in  Zambrano
    or  a  potential  conflict  between  removing  the  appellant  and  the
    appellant's British citizen relative's rights under  Article  20  TFEU.
    This is plainly an error of law  given  that  it  was  pleaded  in  the
    skeleton argument before the Tribunal.  The question  I  must  now  ask
    myself however is whether the failure of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider this issue is such that I should set aside its  determination.
    I conclude that it is not.

27. At the hearing Mr Adeolu sought, with some degree of force,  to  resile
    from the statements of  law  which  were  identified  in  the  skeleton
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal and submitted in its place that
    the decision in Zambrano protects the care providers of British citizen
    children and that if a non-British citizen national is  providing  care
    for British citizen children  in  the  United  Kingdom  then  they  are
    entitled to reside here, irrespective of whether  their  removal  would
    lead to those British citizen children  being  required  to  leave  the
    territory of the European Union.  This submission quite clearly  in  my
    conclusion misunderstands the decision in Zambrano.

28. [When this returns from typist cite from paragraphs 107 to  211  of  my
    decision in Mehmood Ahmed].  In the instant case there is  no  prospect
    of the appellant's grandchildren being required to leave the  territory
    of the European Union if their grandmother is removed.  The appellant's
    daughter, i.e. the grandchildren's mother, makes no assertion  to  this
    effect in her witness statement and in any event the Tribunal  came  to
    conclusions in this regard in paragraph 26 of its determination,  which
    I have already considered above to be conclusions that were open to it.

29. Consequently there is no prospect that this appeal could succeed on the
    "Zambrano ground" and so the failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    consider this ground is not a matter which requires  its  determination
    to be set aside because  it  is  not  a  matter  which  is  capable  of
    affecting the outcome of the appeal.

30. I finally turn my attention to a ground which was raised for the  first
    time by Mr Adeolu at the end  of  his  submissions  and  after  he  had
    already applied for and been given permission to amend  his  ground  in
    other respects; that being the assertion that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in failing to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules and in
    particular in failing to conclude that the  requirements  of  paragraph
    EX.1 to those Rules had not been met.

31. In his decision Judge Eldridge said as follows at paragraph 17:

         "The appellant does not suggest she can bring herself  within  them
         [Immigration Rules].  There is nothing in Appendix  FM  that  would
         enable her successfully to plead that she was  entitled  to  remain
         under the Rules on the basis  of  her  family  life.   She  has  no
         private life that would meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE."


32. This is palpably correct.  Even if, which he is not, Mr Adeolu is right
    in saying that the applicant meets the requirements of  paragraph  EX.1
    this does not lead to the appellant meeting  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  As the Tribunal indicated in the reported  case  of
    Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 00063;

         "it is plain from the architecture of the Rules ...  that  EX.1  is
         parasitic on the relevant Rule within Appendix  FM  that  otherwise
         grants leave to remain.  If EX.1 was intended to be a  freestanding
         element some mechanism of identification would have been used.  The
         structure of the Rules as presently drafted requires  it  to  be  a
         component part of the leave granting Rule.  This is  now  plain  by
         the respondent's guidance dated October 2013."


33. It is not suggested, or  at  least  if  it  is  and  it  has  not  been
    particularised, that the applicant  meets  the  other  requirements  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules, she plainly  does  not.   In  any
    event, as identified above, the appellant did not assert to the  First-
    Tier Tribunal that she did meet the requirements of the Rules  as  this
    can be seen  from  both  paragraph  17  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination and a consideration of the  skeleton  argument  that  was
    placed before the First-tier Tribunal.

34.  For  all  these  reasons  in  my  conclusion  the  appellant  has  not
    demonstrated that the First-tier Tribunal's determination  contains  an
    error of law capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and
    consequently I find that its determination  does  not  require  setting
    aside.

35. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall remain standing.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
