
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47834/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 November 2015                  |On 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           janet priscilla arthur
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, instructed by the Legal Resource
                    Partnership, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent, Ms Arthur is a citizen of Ghana whose date of birth  is
    recorded as 15 July 1958.  On 4 March 2011 Ms Arthur  made  application
    for leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the Immigration Rules
    relying upon Article 8 of the European Convention of Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms.  On 29 March 2011 a decision was made  to  refuse
    the application.  That refusal was followed,  on  6  April  2011  by  a
    request on behalf of Ms Arthur's solicitors for re-consideration of the
    application to which the Secretary of State responded by  letter  dated
    21 July 2011 indicating that the request for re-consideration would  be
    dealt with in due course.  Thereafter Ms Arthur's solicitors  wrote  to
    the Secretary of State asking for  an  update  on  no  less  than  four
    occasions, 24 February 2012, 20 April 2012, 4 October 2012 and 11  June
    2013.  On 2 July 2013 the  Secretary  of  State  replied  but  only  to
    apologise for the delay.  On 17 February 2014 the  Secretary  of  State
    (via CAPITA) requested completion of a proforma  form.   The  following
    day Ms Arthur's  solicitors  again  requested  an  update  on  the  re-
    consideration of the application and on 3  March  2014  they  sent  the
    completed form to the Secretary of State.

 2. It was not until 14 November 2014 that the Secretary of  State  finally
    responded with the decision, the subject matter of  this  appeal.   The
    Secretary of State refused the application and so Ms Arthur appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  On 2 June 2015 her appeal was heard by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Veloso sitting at Hatton Cross.

 3. Judge Veloso considered the basis upon which the Secretary of State had
    refused the application.  It is of note that the Secretary of State was
    not represented.

 4. There is no issue about the fact that Ms Arthur was an overstayer.  She
    entered the United Kingdom in May 2002 with a visitor's visa valid only
    until 25 October 2002.  However, given the  length  of  time  which  Ms
    Arthur had been living in the United Kingdom  Judge  Veloso  considered
    that Paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration  rules  applied.   That
    provides a route for applicants to obtain leave to remain in the United
    Kingdom on the grounds of private life where they are aged 18 years  or
    above and have lived continuously in the United Kingdom for  less  than
    twenty years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  there  would
    be very significant obstacles to the applicant's integration  into  the
    country to which [she] would have to go if required to leave the United
    Kingdom.

 5. Judge Veloso did not consider that Ms Arthur met  the  requirements  of
    the rule because he was of the view that Ms Arthur  would  be  able  to
    reintegrate into her home country.

 6. Judge Veloso went on to consider the wider  application  of  Article  8
    making reference to the guidance in SS (Congo) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and in particular paragraph 43.
     Judge Veloso found compelling circumstances to  justify  consideration
    of Article 8 and gave "greater weight than as merely a starting  point"
    to the fact that Ms Arthur did not meet the Immigration Rules.  He went
    on to consider Sections 117A-D with the focus in this case  being  upon
    the relationship of Ms Arthur to Ms Willis in respect of whom Ms Arthur
    had become, after first knowing her in  2007,  in  2010,  her  live  in
    carer.   Notwithstanding  no  permission  to  work,  tax  and  national
    insurance was paid on Ms Arthur's behalf.  The judge went  on  to  have
    regard to Section 117B(4) which provides that little weight  should  be
    given to any private life established at a time when a person is in the
    United Kingdom unlawfully but gave considerable weight to the fact that
    Ms Arthur had attempted to regularise her status with the Secretary  of
    State  taking  over  three  years  then  to  consider  the  application
    notwithstanding the letters that were then sent on  her  behalf.   Even
    after the apology for the delay there was still more delay which  Judge
    Veloso took into account.  He then went to consider the five  questions
    of the "Razgar test" noting the "very strong bond and friendship in the
    context of a very high level of dependence on the part  of  Ms  Willis"
    and indeed the judge in noting the very close and strong bond  observed
    that Ms Willis and Ms Arthur, "came to consider themselves as sisters."

 7. Over  and  above  those  matters,  the  judge  took  into  account  the
    increasing weakening condition of Ms Willis  and  considering  all  the
    evidence in the round found removal in the particular circumstances  of
    the case to be disproportionate and allowed  the  appeal  therefore  on
    Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 8. Not content with that decision the Secretary of State made  application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Reliance was placed on
    the fact  that  little  weight  is  to  be  attached  to  private  life
    established during unlawful  presence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   [See
    Section 117B(4)].   Further exception was taken to the weight given  by
    the judge to the delay on the part of the Secretary of State, it  being
    submitted that the public interest in removing Ms Arthur still remained
    strong given the statutory presumption in Section 117B(4).  Finally  it
    was submitted that the judge had mis-applied the guidance in SS  Congo;
    there was no sufficient basis for  the  judge  to  look  to  the  wider
    application of Article 8 on the facts of this case.

 9. On 15 September 2015 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Coates  granted
    permission thus the matter comes before me.

10. Ms Everett for the Secretary of State took what I considered  to  be  a
    very sensible and realistic approach to her own appeal.  She relied  on
    the grounds which she submitted spoke for  themselves.   She  submitted
    that so far as the delay was concerned though  the  solicitors  for  Ms
    Arthur had contacted the Home Office on  a  number  of  occasions,  the
    delay on the part of the Secretary of State  had  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of Ms Arthur having been in the United Kingdom unlawfully  from
    2002 though she accepted that the delay of three years  was  "not  good
    practice".

11. Mr Ume-Ezeoke drew my attention to the consideration by  the  judge  of
    Section 117B at paragraph 32 of the Statement of Reasons and indeed not
    only did the judge do that but made an adverse finding in respect of Ms
    Arthur's contention that she had attempted in 2005  to  regularise  her
    status.  The point Mr Ume-Ezeoke was making was that this  demonstrated
    a very balanced approach by the judge to the issues to  be  considered.
    Still further at paragraphs 28-30 the judge had  clearly  set  out  the
    reasons why in his view the wider application of Article 8 fell  to  be
    considered on the facts of the case.  Mr Ume-Ezeoke also reminded me of
    the guidance by the House of Lords in the case of EB Kosovo v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2008] UK HL41.

         "14. It does not, however, follow that delay in the decision making
             process is necessarily irrelevant to the  decision.   It  may,
             depending on the facts, be relevant in any one of three  ways.
             First, the applicant  may  during  the  period  of  any  delay
             develop closer personal and social ties and  establish  deeper
             roots in the community and he could have shown  earlier.   The
             longer the period of the delay, the likely this is to be true.
              The extent that it  is  true,  the  applicant's  claim  under
             Article 8 will necessarily be strengthened.  It is unnecessary
             to elaborate this point since the Respondent accepts it.

         15.  Delay may be relevant  in  a  second  less  obvious  way.   An
             Immigrant without leave to  enter  or  remain  is  in  a  very
             precarious situation, liable to be removed at any  time.   Any
             relationship into which such an applicant enters is likely  to
             be, initially, tentative, being entered into under the  shadow
             of severance by administrative order.  This is the  more  true
             where the other party to the  relationship  is  aware  of  the
             applicant's precarious position...

         16.   Delay  may  be  relevant,  thirdly  in  reducing  the  weight
             otherwise to be accorded to the requirements of firm and  fair
             immigration control, if the delay is shown to be the result of
             a   dysfunctional   system   which    yields    unpredictable,
             inconsistent and unfair outcomes..."

12. Whilst therefore the point made by Ms Everett  is  a  relevant  factor,
    namely that the delay was in the course of a long period of  Ms  Arthur
    being unlawfully in the United Kingdom, the question for me is  whether
    it was open to the judge to give that delay the weight that he did.

13. In my judgment there was nothing perverse or irrational in the approach
    taken by the judge.  He was  constrained  by  statute  to  give  little
    weight to private  life  established  when  unlawfully  in  the  United
    Kingdom though that has to  be  seen  against  the  guidance  given  at
    paragraph 16 in the case of EB Kosovo to which I have  referred  above.
    Further whilst little weight is to be given to private life, there will
    be different types of private life so that the  little  weight  may  be
    more in some cases than in others.  In looking to the  public  interest
    and indeed the individual's contentions said  to  outweigh  any  public
    interest in removal a relevant factor must of course be the  nature  of
    that relationship which on the facts of this case came very  close,  in
    the judge's view to amounting to family life indeed whether it was open
    to the judge to characterise the relationship as family life  is  moot.
    However that was not a finding which the judge made and it would not be
    appropriate to me to go further than I have.

14. In my judgment this  was  a  very  carefully  considered  statement  of
    reasons.  The decision of the judge falls  well  within  the  range  of
    findings open to him on the issue of proportionality given the facts as
    they were and I should say further that his decision  to  look  to  the
    wider application of Article 8 on the facts  of  this  case  given  the
    medical issues and the nature of the relationship were such that it was
    entirely appropriate in my  judgment  for  him  to  take  that  course.
    Indeed it is An observation which this tribunal can make  that  a  very
    large proportion of cases which fall to be considered within the  wider
    application of Article 8 will necessarily be  cases  involving  medical
    issues because the Immigration Rules did not specifically address cases
    where medical issues arise  on  top  of  the  family  or  private  life
    considerations ordinarily to be considered under the Immigration Rules.



15. In all the circumstances I  find  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and accordingly the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

