
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47652/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2014                               |On 5 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                               MR ASAD BASHIR
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Litchfield, Counsel, instructed by Khans,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  whose  appeal  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman in a determination promulgated on 8th
    April 2014.  Grounds of application were lodged on the basis  that  the
    judge erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons for the  finding
    that the Sponsor was a qualified person at all material times.  It  was
    said  that  the  Sponsor's  circumstances  of  having  had  periods  of
    unemployment between  jobs  did  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the
    Regulations.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the case came  before  me  on
    the above date.

 3. For the Home Office Mr Tufan relied on his grounds and went no  further
    than that.  He was  correct  not  to  do  so.   For  the  Appellant  Ms
    Lichfield said that both at the  date  of  decision  and  date  of  the
    hearing the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights and there was no error
    of law in the judge's determination.

 4. I indicated to parties that I considered the crucial date  was  whether
    the Sponsor was working at the date of the hearing of the appeal and it
    appeared that the judge had accepted she was.  I formally  reserved  my
    decision.

Conclusions

 5. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and his  Lithuanian  spouse
    Ms Nazarova.  Both witnesses said she was working as at the date of the
    hearing.  The judge focused initially on whether  the  marriage  was  a
    genuine one and for reasons given (paragraphs 51 to 55) concluded  that
    "this is indeed a genuine and subsisting marriage."

 6. The judge then went on to consider whether or not Miss Nazarova  was  a
    "worker" within the meaning of the Regulations.   He  referred  to  the
    documentation and noted that there was  at  least  a  period  of  self-
    employment and that she was now a company director with the  Appellant.
    It was only in the last few weeks that she had started her latest sales
    job with M-Bitz.  He concluded that she was a qualified person in terms
    of Regulation 6 of the 2006 Regulations.

 7. While the judge does  not  actually  say  that  he  was  accepting  the
    evidence from the Appellant and Sponsor  in  relation  to  the  Sponsor
    working in the United Kingdom the only reasonable inference was that he
    was accepting that evidence as true.  I say that because the judge  had
    accepted the evidence of the marriage as genuine and there  is  nothing
    in his decision to suggest that he thought anything other than that the
    Appellant and Sponsor were credible and  reliable  witnesses.   Had  he
    thought otherwise then no doubt he would have said  so.   It  is  clear
    from paragraph 60 that he was accepting the  documentation  because  he
    went on to find that the Appellant was a qualified person in  terms  of
    the Rules.

 8. I refer to Boodhoo and Another (EEA  Regs:  Relevant  Evidence)  [2013]
    UKUT 00346 (IAC) where it was found by Mr  Justice  Blake  following  a
    concession from the Home Office that the judge ought  to  have  allowed
    that  appeal  because  the  Appellants  had  produced  proof  of  their
    entitlement to remain  "under  the  Regulations  at  the  date  of  the
    appeal."  The evidence before Judge Wiseman at the date of this  appeal
    was that the Sponsor was working and thus the Appellant was entitled to
    succeed in terms of the 2006 Regulations.  That is what the judge found
    and there is manifestly no error of law in such a finding.





Decision

 9. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

10. I do not set aside the decision.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

