
[pic]
Self-Typed

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/47482/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 August 2015                    |On 2 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr WAQAS ARSHAD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Duffy, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Miss Shaheen Haji, Counsel instructed by M.J.
Immigration


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State ("SSHD") appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  ("UT")
    from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pirotta sitting  at
    Birmingham  on  5  March  2015)  allowing  on  Article  8  grounds  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision by the SSHD to refuse  to  issue
    him with a residence card as confirmation of his right to reside in the
    United Kingdom as  the  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights here. With the  agreement  of  Mr  Duffy,  the
    claimant cross-appeals against the dismissal of his  appeal  under  the
    EEA Regulations. The  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FTT")  did  not  make  an
    anonymity order, and I do not consider that such an order is  warranted
    for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant is a national of Pakistan, whose date of birth is 5 August
    1989. On 11 November 2014  the  SSHD  refused  his  application  for  a
    residence card. She referred to Regulation 8(5). He had not shown  that
    he was in a durable relationship, or that his  sponsor  was  exercising
    treaty rights.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal under Regulation 8(5), but  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds. Her reasoning was that they had not  lived
    together for at least two years, and  there  was  no  evidence  of  the
    sponsor being in recent employment: paragraphs [20] and [21]. But  they
    had shown they had established  a  family  life  together,  with  their
    daughter and the  sponsor's  daughter  from  a  previous  marriage.  At
    paragraph [23] the Judge held:

         "The Sponsor is (my emphasis) exercising treaty rights."

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 4. The SSHD applied for permission to appeal to the UT, arguing  that  the
    decision was  internally  inconsistent  and  the  judge's  approach  to
    Article 8 was highly flawed.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 5. On 1 July 2015 Judge Pooler granted  the  SSHD  permission  to  appeal,
    holding that the Judge  had  arguably  made  inconsistent  findings  on
    whether the sponsor was exercising treaty rights and  that  there  were
    arguable flaws in the judge's Article 8 assessment.

Reasons for finding an error of law.

 6. Mr Duffy and Miss Haji agreed at the outset that  the  entire  decision
    was vitiated by a material error of law, such that  it  should  be  set
    aside in its entirety and remade by me. Not only  did  the  judge  make
    inconsistent findings about whether or not the sponsor  was  exercising
    treaty rights, but there  is  an  apparent  inconsistency  between  her
    rejecting the claim of a durable  relationship  under  Regulation  8(5)
    while at the same time finding that the parties  were  in  a  committed
    relationship when addressing Article 8 ECHR.  It is not  a  requirement
    of Regulation 8(5) that the parties should have cohabited for at  least
    two years, and the judge was wrong to treat the claimant as needing  to
    accrue  two  years'  cohabitation  as  an  essential  precondition   of
    qualifying as an extended family member ("OFM").

 7. The judge did not have the  benefit  of  Amirtyemour  and  others  (EEA
    appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT  00466  (IAC)  which  clarifies  the
    limited  circumstances  in  which  the  Tribunal  has  jurisdiction  to
    entertain an Article 8 claim in an EEA appeal. At [75] the Presidential
    panel held that, where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act  has
    been served and where no EEA  decision  to  remove  has  been  made,  a
    claimant cannot in an appeal under the EEA Regulations  bring  a  Human
    Rights challenge to removal.

 8. The law always speaks, so the judge was wrong to consider Article 8. It
    was clearly not engaged, as the claimant was  not  facing  removal.  An
    Article 8 claim had not been advanced by Miss Haji (who appeared below)
    and the claimant had not in any event been served with  a  section  120
    notice, which is an essential precondition for raising Article 8 in  an
    EEA appeal.

The Remaking of the Decision

 9. I received uncontested evidence from the claimant and  his  wife  about
    their current circumstances. Mr Duffy did not dispute  that  they  have
    now been living together for over two years, and that  they  are  in  a
    durable relationship. He also accepted that the sponsor  is  exercising
    treaty rights, as evidenced by the production of recent  payslips.  She
    gave credible evidence that she had gone back to work on 1  April  2015
    after being on maternity leave.

10. Accordingly I find that the claimant has established that he is an  OFM
    under Regulation 8(5). He thereby meets the gateway requirement for the
    exercise of the discretion to issue him with  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 17(4).

Conclusion

11. The decision of the FTT contained an error of law, and accordingly  the
    decision is set aside and the following decision  is  substituted:  the
    claimant's appeal  is  allowed  on  the  ground  that  the  refusal  to
    recognise him as an OFM under Regulation 8(5)  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law, and the claimant's application for a residence card as an
    OFM is remitted to the SSHD for the exercise of  her  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4).

Anonymity

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

