
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47236/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 4 June 2015                           |             On 12 August 2015      |
|Prepared 6 June 2015                     |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY
              DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PROFESSOR N M HILL QC

                                   Between

                              ADAM HASSAM LEHER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Leher
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of  Zimbabwe,  date  of  birth  14  September
    1944, appealed a decision of the Respondent, dated 25 October 2014,  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain and to  make  removal  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   On 6 March 2015 I found that the  judge  who  dealt  with  this  matter
    previously had made  errors  of  law  so  that  the  Original  Tribunal
    decision could not stand.  Accordingly  I  decided  that  the  decision
    would have to be remade in relation to the considerations of Article  8
    of the ECHR.  The balance of the Original Tribunal's decision stands in
    relation  to  the  Appellant's  appeal  being   dismissed   under   the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge made no specific finding in  relation  to
    the removal directions but it was to be inferred that  he  had  decided
    that the removal directions should stand.

3.   We have therefore considered this matter both as to Article 8 ECHR  and
    in connection with the removal directions.

Background

4.   The Appellant with his wife first entered the  United  Kingdom  in  May
    2008, as the dependent spouse of his wife, having being  granted  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom on ancestry  grounds.   The  Appellant  was
    granted leave to remain until 29  April  2013.   In  advance  of  their
    arrival in the United Kingdom the Appellant's son, Seth Karl Leher, had
    entered the United Kingdom in December 2002 under  ancestry  provisions
    from his  mother.  Eventually after extensions of his residence  permit
    he was granted indefinite leave to remain, and a British  passport  was
    issued to him in December 2012.

5.   The Appellant's daughter, Lain Daria Leher, came to the United  Kingdom
    in 2007, and qualified for entry on the basis of her being the daughter
    of a British citizen (her mother) under an ancestry visa.

6.   The Appellant's wife fell ill and died of  cancer  in  May  2011.   The
    Appellant was unaware of the  potential  consequences  of  that  matter
    until his application for further leave to remain was  refused  on  the
    basis  that  the  Appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules paragraph 287 because he had been granted an  initial
    period exceeding 27  months.   The  application  was  considered  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules which could not be met because the
    Appellant's spouse was deceased and because  the  Appellant's  children
    Seth and Lain were both over the age of 18 years.  It was said that the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.  No  exercise  of  discretion  was
    carried out outside of the Rules.

7.   The evidence of the Appellant, his son and daughter were  contained  in
    witness statements  previously  before  the  original  judge.   Further
    reasons were added by Mr Seth Leher in the grounds of appeal  which  he
    settled.  In short  he  indicated  that  he  did  not  think  that  the
    Appellant, over 70 years of  age,  would  be  in  a  position  to  find
    reasonable and remunerative employment, he and his sister did not  have
    extra income to support their father in Zimbabwe were he to return  nor
    did the Appellant have savings or  a  home  to  return  to,  all  those
    matters having been resolved when he and  his  wife  left  in  2009  to
    settle in the UK.

8.   It was unchallenged that the Appellant's relatives were in  the  United
    Kingdom and that there was no one in  Zimbabwe  for  the  Appellant  to
    return to.  It was claimed the Appellant would be unable  to  care  for
    himself or survive in Zimbabwe on his own.  Mr Melvin  did  accept  his
    return would be hard for the Appellant. It  was  also  clear  that  the
    Appellant's sister-in-law and husband  along  with  close  friends  all
    lived in the UK.  The Appellant's nieces and nephews all  live  in  the
    United Kingdom and the rest of his family is here.  Reliance was placed
    upon the fact that the Appellant's children had occasionally sent money
    to their father in Zimbabwe but that they would not  be  able  to  send
    meaningful quantities of funds to  support  the  Appellant  to  survive
    there. It was also identified that communication, email contact and the
    like is very poor  and  while  phone  costs  are  high,  communications
    because  of  the  lack  of  consistent  electricity  supply  are   very
    difficult.  It was argued that the Appellant would not survive  on  his
    own with no friends and family to provide the  physical  and  emotional
    support he  needed.   Reliance  was  placed  upon  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's health would inevitably with the passage  of  time  decline
    and at the hearing the  Appellant  alluded  to  previously  undisclosed
    health conditions which he had  avoided speaking of in order  to  avoid
    upset to his son and daughter.

9.   There were made, but it seemed to us of no particular  moment,  general
    comments upon the poverty  to  be  found  in  Zimbabwe,  the  uncertain
    economy, the nature of the government and the conduct of people  within
    it.  Essentially what was said was that the Appellant, over 70, has  no
    real prospect of finding work,  has  nowhere  to  live,  no  money,  no
    support in Zimbabwe and with no entitlement to  any  state  support  or
    benefits network.

10.  The evidence given at the hearing by the Appellant and Seth  Leher  was
    to similar effect, but simply highlighting the  impoverished  state  of
    the Zimbabwean economy and the circumstances to which he would  return.
    In addition the Appellant spoke movingly of the impact on his  life  of
    the loss of his wife in the United Kingdom and the important part  both
    his son and daughter had played in enabling him to get back on his feet
    and keeping him there.

11.  The Appellant currently lived in Redditch and his son a few miles  away
    in Bromsgrove while his daughter lived  in  London.   She  visited  her
    father on a regular basis, as well as did his son on a weekly basis.

12.  It was clear to us that the Appellant lived for the  contact  with  his
    children.  Seth Leher is married:  He and his  wife  plan  to  start  a
    family in the United Kingdom and he wished his father to be a  part  of
    that life.  Similarly his daughter had made her  home  in  the  UK  and
    planned to remain here.

13.  As Mr Melvin pointed out, the Appellant, as a matter of fact, lived  in
    separate accommodation from his son and daughter.  We find that they do
    have regular contact and if the Appellant needed help his son was close
    by.  If he cannot manage any longer on his own he would be accommodated
    by his son.  Whatever the green fee charges are at Redditch  Golf  Club
    it is not suggested that either the  Appellant  or  his  son  has  such
    wealth and means to be full members of that  particular  golf  club  or
    that the green fees  saved  would  enable  the  Appellant  to  live  in
    Zimbabwe.

14.  Whilst the Respondent, by Mr Melvin's submissions, did not accept  that
    the Appellant has lost all contact with other family members or friends
    "given that he spent the first 63 years of his life living in Zimbabwe"
    it was not put to the Appellant that there are such persons  who  would
    take on, accommodate or maintain the Appellant there.   If  there  were
    any material friends who could assist they would certainly  be  of  the
    similar age to the Appellant but the cross-examination by Mr Melvin did
    not establish the same.  Ultimately Mr Melvin's submission was that the
    evidence did not show ties going beyond normal emotional  ties  between
    an adult and his children.

15.  We take into account that the leave to remain granted  until  29  April
    2013 could not be renewed because of the death of  his  wife.   In  the
    circumstance, on the expiry of leave to remain, his status  in  the  UK
    necessarily became precarious.  We apply the case of AM (Malawi) [2015]
    UKUT  260  (Section  117B).   In  this  case  the  provisions  in   the
    Immigration Rules which the Appellant could not  meet  because  of  the
    death of his wife, the age of his children bears on whether or not  the
    Article 8 objectives are being addressed.  In this  case  there  is  no
    clue as to why discretion was not exercised outside of the Rules or  if
    any balance had been struck between the  relevant  considerations,  the
    public interest and the consequences of non compliance with the  Rules.
    Such an assessment is extremely difficult to make when the Secretary of
    State gives no insight into that matter.

16.  In assessing this matter we fully consider the provisions  of  Sections
    117A, 117B and 117C of the Immigration Act 2014 amending the NIAA 2002.
     Thus, as we have indicated, we accept that the Appellant's status  was
    precarious but it was not precarious when the Appellant came  with  his
    wife to the United Kingdom and, had she not died, leave to remain would
    likely have been granted and he  would  have  remained  here  with  his
    family.

17.  Before us there was no challenge to  the  role  the  children  play  in
    supporting the Appellant.   The significance  of  that  role  has  been
    highlighted  by  the  circumstances  surrounding  the  death   of   the
    Appellant's wife and its consequences for the Appellant in terms of his
    mental health and ability to manage his life:  In  which  the  children
    played a significant  part  rebuilding.   Significantly  there  was  no
    challenge to the Appellant's description of the importance of the  part
    his children still play in what might be described as  the  Appellant's
    will to live.  We find that it was a fact specific consideration as  to
    whether the ties between the Appellant and his children  were  anything
    more  than  the  normal  parental  and  emotional  ties.  We  look  for
    exceptional or compelling circumstances  which  are  not  significantly
    recognised under the Immigration Rules to consideration  of  Article  8
    ECHR issues.

18.  We have considered the case of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  It  was
    clear that not every case requires exceptional circumstances to prevent
    removal.  SS (Congo) identified the differences between leave to  enter
    and the grant of leave to remain [41].  At [44]  the  Court  of  Appeal
    stated

         "The proper approach should  always  be  to  identify,  first,  the
         substantive content of the relevant Immigration Rules, both to  see
         if an applicant for LTR ... satisfies the conditions laid  down  in
         those Rules (so as to be entitled to LTR ... within the Rules)  and
         to assess the force of the  public  interest  given  expression  in
         those Rules (which will be relevant to the balancing exercise under
         Article 8, in deciding whether LTR  ...  which  should  be  granted
         outside  the  substantive  provisions  set  out  in   the   Rules).
         Secondly, if an applicant does not satisfy the requirements in  the
         substantive part of the Rules, they may seek to maintain a claim or
         grant of LTR ... outside the substantive provisions  of  the  Rules
         pursuant to Article 8, then in considering that case the individual
         interests of the applicant and others whose Article 8 rights are in
         issue should be balanced against the public interest, including  as
         expressed in the Rules, in order to make an assessment  of  whether
         refusal or grant LTR, as the  case  may be, is disproportionate and
         hence unlawful by virtue of Section  6(1)  of  the  HRA  read  with
         Article 8."


    At [D51 - 53] the Court of Appeal also considered  circumstances  where
    compelling circumstances may be required.

19.  We find that the circumstances in which  the  Appellant  found  himself
    were not only completely unexpected in terms of the death of  his  wife
    but also set in the context that there was every expectation they would
    live out their years in the United Kingdom.  We did not think the rules
    make sufficient provision to deal with  the  Appellant's  circumstances
    and the effect of the unexpected death of his wife.  It was clear  that
    they sold up and left Zimbabwe behind to join  their  children  in  the
    United Kingdom where it was plainly planned a new life would  be  made.
    Given  the  status  of  the  Appellant's  children  and  his  wife   in
    immigration terms, this was not the kind of case under Article 8  where
    the presence of the Appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  initially
    unlawful and, as Mr Melvin argued, it may be that with the death of the
    Appellant's wife, leave to remain "effectively expired on  her  death".
    We accept the Appellant and his son's evidence that they simply did not
    realise that effect or consequence of her death.

20.  We  give  full  and  significant  weight  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration controls in the assessment of Article 8  claims
    and the assessment of proportionality.  We find that matter is tempered
    by the weight to be given to  both  the  impact  of  removal  upon  the
    Appellant and the evident upset it would cause to his children combined
    with the personal hardship and circumstances that he would face on  his
    own and on return to Zimbabwe.  We note that there is no state support,
    no comprehensive social security system to which  the  Appellant  would
    have recourse, nor is it suggested that he could have recourse to  such
    on  a  return  to  Zimbabwe.   We  understand  there  was  some  public
    assistance programme which required evidence that claimants are  unable
    to find family support or due to the market  economy.   We  accept  the
    unchallenged evidence that the Appellant's son and daughter  could  not
    financially support him in Zimbabwe.  We find it was  material  to  the
    public interest that it was undesirable for close relations of  British
    nationals or those with indefinite leave to remain to  be  expected  to
    tolerate their only parent being required to return and live  in  what,
    we find, in all  likelihood  would  be  destitution  in  Zimbabwe.   We
    conclude that a  relevant  element  of  the  public  interest  included
    matters of common humanity in how a person is treated.

21.  In these circumstances we find that this was  one  of  those  very  few
    cases  where  the  public  interest  was  outweighed  by  the  personal
    circumstances of the Appellant and his children.  We readily appreciate
    that the Secretary of State wishes to maintain a high threshold  so  as
    to prevent proportionality and Article 8 being misused.   However,  for
    the reasons given, we also take into account his good English  language
    skills and his will to occupy himself so far as he can, for as long  as
    he can, in work.  We take into account that  the  Appellant's  children
    are in work with prospects of it and being good, well paid  employment,
    have their homes and roots in the United Kingdom now.  They are able to
    accommodate the Appellant in the UK if need be.  Accordingly,  we  find
    the Respondent's decision was disproportionate.

 NOTICE OF DECISION

22.  The appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

23.  It follows the appeal against removal directions is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have allowed the appeal  and  because  a  fee  has  been  paid  or  is
payable, we have considered making a fee award but decided to  make  no  fee
award for the  following  reason.    It  was  later  evidence  which  showed
removal was disproportionate.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

