
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47696/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd June 2014                             |On 1st July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                             Mr Orestes Rapadas
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lams, instructed by Palis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the parties as they were referred to in the First Tier
    Tribunal that is Mr Rapadas as the appellant and the Secretary of State
    as the respondent although the application for permission to appeal was
    made by the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines and  born  on  7th  April
    1979.  He made an application dated 28th November  2012  for  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration  Rules  and  this  was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State under Paragraph 276 ADE as he had not spent half his
    life in the UK and he had not lost ties with  his  home  country.   The
    matter  was  also  considered  under  the  'exceptional   circumstances
    consideration'.

 3. The background to the case was that the appellant's mother was born  in
    the Philippines and never married.  She had one son, the appellant. She
    worked in the UK as a domestic worker at St  Mary's  Hospital  and  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain.  In 2008  she  had  a  stroke  from
    which she recovered.  In 2011  she  had  a  'massive  right  hemisphere
    haemorrhage and was admitted to  hospital  and  then  a  rehabilitation
    unit.  In May 2012 she had a third stroke whilst in an  assisted  home,
    the Willow Housing Association.  Power of attorney  was  granted  to  a
    friend Miss L Lamido and on 17th June 2012 the  appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom on a visit visa, having made clear that he  intended  to
    visit to take care of his mother during his stay. The appellant made an
    application outside the rules for leave to remain.

 4. The respondent asserted in the refusal letter that the local  authority
    and social services were under a duty to provide suitable care for  his
    mother. She had assisted housing, meals on wheels and carers in the UK.
     Ms L Llamido, a friend, was listed as next of kin  and  had  power  of
    attorney for his mother.  If she needed alternative care this could  be
    arranged by Ms Llamido.  The appellant had failed to provide  a  letter
    from a registered medical practitioner and thus his presence in the  UK
    was not required to provide care. Grants of  leave  outside  the  rules
    were rare and  given  only  in  genuinely  compassionate  reasons.  The
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that his circumstances  were  such
    that discretion should be exercised outside the Immigration  Rules  and
    thus the application was refused further to Paragraph 322(1).

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Oakley  allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 6. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    Judge had misdirected himself because  he  had  failed  to  follow  the
    guidance in Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (admin) and Gulshan  v  SSHD   [2013]
    UKUT 640 IAC.  There should not be a freewheeling  Article  8  analysis
    unencumbered by the rules.  The judge had addressed  Article  8  family
    aspects through the rules.  He failed to have adequate  regard  to  the
    rules when making the Article 8 assessment.

 7. Application for permission was granted by  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Osborne on the basis that the First Tier Tribunal judge missed out  the
    essential  step  of  considering  whether  there  were  compelling   or
    exceptional circumstances in the appellant's case before moving  on  to
    undertake such as assessment.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Everett stated that there was one point  of
    challenge and that was that the judge did not follow  the  guidance  in
    Gulshan or the provisions of Appendix  FM.   She  referred  me  to  the
    judgement in Haleemudeen v SSHD 2014] EWCA Civ 558  and  in  particular
    paragraphs 40 and 41 which stated

    'These new provisions in the Immigration Rules are a  central  part  of
    the  legislative  and  policy  context  in  which  the   interests   of
    immigration control are balanced against the interests  and  rights  of
    people who have come to this country and wish to settle in it.  Overall
    the Secretary of State's policy as to  when  an  interference  with  an
    Article  8  right  will  be  regarded  as  disproportionate   is   more
    particularised in the new Rules than it had previously  been.  The  new
    Rules require stronger bonds with the United Kingdom before leave  will
    be given under them. The features of the policy contained in the  Rules
    include the requirements of twenty year residence, that the applicant's
    partner be a British citizen in the United Kingdom,  settled  here,  or
    here with leave as a refugee or humanitarian protection, and that where
    the basis of the application rests on  the  applicant's  children  that
    they have been residents for seven years.


    The FTT's decision on Mr Haleemudeen's Article 8 appeal is contained in
    [34]-[41], which I summarised and set out in part at [21] - [23] above.
    Those paragraphs do not  refer,  either  expressly  or  implicitly,  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the rules or to Appendix FM. None of the  new  more
    particularised features of the policy are identified or  even  referred
    to in general terms'


 9. Mr Lams asserted that the case turned on its own unusual facts and  was
    the paradigm 'exceptional' case requiring separate consideration.  This
    case differed from Nagre and Gulshan.  The appellant fell  outside  the
    ambit of the Rules and  Appendix  FM.   Rule  276  ADE  was  of  little
    relevance to his application and thus  the  Nagre  'coverage'  did  not
    apply.  Both MF Nigeria v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 and Nagre confirmed
    that any decision should be compliant with Article  8.  The  judge  had
    identified that the appellant had a family life with  his  mother.   It
    was right that a  separate  consideration  was  given  and  unless  the
    Judge's conclusion that removal was disproportionate was plainly  wrong
    there were clearly arguably good grounds  for  considering  the  matter
    outside the rules.  The appellant had offered his  mother  close  daily
    support over the last 18 months and this conclusion was central to  the
    judge's conclusions.  The judge took in evidence from Janet Ellwood  of
    Harrod Court, from the Sheltered Housing Support worker  and  from  the
    Willow Housing and Care Scheme Manager dated 15th November  2013  which
    remarked on the improvement of the appellant's health since the arrival
    of her son and her depression at the thought of him  returning.   There
    was also reference to the extent to which Ms Llamido could continue  to
    provide  for  the  appellant's  mother  as  she  had  her  own   family
    commitments.

10. He submitted that was unarguable  that  there  were  good  grounds  for
    considering the matter outside the rules and thus there was no error of
    law in the Judge carrying out the assessment. He also  argued  that  as
    the respondent herself had cited that the matter was considered outside
    the rules this  in  itself  demonstrated  that  the  matter  should  be
    considered outside the rules by the judge with reference to Article  8.
    Appendix FM did not apply in this case. There were no standard  factors
    in this case and thus the judge was bound to go outside the rules.  The
    judge would have been wrong not to go on to consider Article 8  in  the
    way he did. This was a different case from Nagre and in particular  the
    appellant only applied  for  limited  leave.  This  appellant  had  not
    applied for settlement. The judge had found that there were  compelling
    circumstances.

11. Ms Everett submitted that she accepted that the grounds had  only  been
    framed with respect to the challenge to the approach under Gulshan  and
    that the determination was not challenged with respect  to  the  weight
    put on the Secretary of State's case in proportionality.

Conclusions

12. The appellant made an application which was refused by  the  respondent
    not only  with  reference  to  Paragraph  276ADE  but  also  under  the
    'exceptional circumstances policy'.  The respondent identified that the
    application was refused under Paragraph 322 (1) but the respondent also
    noted that the application  was  made  on  exceptional  and  compelling
    grounds.   Inherent  in  this  is,  in  my  view,  an  acceptance  that
    exceptional grounds did apply from the outset.

13. This is not a case where the judge made no reference to the  rules  and
    was not aware of the rules.  In particular he found that the  appellant
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules paragraph 276 ADE at [20]
    of the determination.

14. Although he did  not  specifically  make  reference  to  Gulshan,  when
    reading  the  determination  as  a  whole  and  in  the  light  of  the
    respondent's decision which confirmed that the  matter  was  considered
    outside the rules on the basis of exceptional and compelling grounds, I
    am not persuaded that there was an error of law in the approach of  the
    judge.  This was an unusual case.  I find that the judge  set  out  the
    unusual circumstances of the appellant's situation.  On  a  reading  of
    the determination it is clear there  were  arguably  good  grounds  for
    considering the matter outside the rules. The mother had had 3  strokes
    and the judge went through the evidence with regard the  care  for  the
    mother and the 'profound emotional  effect  on  his  mother  which  has
    translated into improved health'.  The appellant had entered the UK  to
    care for his mother and made this plain to the Immigration  authorities
    when he made that application.

15.   Ms Everett submitted that there was no provision in  the  Immigration
    rules for issuing entry clearance on the basis of an applicant  wishing
    to come to the UK to care for a sick family member  and  this  type  of
    application was catered for by the visit visa provisions.  It  was  set
    out by the judge in his proportionality exercise that this was  not  an
    application for settlement and indeed  the  appellant  only  wished  to
    remain on a temporary basis.  Mr  Lams  pointed  out  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph  276ADE  referred  to  settlement  or  route  to   settlement
    applications and in this manner the appellant's claim differed.

16. I take the point that Ms Everrett makes that the fact that no  rule  in
    the Immigration Rules covers an application for a  carer  and  this  in
    itself underlines the Secretary of State's position  regarding  carers,
    there is none the less policy guidance regarding carers  and  leave  to
    remain. This states specifically that 'each case must be looked  at  on
    its individual merits'. Indeed initially the  guidance  states  that  3
    months leave  might  be  granted  to  arrange  alternative  care.   The
    guidance goes on  to  state  that  where  there  are  further  requests
    detailed enquiries will be made to establish the full facts.

17. I concur that the circumstances of this appeal are not  such  that  are
    envisaged under the Immigration Rules that is  Paragraph  276ADE  which
    has some but limited relevance in this instance and, as I state, was in
    any event cited.

18. Even if this is incorrect, overall I find that the failure  to  address
    Gulshan in the judge's approach, was not a material error in the  light
    of the subsequent analysis  and  findings  by  the  judge.   There  are
    particular circumstances of this  case  which  found  a  good  arguable
    ground for addressing the matter outside the rules, not least the  very
    poor health of the mother and the cost  saving  to  the  state  by  the
    presence (at present) of the appellant and the  appropriate  care  that
    could be made for the mother. I am  not  persuaded  that  there  is  an
    adequate mechanism in the Immigration Rules to address these issues and
    note that it is the guidance, not part of the  rules,  which  addresses
    the matters to be asked.

19. The judge explored  the  relevant  factors  under  Razgar  and  made  a
    detailed analysis of the evidence. He did factor in the, albeit briefly
    the 'countervailing interests of immigration  control'  albeit  briefly
    but this in itself was not challenged by the respondent, as Ms  Everett
    noted.

20. In all the particular circumstances of this case  I  am  not  persuaded
    that the judge made an error of law which would materially  affect  the
    outcome.  I find that the decision of Judge Oakley should stand.


Signed                                             Date 23rd June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington














