
[pic]
IAC-fH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47865/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 February 2016                        |On 16 March 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                        ELIZABETH TEMITOPE OLAYIWOLA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. A. Adeolu, Counsel instructed by Lonsdale &
Mayall Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Keith promulgated on 3 June 2015 in which  he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    grant an EEA residence card as confirmation of her right to  reside  in
    the United Kingdom under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

    "The grounds seeking  permission  are  wide-ranging  and  make  various
    allegations, with which I need deal.  However,  they  may  be  read  as
    including a complaint about the lack  of  adequate  reasoning  and  the
    approach taken about the issue of whether the appellant's marriage  was
    one of convenience.  The self-direction (see paragraphs 6 and 7) as  to
    the  law  does  not  follow  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage   of
    convenience) Greece [2012]  UKUT  00038  (IAC)  and  thus  the  judge's
    decision may be vitiated by an  arguable  error  of  law  and  I  grant
    permission."


 3. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives, following
    which I reserved my decision which I set out below with reasons.

Error of law


 4. In paragraph [6] the judge states:

    "The burden of proof rests with the Appellant to demonstrate  that  she
    meets the requirements of a 'spouse' for the purpose of Regulation 7 of
    the EEA Regulations, and in particular  ,  that  her  marriage  to  the
    Sponsor is not one of convenience."

 5. In paragraph [24] he states:

    "Having assessed that evidence, I do not find, in the  context  of  the
    extremely limited  evidence  provided  by  the  Appellant,  that  those
    limited documents were of sufficient corroborative weight such that the
    Appellant had  discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  she  is  the
    Sponsor's spouse, within the meaning of the EEA Regulations."

 6. It was accepted by Mr. Avery at the hearing that it  was  not  apparent
    from paragraph [6] that the judge had appreciated that  the  burden  of
    proof lay on the Respondent in the first instance.   He  accepted  that
    the judge  had  not  appreciated  the  Papajorgji  point.   However  he
    submitted that although this may be an error,  it  was  the  extent  to
    which it was material which was relevant.


 7. I find that  it  is  clear  from  paragraph  [6]  that  the  judge  has
    misdirected himself as to the law.  Papajorgji provides that  in  cases
    of marriage of convenience the burden of proof initially  lies  on  the
    Respondent  to  raise  a  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is   one   of
    convenience.  Only once the Respondent  has  satisfied  the  burden  of
    proof to show that there is a suspicion of such  a  marriage  does  the
    burden of proof pass to the Appellant.  Paragraph [24] where the  judge
    states that the Appellant  had  not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof
    indicates that the misstatement of the law in  paragraph  [6]  has  fed
    through the whole decision.


 8. In order to ascertain whether this error is material I have  considered
    whether the judge placed weight on  the  evidence  of  the  Respondent,
    given the fact that the burden of proof rested with the  Respondent  in
    the first place.


 9. In paragraph [20] the judge states:

    "I was conscious that I had not seen the notes of the  Appellant's  and
    Sponsor's  interviews  and  while  the  Appellant  did  not   seek   an
    adjournment on this basis, I attach less  weight  to  the  Respondent's
    summary  of  the   interviews   (and   the   alleged   inconsistencies)
    accordingly."

10. Given that the burden of proof lay on the Respondent, it  was  not  for
    the Appellant to seek an adjournment on the basis that the notes of the
    interviews had not been provided.  Rather it was for the Respondent  to
    seek an adjournment if she wished to rely on those documents.   I  find
    that the misdirection as to the law has infected the  judge's  approach
    as shown by this implicit criticism of the  Appellant  for  failing  to
    seek an adjournment.


11. The judge states that he  attaches  less  weight  to  the  Respondent's
    summary  of  the  interviews.   The   Respondent   decided   that   the
    relationship was is not genuine by reference to the marriage  interview
    records.  She considered  that  there  were  a  significant  number  of
    discrepancies,  inconsistencies,  irregularities  and  issues  in   the
    interview records.  On page 2 of the reasons  for  refusal  letter  the
    Respondent lists these  discrepancies.   At  the  end  of  page  2  the
    Respondent concludes that "based on the  information  detailed  in  the
    interviewer's reports the Secretary of State has sufficient evidence to
    believe that the marriage undertaken is one of convenience".  Therefore
    in the reasons for refusal  letter  the  only  evidence  on  which  the
    Respondent relies are these discrepancies.  However, the  judge  states
    in paragraph [20] that he had not seen the notes of the interviews  and
    accordingly attached less weight to the Respondent's summary.


12. Given that this was the basis on which the application was refused,  if
    the judge does not have the interview records themselves and is placing
    less weight on the summary of this evidence, it is difficult to see how
    he could have found in any event that the Respondent had discharged the
    burden of proof to show that the marriage was one of convenience.


13. Mr. Avery submitted that additionally the reasons  for  refusal  letter
    detailed failures to attend interviews.  However, I  find  that  it  is
    clear from the letter that the reason that  the  Respondent  gives  for
    deciding that the marriage was one  of  convenience  is  based  on  the
    information detailed in the interviewer's reports.  The only  reference
    to any failure to attend interviews is  in  the  second  paragraph  and
    relates  to  previous  applications.   The  Respondent  then  turns  to
    consider the current application  and  notes  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor attended interviews.  The judge refers to the failure to attend
    marriage interviews in paragraph [3]  when  detailing  the  immigration
    history of the Appellant.  He does not mention it either when recording
    the submissions made by the Respondent's  representative,  nor  in  the
    findings of fact.  The only evidence from the Respondent to  which  the
    judge  refers  when  making  his  findings  is  the  evidence  of   the
    discrepancies in the summary of the interviews.


14. The judge also refers to the lack  of  documentation  provided  by  the
    Appellant to corroborate his claim to be in a  relationship.   However,
    in the reasons for refusal letter there is  no  issue  taken  with  the
    Appellant's  claim  to  be  cohabiting,  and  no  suggestion  that  the
    Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  not  living  together.   The   documents
    considered  by  the  judge  are  listed  in  paragraph  [24].   I  have
    considered these documents which contain evidence in these documents of
    cohabitation.  However, the judge has  not  paid  any  regard  to  this
    evidence but has instead relied on the answers given at interview.


15. The judge's findings relating to credibility are set out in only  three
    paragraphs.  The judge did not find the Appellant  and  Sponsor  to  be
    credible witnesses but this finding must be set against  his  error  in
    placing the burden of proof on them and not on the Respondent,  and  in
    failing to assess whether or not  the  Respondent  had  discharged  her
    burden by reference to the evidence she provided.   He  has  failed  to
    take into account the corroborative evidence.


16. Following the  case  of  Papajorgji  a  child  can  be  evidence  of  a
    relationship.  Given that the Appellant was pregnant at  the  time  and
    documents had been provided detailing this pregnancy, it was  incumbent
    on the judge to consider this.  However he failed to mention this until
    the last sentence of paragraph [24].


17. I find that the error of law in placing the  burden  of  proof  on  the
    Appellant has infected the judge's entire approach such that the  error
    is material.  No account was taken of the evidence of  cohabitation  or
    of the pregnancy.


18. Paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice  Statement  dated  10  February  2010
    contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    where the effect of the error has been to deprive a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing  or  other  opportunity  for  the
    party's case to be put to and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Given the nature and extent of the  fact-finding  necessary  to  enable
    this appeal to be remade, having regard to the overriding objective,  I
    find that it is appropriate  to  remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


19. The decision involves the making an error of law and I set it aside.


20. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 4 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

