
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47292/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 23 July 2015                        |               On 22 September 2015  |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            SEMHAR HAILE BEREKET
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)



                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Skyler, instructed by Singhania & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Semhar Haile Bereket, was born on 25 May 1986 and is  a
    female citizen of Eritrea.  The  appellant  had  appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 27 October 2014 to refuse her leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom and to remove  the  appellant  by  way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act  2006.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Cox),  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 23 March 2015, allowed the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the  Upper  Tribunal.   I  shall
    hereafter  refer  to  the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  to  the
    respondent as the appellant (as they appeared respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Mr Skyler, for the appellant, acknowledged that the judge had erred  in
    law by allowing the appeal under HC 395, in particular E-DVR  ILR  1.2.
    At [26] the judge had written:

         As can be seen paragraph E-DVR ILR 1.2 specifically refers  to  the
         applicant's first and last grant of limited leave to  remain  being
         granted under the Immigration Rules...

 3. The judge went on to conclude at [27]:

         having carefully considered E-DVR ILR 1.2 I am satisfied  that  the
         natural ordinary meaning of 'last grant  of  limited  leave'  could
         include leave granted on a discretionary basis.  I am satisfied the
         appellant's last grant of limited leave to remain in the UK was  as
         a partner of a person with  ILR  in  the  UK.   Accordingly,  I  am
         satisfied the appellant met the requirements of paragraph E-DVR ILR
         1.2.

 4.  The  judge  acknowledged  [23]  that  both  parties  agreed  that  the
    appellant's last grant of limited leave had  been  on  a  discretionary
    basis and outside the Immigration Rules.  As the grounds point out:

         the appellant has never been  granted  leave  as  a  partner  of  a
         British citizen or a person settled in the UK.  The last leave  she
         was granted was discretionary leave.  The wording at  paragraph  E-
         DVR ILR 1.2 is clear and, therefore, the Tribunal's finding at [27]
         is incorrect.  It applied the natural and ordinary meaning test  to
         only a small part of the paragraph and then redefined it.

 5. Mr Skyler and Mr Diwnycz agreed that the judge's  construction  of  the
    Rule was incorrect.  The Rule clearly refers to  the  "last  ground  of
    limited leave"; both parties now agree that the proper construction  of
    this Rule cannot include discretionary leave to  remain  given  outside
    the Immigration Rules.

 6. In addition to claiming a right to remain under the Immigration  Rules,
    the appellant had also appealed on asylum and Article 3  ECHR  grounds.
    She claims  that  "due  to  her  political  and  religious  and  social
    circumstances and the existing situation in Eritrea, she will  be  ill-
    treated by the authorities ..."  (see Paragraph 21 of  her  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal).  Judge Cox  noted  [17]  that  "the
    appellant also stated  that,  as  a  practising  Christian,  she  fears
    returning to Eritrea.  However, she has not formally lodged a claim for
    asylum with the respondent."  He makes  no  further  reference  to  the
    asylum/Article 3 ECHR grounds of the appellant, perhaps because he  was
    content to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.   However,  he
    erred in law by failing to deal with a  ground  of  appeal  (Article  3
    ECHR)  validly  raised  by  the  appellant.   Therefore,  although  the
    appellant cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  relating  to
    domestic violence, she is entitled to a  proper  consideration  of  her
    appeal on Article 3/asylum grounds.  For that reason, I  have  remitted
    the matter to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge Cox) for that Tribunal
    to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 23 March 2015 is  set
aside.  None of the findings of fact  shall  stand.   The  appellant  cannot
succeed in her appeal under paragraph E-DVR ILR 1.2 of HC 395 (as  amended).
 The First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Cox)  will  therefore  determine  the
appeal  on  asylum/Article  3  ECHR  grounds   and   remake   the   decision
accordingly.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 20 September 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



