
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47552/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 5 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                                MR RASAL MIAH

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel instructed by Sony Sadaf Haroon
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant,  Mr  Rasal  Miah,  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   His
    evidence is that he has lived continuously in the UK since 1997.  On 26
    September 2007 he applied for leave to remain in  the  UK  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and by reference to Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.
     His application was refused in a decision of 10 December  2009,  which
    was followed by removal directions on 22 January 2010.  By  that  stage
    the Appellant would have been in the  UK,  on  his  own  evidence,  for
    thirteen or fourteen years.  The Appellant's solicitors wrote again  to
    the Respondent on 9 September 2013, prompting a refusal  letter  of  14
    October 2013.

2.   On 7 November  2013  the  Appellant  gave  Notice  of  Appeal,  relying
    essentially on Article 8.  His appeal was heard on  29  April  2014  by
    Judge Symes sitting at Richmond.  Both parties  were  represented,  the
    Appellant by Mr Miah of Counsel (who appeared before me at the error of
    law hearing).

3.   The correspondence between the parties in 2013 which is  before  me  is
    not  complete.   It  seems  to  have  invoked  paragraph  276B  of  the
    Immigration Rules, setting out the requirements for indefinite leave to
    remain in the UK on the ground of, in this instance, at least  fourteen
    years' continuous residence there.  The appeal was argued by  reference
    to paragraph 276B and to Article 8  based  upon  private  life.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 19 May 2014 the appeal  was  dismissed  on
    both grounds.

4.   On  28  May  2014  the  Appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal.   As
    subsequently expanded  by  standard  procedural  directions,  this  was
    granted on 11 June 2014 by Judge Kelly in the following terms:

         "1.  The appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Symes)  who,  in  a
             determination promulgated on the 19th May 2014, dismissed  his
             appeal against refusal of his application  to  remain  on  the
             basis of his long residence in the United Kingdom.


           2. The Tribunal found that whilst the appellant may have  resided
             in the United Kingdom for up to a decade, it was not satisfied
             that he had resided here for a period  of  14  years  for  the
             purposes  of  paragraph  276B   of   the   Immigration   Rules
             [paragraphs 20 and  21].   In  failing  to  particularise  the
             inconsistencies that it found between the testimony  given  by
             the Appellant and that given by Nural  Haque  (other  than  to
             record that they in some way related to the gaps between their
             meetings and the appellant's work  patterns)  it  is  arguable
             that the Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for  finding
             that their testimony was unreliable concerning the Appellant's
             claimed residence for a period of 14 years [paragraph 21], and
             that this was especially so in  view  of  the  fact  that  the
             appellant's representative had  made  submissions  as  to  how
             their testimony might be reconciled [paragraph  13].   Because
             proof of the Appellant's claimed residence for a period of  14
             years lay at the crux of his appeal, any error of law that may
             be found in this regard is obviously material to  the  outcome
             of the appeal."


5.   On 24 June 2014 the Respondent submitted a response to the  grounds  of
    appeal under Rule 24 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

6.   The Appellant attended the error of law hearing before me,  which  took
    the form of submissions.  I reserved my determination.   I  have  taken
    these  submissions  into  account,   together   with   the   permission
    application and the Rule 24 response.

Determination

7.   As Mr Miah explained, in response to submissions from Mr  Jarvis  which
    he submitted went beyond the issues in the permission application,  the
    application was based upon the failure to particularise inconsistencies
    found by the judge between the evidence of the Appellant  and  that  of
    his witness, Mr Nural Haque, and thus upon inadequate findings.  I have
    analysed the determination in this light.

8.   The Refusal Letter of 14  October  2013  seemingly  (because  only  its
    first page is before me) stated that on his evidence the Appellant  has
    been in the UK for twelve years and eleven months (paragraph 3  of  the
    determination).  The Appellant's evidence is that he lived continuously
    in the UK since 1997 (Appellant's statement at page  1  of  Appellant's
    bundle, paragraph 1, and determination paragraph 6).  I  note  that  on
    that basis he would have been in the UK for some sixteen years  at  the
    date of the Refusal Letter of 14  October  2013  and  some  sixteen  or
    seventeen years at the date of the hearing on 29 April 2014.

9.   Nural Haque wrote in his letter of 1  April  2014  at  page  7  of  the
    Appellant's bundle that he had known the Appellant for around  thirteen
    years (determination paragraph 7).  The Appellant said in evidence that
    he had known Nural Haque for some thirteen years (paragraph 10).  Nural
    Haque said in evidence that he had known  the  Appellant  for  thirteen
    years (paragraph 11).  I note that the Appellant and  Nural  Haque  are
    consistent in stating that they had known each other for, or for around
    thirteen years.

10.  The Appellant wrote in paragraph 3 of his statement that he had  worked
    in restaurants.  In oral evidence he said that following his arrival in
    the UK he had gone to an Indian restaurant in  Chiswick  where  he  had
    worked for a few days.  Mr Haque's letter does not refer to his  having
    employed the Appellant.  In his oral evidence Mr Haque  said  that  the
    Appellant would come to the place where Mr Haque  worked  in  Hounslow,
    and that years ago Mr Haque used  to  own  a  chicken  shop  where  the
    Appellant had worked with him for perhaps five or six months (paragraph
    11).  If Mr Haque gave any evidence about the  Appellant's  pattern  of
    working, this is not recorded.

11.  The Respondent submitted that the Appellant  and  Mr  Haque  had  given
    inconsistent  evidence  about  the  Appellant's  work  in  a   takeaway
    restaurant (paragraph 12).  For the Appellant Mr  Miah  responded  that
    the  evidence  about  the  terms  of  the  Appellant's  work  was   not
    necessarily inconsistent because the Appellant might  have  worked  for
    six months covering periods of one or two days  at  a  time  (paragraph
    13).  I note that it is not clear whether the Appellant's  evidence  of
    having worked initially at an Indian restaurant in Chiswick for  a  few
    days (paragraph 8) refers to the chicken shop which Mr  Haque  used  to
    own.  In the light of the Appellant's evidence in paragraph  3  of  his
    statement that he worked in restaurants, this may or may not have  been
    the same restaurant.

12.  The judge found that the evidence of the Appellant  and  Mr  Haque  was
    inconsistent about the Appellant's former pattern of working (paragraph
    19) and about how long they sometimes went without seeing  one  another
    and the circumstances in which the Appellant  worked  in  the  takeaway
    restaurant (paragraph 21).  As to the circumstances of the  Appellant's
    work, the recorded evidence is only that which I have  summarised.   As
    to how long  they  sometimes  went  without  seeing  one  another,  the
    determination does not summarise any evidence, and none appears in  the
    Appellant's statement nor in Mr Haque's letter.

13.  I accept the submission of Mr Miah  that  the  determination  does  not
    explain the basis for the finding of inconsistency.  This was an  error
    of law, because the Appellant was entitled to know the basis upon which
    this finding had been reached.  The issue of the Appellant's pattern of
    working was significant, because it was described as the peg  on  which
    so much of the case hangs (paragraph 21).

14.  The judge considered the evidence holistically.   Although  there  were
    letters of support from several people,  only  Mr  Haque  attended  the
    hearing to give evidence (paragraphs 7, 11).  The Respondent  submitted
    that witness statements and letters should be afforded  reduced  weight
    in the absence of their authors (paragraph 12).   An  advised  decision
    had been made not to call the  Appellant's  wife  (paragraph  19).   Mr
    Haque and the Appellant both said that they had known each other for or
    for around thirteen years (paragraphs 7, 10, 11).  The judge  found  on
    balance that the Appellant had established that he had lived in the  UK
    for a significant period; this may have been for as long as  a  decade,
    although there was insufficient reliable material before him to come  a
    firm conclusion beyond this (paragraph 20).  He did not accept that the
    Appellant had lived in the UK  for  fourteen  years.   Because  of  the
    inconsistency in the evidence between the Appellant and Mr Haque he did
    not think that their recollection of the Appellant's precise period  of
    residence was reliable; the writers of  the  letters  of  support  were
    unable to confirm this  length  of  residence;  and  having  heard  the
    Appellant's evidence,  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  it  could
    establish that he has truly lived in the UK  for  such  a  long  period
    (paragraph 21).

15.  The inconsistency between the evidence of the Appellant and that of  Mr
    Haque was a factor which the judge took into  account.   As  stated,  I
    have found it to be an unreliable finding.   However  it  is  severable
    from the other factors in the judicial chain of reasoning which led  to
    the  conclusions  in  paragraphs  20  and  21.   Severing   it,   those
    conclusions are grounded in the evidence and justifiable.

16.   The  onus  was  upon  the  Appellant  to  establish  fourteen   years'
    continuous residence.  Mr Haque's evidence, taken at  its  highest  and
    even had it been accepted without qualification, was that at  the  date
    of the hearing, when he gave evidence, he had known the  Appellant  for
    or for around thirteen years.  The totality of the evidence before  the
    judge was insufficiently reliable to enable  him  to  come  to  a  firm
    conclusion that the Appellant had lived in the UK  for  as  long  as  a
    decade, and still less for fourteen years.  So  the  error  of  law  in
    relying on insufficiently reasoned findings was  not  material  to  the
    conclusion, which is consistent with the evidence of Mr  Haque  had  it
    been unreservedly accepted, that  the  Appellant  had  not  established
    fourteen years' continuous residence in the UK.

17.  The permission application does not challenge the Article  8  findings.
    I have nevertheless considered  whether  the  error  of  law  may  have
    influenced them.  The judge concluded that the Appellant  had  made  an
    application based  on  exaggeration  as  to  his  length  of  residence
    (paragraph  24).   He  considered  the  position  on  unlawful  working
    (paragraph 24).  In the light of his holistic findings, I find that the
    specific error of law did not undermine his findings on Article 8.

18.  I conclude that, whilst the determination reflected an error of law  in
    the form of insufficiently reasoned findings upon a significant matter,
    this was not material to the outcome of the appeal.  The  determination
    is accordingly upheld.

Decision

19.  The original determination does not contain a material  error  of  law,
    and is upheld.

Signed
     Dated: 5 August 2014




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

