
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/47506/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th February 2016                         |On 2nd March 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        oluwamakiwa oludolamu folarin
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Alexander of Counsel instructed by ATM Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of  Judge  Gibb  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 28th January 2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FTT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Nigerian citizen born 1st April 1967 who arrived
    in the United Kingdom illegally in  2003.   He  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in January 2012, his application was based upon his marriage  to
    a person with settled status, and he relied upon Article 8 of the  1950
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950  Convention).   The
    application was refused on 18th March 2013 without a right  of  appeal.
    On 8th November 2013 the Secretary of State made a decision  to  remove
    the Claimant from the United Kingdom.

 4. The Claimant appealed against that decision and his appeal was heard by
    the  FTT  on  7th  January  2015.   The  FTT  found  that  because  the
    application for leave to remain had been made in January 2012,  it  was
    appropriate to consider the application with  reference  to  Article  8
    outside  the  Immigration  Rules,  as  the  application  pre-dated  the
    introduction into the Immigration Rules of Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE(1).

 5. The FTT allowed the appeal under  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  This prompted the Secretary of State to make an application for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. In summary it was contended that the FTT had erred by  considering  the
    appeal with reference to Article 8 outside the Immigration  Rules,  and
    should initially have considered the appeal with reference to  Appendix
    FM and paragraph 276ADE.

 7. It was also contended that the FTT had erred  in  assessing  Article  8
    outside the Rules, and had failed to lawfully engage with section  117B
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede in  the
    following terms;


         "2.  Although the judge considered Appendix FM in the  alternative,
             it is arguable that his view of the applicability of  the  new
             Rules, now clarified by the judgment in Singh v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  74  as  being
             erroneous, affected his decision so that his  starting  point,
             in considering Article  8  outside  the  rules,  was  arguably
             inconsistent with relevant case law.  It is arguable that  the
             judge did not take full and proper account of  the  weight  of
             the  public  interest   considerations   in   s117B   of   the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
         3.   The grounds are arguable."

 9. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FTT had erred in law such  that
    the decision must be set aside.

Oral Submissions

10. Mr Nath relied upon the grounds contained within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

11. Mr Alexander accepted that the FTT had erred by considering  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules and should have initially considered  the
    application under  the  Immigration  Rules,  notwithstanding  that  the
    application was made before the introduction  of  the  new  Immigration
    Rules, including Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

12. Mr Alexander however contended that the error was not material  because
    the FTT had considered all the evidence, and  would  have  reached  the
    same conclusion, had the  appeal  been  considered  with  reference  to
    Appendix FM.

My Conclusions and Reasons

13. I announced at the hearing that the FTT had erred in law, and the error
    was material, and the decision of the FTT must be set  aside,  for  the
    following reasons.

14. The approach of the FTT to the issues in the appeal was wrong  in  law.
    The FTT erred in paragraph 6 in stating;

         "The  correct  legal  approach,  therefore,  was  to  consider  the
         application under the  legal  structure  that  existed  before  the
         introduction of Appendix FM."

15. This point of law was clarified by the Court of Appeal in Singh  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74.  It was stated in paragraph 56 that with effect  from  6th
    September 2012 the Secretary of State was entitled to take into account
    the provisions of Appendix FM and paragraphs 276ADE-276DH  in  deciding
    private or family life applications even if they were made prior to 9th
    July 2012.  The  only  exception  to  this  would  be  in  relation  to
    decisions taken between 9th July 2012 and  6th  September  2012,  which
    does not apply in this case.  It is only fair to the FTT to point  out,
    that this issue was not clear when the FTT heard this appeal, and Singh
    was published after the FTT decision was promulgated.

16. However Singh makes it clear that the FTT did approach this appeal in a
    legally incorrect way, and should have considered firstly, Appendix  FM
    in relation to family life, and paragraph 276ADE  in  relation  to  any
    private life claim.

17. The Court of Appeal in Agyarko [2015]  EWCA  Civ  440  (also  published
    after the FTT decision had been promulgated) gave some guidance on  the
    insurmountable obstacles test, to which there was reference in the  FTT
    decision.  For ease of reference  I  set  out  below  paragraph  21  of
    Agyarko:

         "21. The phrase insurmountable obstacles as used in this  paragraph
             of the rules clearly imposes a high hurdle to be  overcome  by
             an applicant for leave to remain under the rules.  The test is
             significantly more demanding than a mere test  of  whether  it
             would be reasonable to  expect  a  couple  to  continue  their
             family life outside the United Kingdom."

18. In Agyarko, it was found that the mere fact that the Sponsor,  who  had
    lived all his life in the United Kingdom and had employment  here,  and
    hence might find it  difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to  relocate
    outside  the  United  Kingdom  to  continue  family  life,  could   not
    constitute insurmountable obstacles to his doing so.

19. The FTT should only have gone on to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, according to the principles  in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387, which is another decision published after promulgation of
    the FTT decision, if compelling circumstances existed, which  were  not
    covered by the Immigration Rules.

20. The FTT erred in considering Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules,
    by not adequately considering the provisions of  section  117B  of  the
    2002 Act.

21. The FTT failed to adequately explain the findings in paragraph  26,  in
    which proportionality was considered,  and  why  the  balance  fell  in
    favour of the Claimant.  The FTT referred to section 117B but  did  not
    demonstrate that it had properly engaged with the provisions  contained
    therein.  Section 117B  contains  the  public  interest  considerations
    which are applicable in all cases when Article 8 of the 1950 Convention
    is considered outside the Immigration Rules.  It provides that;


         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.
         (4)  Little weight should be given to -
             (a)  a private life, or
             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully."

22. The Claimant had been  in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully  since  his
    illegal entry in 2003.  The FTT therefore  must  have  attached  little
    weight to his private life, and his relationship with his partner,  and
    the FTT has not adequately explained why  if  that  is  the  case,  the
    balance  when  considering  proportionality  fell  in  favour  of   the
    Claimant.

23. The Court of Appeal commented in Agyarko at paragraph 28, that where an
    individual, seeking leave to remain under Article 8 outside the  Rules,
    established a family life in the knowledge that he or she had no  right
    to be in the United Kingdom, they could only succeed under Article 8 if
    their case was exceptional.

24. For the above reasons, the decision of the FTT is  unsafe  and  is  set
    aside with no findings preserved.

25. Mr Alexander accepted that it would be appropriate to remit the  appeal
    to the FTT to be heard again.  I indicated, having considered paragraph
    7 of the Senior President's Practice  Statements  that  this  would  be
    appropriate, because of the nature and extent of judicial  fact-finding
    that will be necessary in order for the decision to be remade.

26. The appeal will be heard at the Taylor House  Hearing  Centre  and  the
    parties will be advised of the time and date in due course.  The appeal
    is to be heard by an FTT Judge other than Judge Gibb.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FTT with no findings preserved.

Anonymity

The FTT made no anonymity direction and there was no request  to  the  Upper
Tribunal for an anonymity order.  I see no need to order anonymity.


Signed                              Date 18th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The issue of any fee award will need to be considered by the FTT.






Signed                              Date 18th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


