

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47246/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On June 20, 2014                     |On June 23, 2014            |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                            MR MD TOUFIQUR RAHMAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kumar (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Saunders (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born October 15, 1988, is a citizen of  Bangladesh.  The
    appellant entered the United Kingdom on November 6, 2009 in  possession
    of a visa valid until April 30, 2011. He submitted  an  application  to
    extend his leave as a Tier 4 (General) student but his application  was
    refused initially on August 30, 2011. He appealed this decision and his
    appeal was heard on October 24, 2011. His appeal  was  allowed  to  the
    extent that the decision was remitted back to the respondent as it  was
    not in accordance with the law and he was allowed a further 60 days  to
    find  another  Tier  4  sponsor.  The   respondent   reconsidered   the
    application and then refused it on October  29,  2013  under  paragraph
    322(1A) HC 395 on the basis  that  a  false  bank  statement  had  been
    submitted. A decision to remove under section  47  of  the  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was also taken.

 2. On November 8, 2013 the appellant appealed under section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Notices  of  the  hearing
    were sent by second class post to the  respondent,  appellant  and  his
    solicitors.

 3.  The  matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Meah
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  11,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on March 18, 2014  he  found  the  notice  of
    hearing had been served and he was entitled to place  reliance  on  the
    document verification  report  (DVR)  that  was  contained  within  his
    papers.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on March 31, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted on May 1, 2014 by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Levin on the basis he  accepted  it  was  arguable  there  had  been  a
    procedural unfairness.

 5. There was no Rule 24 response from the respondent.

 6. The matter was listed before me on the above date and the appellant was
    in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Kumar submitted that neither his firm nor the appellant had received
    notice of the hearing because if they had he would have either attended
    or written to the  Tribunal  setting  out  his  client's  position.  He
    submitted he had provided further evidence from the  bank  dated  March
    12, 2014 and he also noted the phone number on the DVR was different to
    the phone numbers on the letters. The latest letter confirmed that  the
    original bank statement was genuine and that the manager had  not  been
    contacted by anyone and there was no record of any such contact on  the
    file.

 8. Mr Saunders accepted letters can go astray  but  the  chances  of  both
    letters going astray were improbable. He also submitted that there were
    serious questions to be raised about the new letter itself. The hearing
    had been on March 11th and the decision was promulgated  on  March  18,
    2014. The grounds of appeal referred to the decision being received  on
    March 21, 2014 and the  grounds  indicated  the  appellant  immediately
    contacted the bank and they issued the new letter.  However,  the  bank
    letter was not only dated "in type" March 12, 2014 but the signatory to
    the letter had also written in the date "in hand" next to his name.  No
    credible explanation had been given for this  apparent  discrepancy  in
    the timeline or how the bank would have issued such a letter when  they
    were not contacted until nine days later. Regardless  of  these  issues
    the details of the DVR were in the refusal letter  and  no  explanation
    had been provided to explain what steps had been taken when the refusal
    letter was received. The document verification officer had  no  axe  to
    grind and the only submission that could be made was he had  fabricated
    the DVR and that lacked credibility. He submitted that  even  if  there
    had been a procedural unfairness then it was not material.

 9. Mr Kumar responded to these submissions and accepted the respondent had
    a point about the date but his instructions  were  that  this  was  the
    letter received from the bank. The respondent's bundle also appeared to
    contain an application from a person with the same name but it was  not
    the appellant.

10. I retired briefly to consider the submissions.

    ERROR OF LAW DECISION

11. The court file contained a copy notice that  referred  to  the  hearing
    date and the persons who were supposedly served  were  the  respondent,
    appellant  and  his  solicitors.  Their  addresses  were  correct.  The
    solicitors made it clear that they had never received a  notice  and  I
    accept Mr Kumar's submission in this regard particularly because he had
    not advised the Tribunal whether he would be attending. I  was  not  so
    persuaded that the appellant had been served but in  the  interests  of
    fairness and justice I accepted he had not.

12. I was satisfied this was material error because Mr Saunders'  arguments
    on the documents is an evidential issue that should be dealt with at  a
    substantive hearing. In finding an error I make no criticism of the way
    the FtTJ dealt with it. He dealt with it on the basis the  notices  had
    been served correctly and there had been no appearance.

13. I did consider remitting this decision back to the First-tier  Tribunal
    but Mr Kumar indicated he was content for the Upper  Tribunal  to  deal
    with this matter. In the circumstances I agreed especially as the issue
    was limited to whether the appellant had submitted a false document.



    EVIDENCE

14. The appellant was called  to  give  oral  evidence  and  he  adopted  a
    statement that had been submitted on June 9, 2014.  He  maintained  the
    bank statement of April 1, 2012 was genuine and that the bank had  sent
    him the letter dated March 12, 2014 and it was they who had  dated  the
    letter incorrectly. He confirmed under cross-examination  that  he  had
    called the bank about the  letter  and  statement  but  he  was  unsure
    whether this was on either  March  19th  or  March  20th.  He  recalled
    speaking to his solicitors who told him what to  do.  He  struggled  to
    explain how if he only spoke to the bank on the 19th or 20th March that
    he could receive a letter  dated  March  12th  but  he  reiterated  the
    document was genuine. He was unsure if he  had  retained  the  envelope
    that the documents arrived in but he believed it was some two to  three
    days after his call. He further stated that although he  was  aware  of
    the reason for refusal in late October 2013 he had  not  contacted  the
    bank because his solicitor had said there as no need  until  a  hearing
    date had been given.

15. I then questioned him about who had obtained  the  letter  because  his
    oral evidence was that he had called the  bank  but  as  this  was  his
    father's statement I asked whether this was the case. He told  me  that
    he had spoken to his father and it was his father who  had  called  the
    bank and it was his father who had sent him the document.

16. I have also before me the original bank statements,  two  letters  from
    the bank dated December 15, 2011 and March 12,  2014  as  well  as  the
    respondent's bundle.

    SUBMISSIONS

17. Mr  Saunders  relied  on  both  the  refusal  letter  and  his  earlier
    submissions where relevant to the bank  documents.  He  invited  me  to
    accept the DVR and to accept the checks were made. The  respondent  had
    provided sufficient evidence to satisfy the evidential burden placed on
    her. He submitted the remedial action taken was at  best  confused  and
    little weight should be attached to the new letter  that  contained  an
    incorrect date. He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

18. Mr Kumar adopted his earlier submissions and invited  me  to  find  the
    appellant met the Rules. He  had  explained  why  no  response  to  the
    refusal letter had been obtained in October 2012 and he  had  clarified
    who had obtained the letter in March 2014. He  also  submitted  it  was
    possible that the author of the letter had mistakenly dated the  letter
    incorrectly in two places. I was invited to accept the bank  statements
    as genuine and to allow the appeal.

    FINDINGS ON THE EVIDENCE


19. The appellant's application to extend his leave would be allowed if  he
    satisfied the maintenance requirement. The  issue  in  this  appeal  is
    whether he had satisfied paragraph 245ZX(a) of the Immigration Rules.

20. Two bank statements were submitted along with a letter  from  the  bank
    dated December 15, 2011. The respondent carried out a spot  check  with
    the bank and the information provided  to  her  was  that  the  account
    details were correct but the balances were not. The respondent  refused
    the application under paragraph 322(1A) HC 395.

21. Where a claimant seeks to rely  on  a  document  then,  in  the  normal
    course, the burden lies on the claimant to show that it is  a  document
    that can be relied on.  It does not follow, however, from this exercise
    that the document is a forgery.  There will need to be strong  evidence
    before a Judge makes a positive finding that a document is forged.   It
    is one thing to decide that, as a piece of evidence, a document  merits
    no real weight and is unreliable; quite another to decide that it is  a
    forgery.  In  contrast,  a  finding  that  an  appellant  has  actually
    submitted a forged document may seriously taint the general credibility
    of the appellant. In Re B(Children) 2008 UKHL 35  the  House  of  Lords
    said that in fact "there is only one civil standard of proof  and  that
    is proof that the fact in issue more probably occurred than  not".  The
    respondent  therefore  bears   the   burden   initially   when   forged
    documentation is alleged.

22. To support her claim the respondent relies on the document verification
    report. This report, contained in  the  respondent's  bundle,  confirms
    that an officer contacted the bank concerned and sent  the  letter  and
    statement. The bank  indicated  the  balances  on  the  statement  were
    incorrect but the details of  the  account  holder  were  correct.  The
    officer concluded  that  both  the  statement  and  letter  were  "non-
    genuine".

23. The appellant gave oral evidence today  and  relied  on  the  new  bank
    letter dated March 12, 2014. If this letter had  merely  contained  the
    typed date on it then Mr Kumar's  submissions  may  have  carried  more
    weight but the fact the signatory of the letter  not  only  purportedly
    signed the document but  also  wrote  the  date  against  his  name  as
    12.03.2014 undermines the argument there has been a typing error.

24. The fact the letter pre-dates the date the appellant  became  aware  of
    the original decision is  a  hurdle  he  has  not  addressed.   He  was
    uncertain about his dates but this in itself is not a matter I  make  a
    negative finding on. However, I do have regard to the evidence he  gave
    about how he came to obtain the letter. In cross examination he made it
    clear on at least two occasions that he had called the bank whereas  in
    questions  posed  to  him  by  myself  he  altered  his  account,  when
    challenged as to why the bank would speak to him when he  was  not  the
    account holder, and  said  he  had  called  his  father  who  had  then
    contacted the bank and it was his father who sent the letter to him.

25. Having considered all the evidence I am satisfied  the  respondent  has
    met the test set out in RP (proof  of  forgery)  Nigeria  [2006]  UKAIT
    00086 and has proved the dishonesty by evidence. I accept the  findings
    contained in the DVR report and based on the findings set out  above  I
    do not accept the appellant's evidence or any of the bank documents  in
    so far as the maintenance requirement is concerned.

26. I am satisfied this appeal  that  should  be  refused  under  paragraph
    322(1A) HC 395.

    DECISION

27. There was a material error of law. I have remade  the  decision  and  I
    dismiss the appeal under paragraph 322(1A) of the Immigration Rules.


28. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award I dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
