
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47780/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 March 2016                           |On 28 April 2016                 |
|Prepared on 18 March 2016                  |                                 |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                     A C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotupoulou, instructed by Trott &
Gentry LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Turkey, date of birth [ ]  1974,  appealed
    against a decision of the Secretary of State, dated 24 October 2013, to
    make removal directions under Section 10 of the Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 1999, a form IS.151A having been served on 24 October  2013  and  a
    human  rights  based  claim  having  been  rejected.   Unfortunately  a
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Warren L Grant, who dismissed the
    appeal, was found to contain errors of law.  On 27 October Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rimington concluded that there had  been  a  failure  to
    properly consider the impact of public record keeping, not  least  with
    reference to the GBTS  computerised  national  security  computer,  and
    decided that the appropriate  course  was  to  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision and for the matter to be remade in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Judge Rimington's decision, promulgated on 5 December 2014, eventually,
    regrettably after significant delay, led to a further  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal by Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Shaerf (the Judge) before whom appeared Ms Panagiotupoulou, Counsel.

2.   The judge concluded that there was no  material  risk  on  return  with
    reference to the Refugee  Convention  nor  any  need  for  Humanitarian
    Protection grounds to be engaged and that there were  no  ECHR  grounds
    that justified the Appellant remaining in the UK. The judge's  decision
    [D] was promulgated on 2 September 2015. Permission to appeal was given
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 3 February 2016.

3.   The grounds settled by Ms Panagiotupoulou argued  that  the  judge  had
    failed to properly consider the extent of risk in  the  home  area  not
    only by reference to the GBTS computer system but also to the existence
    of local records and the extent to which if they were consulted, either
    through the arrival at a Turkish airport on entry or thereafter,  would
    reveal adverse interest held by the Gendarmerie or the  police  in  the
    Appellant.

4.   In particular it was submitted that the judge had  failed  to  properly
    consider the impact of the country  guidance  case  of  IK  (Returnees,
    Records, IFA) Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312 in terms of  the  perception
    of the Appellant both through his lengthy absence in  Germany  and  the
    United Kingdom  for over twenty or more years and the extent  to  which
    the home area, described in  a  recent  document  as  a  'ghost  town',
    presented the likelihood if he returned of his background being revived
    and renewed adverse interest in him taken.

5.   It is worth recollecting that the Appellant did not  say,  although  he
    relied upon detentions in 1993 and 1995, that he has, as it were,  done
    anything more to attract adverse interest and nor was it accepted  that
    there are refugee sur  place  issues  that  give  rise  to  an  adverse
    interest in him.  Thus it was clear, on the  evidence  that  must  have
    been given to the judge, that the Appellant had  said  there  had  been
    clearances in the village where he grew up, younger  persons  had  left
    the area and has been repeated in a recent statement where he clarified
    that so far as his parents were concerned  their  home  was  now  in  a
    cleared area or ghost town because it is almost empty.  What  was  said
    was that the judge should not have assumed that there was likely to  be
    changes in policing and thus a diminution in  risk  to  the  Appellant.
    Similarly the judge had not properly assessed the  existence  of  paper
    records and materials which could  be  accessed  from  outside  of  the
    village or alternatively would result in information from  the  village
    headman or  local  Jandarma  giving  rise  to  potential  risk  to  the
    Appellant. I concluded it was open to the judge, on  the  evidence,  to
    have reached a view on the evidence of the  likelihood  of  changes  to
    life in Turkey

6.   The judge's decision was plainly directed  at,  and  substantially  so,
    what was being argued were errors in the earlier decision [D23-28].   A
    distinction was plainly drawn at that stage between  the  situation  of
    arrests or previous arrests, restrictions on  travel,  potential  draft
    evasion and various other matters in relation to military  service  and
    tax arrears which were not in fact pertinent to this  Appellant.   What
    does not appear to have been substantively advanced to  the  judge  was
    the reasonable likelihood that on a return those  paper  records  would
    have been pursued and addressed bearing in mind, if the  Appellant  did
    not fall within GBTS provision, or that there was likely to be  further
    enquiry made into local records.

7.   I take the view that in relation to the assessment of risk in the  home
    area the judge was entitled to take into account as  he  did  the  long
    absence of the  Appellant  from  Turkey,  the  nature  of  the  adverse
    interest which had been  taken  at  the  time  when  the  circumstances
    involving the PKK and trouble in Turkey was obviously as a fact  likely
    to be different from today in material ways.  More importantly that the
    judge was not failing to deal with an element which had been raised  as
    to the real likelihood as opposed to possibility  of  there  being  any
    present or continuing or likely to be revived adverse interest in him.

8.   Thus the judge recognised that submission had been made, see  D26,  but
    evidently did not conclude, as an experienced  judge,  there  was  real
    risk of proscribed ill-treatment on return. Had he  done  so  he  would
    have dealt with  it,  if  it  was  an  issue  that  merited  particular
    scrutiny.  In any event the judge did go on to look  at  the  issue  of
    local arrangements for policing and the 'tab records' as  touched  upon
    in paragraphs 72 to 87 of IK (Returnees).  It is fair to say  there  is
    not a detailed analysis of that issue but it seemed  to  me  that  that
    reflected the fact that the judge was not  obliged  to  deal  with  all
    points that the parties raise  but  the  particular  points  that  were
    important to assess on risk on return as judged by  the  judge  on  the
    evidence  before  him.   So  it  seemed  to  me  that  as  a  fact   Ms
    Panagiotupoulou's argument has on the face of it a basis to  be  argued
    but for the reasons given reading the decision as a whole the challenge
    was without substance. Ultimately, in the light of the judge's  overall
    findings concerning the Appellant's activities, there was nothing  that
    showed the real likelihood of the authorities inquiring deeply into the
    history of the Appellant assuming, as I do for  these  purposes,  there
    may be some record kept of those detentions as long  ago  as  1993  and
    1995.

9.   The second ground of appeal particularly related to the length of  time
    the Appellant has been absent from Turkey, which was, as I  have  said,
    was something over twenty years.   A matter which was not forgotten  by
    the judge. For whilst the extent to which it may have any significance,
     bearing in mind the many numbers of Turkish people who have from  time
    to time come to the United  Kingdom  and  returned,  was  difficult  to
    assess.  The judge concluded, when  the  Appellant  was  not  a  person
    likely to give rise to adverse interest from the GBTS records the  fact
    was that he has been out of Turkey living in the  United  Kingdom.  The
    judge did not accept the sur place claim [D36]. No  one  can  say  with
    certainty the Appellant would not be of any interest.  The  matter  was
    canvassed to the judge and he dealt with  the  issue  as  it  had  been
    raised. Ground 10 of the grounds is miss-conceived. The judge noted the
    Appellant's brother's evidence [D 22, 45, 47].The  statement  28/5/2015
    does not add to the claimed  basis  of  fear  on  return  nor  does  it
    corroborate the claimed risk on return.    I do  not  accept  therefore
    that the grounds of appeal, well-presented as  they  have  been  by  Ms
    Panagiotupoulou, demonstrate any error of law which  had  it  not  been
    made would have or could have been likely to give rise to  a  different
    decision.  I therefore do not find that any criticisms made were likely
    to generate a different outcome. The Original Tribunal made no material
    error of law.

NOTICE OF DECISION
The appeal is dismissed.
ANONYMITY
In my view an anonymity order is necessary  and  appropriate  to  avoid  any
further sur place claim.
DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 25 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

