
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47974/2013
                                                               IA/47992/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th August 2014                           |    On 18th Aug 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       1) MISS THERESA RAQUEL RICHARDS
              2) MASTER DEVONTAE ELISHA-JOSHUA RICHARDS-HARRIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Seehra, Counsel






                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. I will refer to the parties by the style in which they appeared before
      the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. Both appellants are nationals of Jamaica.   The  first  appellant  was
      born 29 October 1988 and is the mother of the second appellant who  is
      a male child born 20 July 2013.

   3. Both appealed against a decision by the respondent to refuse leave  to
      remain in respect of the first appellant and to refuse to  vary  leave
      to remain in respect of the second appellant.

   4. Their appeals came before Judge of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Carroll
      sitting at Taylor House in 22 May 2014.  There was  an  oral  hearing.
      Each party was represented by counsel (the appellants by Ms Seehra).

   5. In summary the judge conclude that the first appellant no  longer  had
      any "meaningful ties with Jamaica" and that  she  therefore  satisfied
      the provisions of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules.

   6. The final two sentences of paragraph 8 of  the  judge's  determination
      state as follows:

         "In the context of Article 8, the first appellant clearly enjoys  a
      family life with the second appellant.   The  decisions  under  appeal
      amount to an interference with the appellants' family life and I  find
      that the decisions give rise to a disproportionate  interference  with
      the right of the appellants to a family life and to the  private  life
      of the first appellant".

   7. Under the heading "Decision" the judge stated simply   "I  allow  this
      appeal".

   8. The respondent sought leave to appeal that decision alleging that  the
      judge erred in law by  finding  the  appellant  to  have  no  ties  to
      Jamaica.   The  grounds  make  reference  to  paragraph   7   of   the
      determination, wherein Judge Carroll had stated "It is very surprising
      and regrettable that there is no evidence before  me  from  the  first
      appellant's father, or from the father of the second  appellant.   The
      first appellant claims that she is no longer in  a  relationship  with
      the father of her child but I note from the second  appellant's  birth
      certificate that his father is said to be a Jamaican  national".   The
      grounds go on to contend that it is for the appellant  to  prove  that
      she has no ties to Jamaica.  If she were  in  a  relationship  with  a
      Jamaican national it is likely that she would be  held  to  have  such
      ties to Jamaica.  The grounds go on to allege that the judge  did  not
      make a finding that the first appellant's relationship with the father
      of the child had ended and in such circumstances it could not be  said
      that the appellant had proved that she had no ties to Jamaica.

   9. In granting leave to appeal another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      gave the following as his reasons:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
      of First-Tier Tribunal  Judge  Carroll  promulgated  on  5  June  2014
      whereby the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision was allowed.  The application is in time and is admitted.
     2. The main appellant arrived in the in 2001 when she was 12  and  has
        not left since.  An application for leave to remain was refused and
        further representations rejected.  This  application  was  rejected
        but the appeal allowed on the basis that the main appellant had not
        meaningful ties to Jamaica.


     3. The grounds argue that the judge having  noted  that  there  was  a
        regrettable absence of evidence from the appellant's father or  the
        father of her child (a Jamaican national) had not  found  that  the
        relationship with the child's father had ended was  wrong  to  find
        that she had no meaningful ties to Jamaica.

     4. The grounds are arguable and permission to appeal is granted".

  10. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

  11. At the commencement of the hearing Ms Seehra was able to confirm  that
      her client (the first appellant) was present and understood the nature
      of the proceedings.  Ms Seehra produced a Rule 24 response  which  had
      been served upon the respondent, but I could find no copy on the court
      file.

  12. The response contained 13 paragraphs and contended that there  was  no
      error  of  law,  and  that  grounds  seeking  leave  were   merely   a
      disagreement with the judge's "positive decision".  On behalf  of  the
      appellants it was contended that she no longer had any meaningful ties
      to Jamaica and therefore succeeded under the Rules and that there  had
      been no challenge to the  findings  in  respect  of  Article  8.   The
      response also stated that the decision of the First-Tier Judge  should
      not be disturbed.

  13. Each representative then made an oral submission.   A  note  of  those
      submissions has been made on the Record of Proceedings.

  14. In summary Mr Deller  relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking  leave.   He
      emphasised the burden lay with the appellant  to  show  that  no  ties
      remained between her and Jamaica.  However  there  were  two  Jamaican
      nationals in the form of the fathers of both the first  appellant  and
      the second appellant.  They were both Jamaican nationals.   Mr  Deller
      then went on to refer to the judge's treatment of  Article  8.   There
      was very little in the determination with regard to that.   The  final
      two sentences of paragraph  8  would  be  wholly  inadequate.   Whilst
      accepting that the grounds seeking leave were silent on the subject of
      Article 8, Mr Deller referred to it as being "Robinson obvious".   The
      Immigration Rules would have an Article 8  concept.   There  would  be
      overlap that the judge had not followed the appropriate  steps  before
      embarking upon Article 8 consideration.

  15. Ms Seehra referred to her response and in particular to  the  findings
      made by the judge regarding the length of time the appellant had  been
      in the United Kingdom.  There were  community  ties.   It  was  not  a
      transient situation and the first appellant was an important member of
      the church congregation.  The first appellant  had  not  had  an  easy
      relationship with her father and was no longer in a relationship  with
      the father of the second appellant.  This had no been challenged.

  16. Ms Seehra specifically referred to the challenge to Article 8 that had
      now been made by Mr Deller.  That had  not  been  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal.  If it was "Robinson obvious"  it  should  have  been  in  the
      grounds seeking leave.  There had been no application  to  amend.   In
      any event the judge was entitled to go and consider Article 8.

  17. At the end of the proceedings I announced my decision that I  found  a
      material error of law contained within the judge's  determination  and
      the decision must be set aside.

  18. In the circumstances of this case and with great respect to the  judge
      of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal,  I  do  find  that  the   determination
      inadequate.  There is no dispute that the onus is upon the appellant's
      (primarily the first appellant) to show that  she  has  no  meaningful
      ties to her home country.

  19. Paragraph 7 of the  determination  sets  out  the  assessment  of  the
      appellant's case.  The judge quite properly identified the possibility
      of relevant evidence being available  from  the  fathers  of  the  two
      appellants.  Without further explanation there is  some  relevance  in
      establishing the situation between the first appellant and the  second
      appellant's father.  It is especially so bearing in  mind  that  there
      must have been close relationship  fairly  recently.   The  judge  was
      understandably concerned and  this  is  evidenced  by  the  final  two
      sentences of paragraph 7.

  20. It is often said that a determination must be written for  the  losing
      party.  That being the case the respondent is justifiably at a loss to
      understand how the judge moves from the contents of the last  part  of
      paragraph 7 to a conclusion that the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
      first appellant no longer had ties with Jamaica.  There is a  lack  of
      explanation and I consider that to be an  error  of  law.   Given  the
      judges views on the  absence  of  evidence  with  regard  to  the  two
      fathers, I consider this error to be material to the  outcome  of  the
      appeal.

  21. Turning now to the question of Article  8  this  does  cause  me  some
      concern.

  22. Mr Deller concedes that  the  initial  grounds  are  silent  as  to  a
      challenge, but he implies that the error is so obvious that  it  would
      not be necessary for it to be specifically pleaded.   Ms  Seehra  does
      not accept that point.  Normally I would agree with Ms Seehra, however
      on a close inspection of the determination I am of the view that  this
      is not a normal situation.

  23. I have quoted above the final two sentences from paragraph  8  of  the
      determination.  I have also noted the very brief decision at paragraph
      9.   Again,  I  am  of  the  view  that  a  reading  of  the   judge's
      determination, especially by the losing party, would be  uncertain  as
      to the outcome.   By  saying  "I  allow  this  appeal"  is  the  judge
      referring to the first appellant's appeal under  the  Rules  or  under
      Article  8  and  what  about  the  second  appellant?   Is  the  judge
      purporting to allow the first appellant's appeal under the  Rules  and
      the  second  appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8?   One  can   make
      assumptions, but it is certainly far from clear.

  24. What is clear is that as a determination on Article  8,  paragraphs  8
      and 9 of Judge Carroll's determination are wholly adequate,  and  here
      amounts to a material error of law.

  25. I therefore set aside the decision and the fairest  disposal  to  both
      parties are for these two appeals to be reheard before the  First-Tier
      Tribunal by a judge other  than  Judge  Carroll  as  I  consider  that
      further evidence will be presented. This case meets the  criteria  set
      out in the senior Presidents Direction. None of the findings of  Judge
      Carroll can be preserved.





Signed                                  Date  18/8/14


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


