
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47645/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th August 2014                             |On 1st September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                               MR Adbul salam
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal, Zacharia Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Abdul Salam date of birth 2nd June 1980, is a citizen
    of Pakistan.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking account  all
    of the circumstances  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge De Haney promulgated on 18th March  2014.   By  the
    determination the judge dismissed the appeal against the  decisions  of
    the respondent dated 1st November 2013 to refuse to grant the appellant
    further leave to remain in the United Kingdom and thereupon  to  remove
    the appellant from the United Kingdom to Pakistan.

 4. By decision taken on 27  May  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive  Lane
    granted permission to appeal in the following terms: --

        It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal's consideration of  the
        best interests of the  child  was  flawed.  In  particular,  it  is
        arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  failed  to  consider
        adequately the appellant's submission that the  best  interests  of
        the child would require the existing contact  arrangements  in  the
        United Kingdom to continue.

 5. Historical Background

         a) Kauser Mahmood and the appellant married sometime prior to  2009
            in Pakistan. After the marriage Kauser Mahmood returned  to  the
            United Kingdom.

         b) In the United Kingdom  she  gave  birth  to  the  child  of  the
            marriage on 11 February 2009.

         c) From 2010 onwards  that  child  was  living  with  his  maternal
            grandparents.  It  does  appear  that   social   services   were
            monitoring the best interests of the child.

         d) No steps were taken by the appellant to seek to enter the United
            Kingdom to visit his child between 2009 and 2012.

         e) In 2012 social services carried out a complete assessment of the
            best interests of the child including investigating  whether  or
            not it would be appropriate for the child to be placed with  his
            father in Pakistan. The conclusion by social  services  is  that
            that was a possibility.

         f) On 1st June 2012 the appellant entered the United Kingdom  on  a
            Visit Visa with a view to pursuing the possibility of the  child
            returning to Pakistan to live with him.

         g) For whatever reason the  prospect  of  the  child  returning  to
            Pakistan became unacceptable and the child  was  placed  in  the
            long-term care of his maternal grandparents.

         h) There was a full Family Court assessment of the  best  interests
            of the child. That Family Court assessment resulted in an agreed
            order of 15 April 2013.  That  order  confirmed  that  the  best
            interests of the child were to be met by  being  placed  in  the
            long-term care of the maternal grandparents.

         i) The order also provided that the appellant was permitted  direct
            contact with the child to take place  alternate  weeks  for  two
            hours whilst he was in the United Kingdom. The order  also  made
            provision for further contact  between  the  appellant  and  the
            child by telephone twice a week to be supervised. The final part
            of the order specifically states that when the appellant  is  in
            Pakistan contact between the appellant and the child  will  take
            place on by Skype and by other indirect means such  as  letters,
            photographs and cards.

 6. The Family Court had clearly assessed the best interests of  the  child
    and found that the best interests of the child were to  remain  in  the
    maternal grandparents care. Thereafter there was to be contact with the
    appellant but that that contact could be indirect.

 7. The Family Court was the appropriate forum to assess the best interests
    of the child and suitable orders have been made to give effect to those
    best interests.

 8. The issue before the First-tier Tribunal was whether or not in light of
    the Family Court order the best interests of the  child  required  that
    the appellant be allowed to remain in the United  Kingdom  to  continue
    direct contact.

 9. The maternal grandparents are taking the day-to-day responsibility  for
    the child. There is no suggestion that the child is in  any  way  being
    deprived. All the emotional and material needs of the child  are  being
    met whilst the child is in the care of  the  grandparents.  The  Family
    Court have clearly had in mind the fact that the appellant  may  return
    to Pakistan. The family court were satisfied that the best interests of
    the child could be adequately met my maintaining indirect contact  with
    the  appellant  by  means  of  Skype,  letters  and  other   forms   of
    communication.

10. In light of the orders made by the Family Court the Judge was  entitled
    to conclude that the best interests of the child were adequately met by
    the orders made by the Family Court and entitled to find that there was
    no need for the appellant to be given leave to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom in order to protect those  best  interests.  Family  Court  had
    clearly been aware of the need to maintain contact between  father  and
    trial and had made appropriate orders to ensure that.

11. The judge was obliged to consider whether or not the decision is  taken
    were proportionately justified in light of the Family Court order.  The
    judge has properly considered all the circumstances of  this  case  and
    was entitled to come to the conclusion that he did on the basis of  the
    evidence presented.

12. There is no error of law in the original determination.  I  uphold  the
    decision to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

