
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47602/2014
     IA/47617/2014
     IA/47624/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 October 2016                           |On 4 November 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                aq (Pakistan)
                               TMr (Pakistan)
                               Ist (Pakistan)
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R de Mello, Counsel, instructed by David Tang &
Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Monson promulgated on 19 November 2015. On 11 July  2016,  I  found  an
    error of law in the decision. With the concurrence of  the  parties,  I
    retained the appeal in the Upper Tribunal for the decision  to  be  re-
    made. My Error of Law Decision is  included  in  this  decision  as  an
    Appendix.  As a result, there is no need  for  to  repeat  the  factual
    background in this case.

2.   The appeal relates to three nationals of Pakistan  who  form  a  family
    unit, the most significant member of which for  the  purposes  of  this
    appeal is the child of the family (whom  I  do  not  name  to  preserve
    anonymity), born in 2003, who has spent the majority of her lifetime in
    the United Kingdom. It is conceded by the Secretary of State  that  the
    parental claims are parasitic upon that of the  daughter  and  that  my
    decision will be determinative of theirs.

3.   For convenience, I will refer to the  appellants  as  the  mother,  the
    father and the daughter respectively. No discourtesy is intended:  only
    the safeguarding of the daughter's anonymity.

4.   I heard evidence from the mother, the  daughter  and  the  father,  who
    each confirmed the content of their witness statements,  answered  some
    supplementary questions and were cross examined. A  substantial  bundle
    of  documents  was  placed  before  me,  and  much  of  the  additional
    questioning was directed to identifying relevant documents and  placing
    them  in  context.  I  then  heard  submissions   from   the   parties'
    representatives and reserved my decision.

     Immigration history

5.   The family's immigration history is not contentious.  The  mother  came
    to the United Kingdom in September 2000, and successfully completed  an
    LLM at a leading university. She returned to Pakistan in 2002.

6.   The mother returned to the United Kingdom on 21  November  2004,  as  a
    student, along with the father and the daughter (then 17 months old) as
    dependent relatives. They all  had  valid  leave  to  remain  until  30
    October 2011.

7.   An application for leave to remain under human rights grounds was  made
    on 27 October 2011 and refused on 6 February 2012. The family's  appeal
    was dismissed on 27 April 2012. Further applications were  unsuccessful
    and the family were issued with forms IS.151A as overstayers. It is not
    disputed that the daughter has resided in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    period in excess of 7 years.

     Evidence

8.   The mother gave evidence of returning to the  United  Kingdom  in  2004
    with her husband and daughter. She  describes  her  daughter  as  being
    inclined towards a career in law, a field in which she has considerable
    academic qualification. The daughter, now in year 9, has performed well
    at school showing a particular aptitude  for  languages.  She  recently
    came first in a school mathematics event and produced the  certificates
    awarded.

9.   The mother says that the family speak English  at  home,  and  although
    she tried to encourage her daughter to speak and  read  Urdu,  she  was
    reluctant to learn.

10.  She says  that  French  and  Spanish  are  not  taught  on  the  school
    curriculum in Pakistan, making reference to an  article  by  M  Garcia,
    'Foreign Language Learning Orientations: The Case of  Pakistan'  (2014)
    Pakistan Annual Research Journal 1-14 at page 202  of  the  Appellants'
    Bundle (AB 202). She referred to a  National  Curriculum  Document  (AB
    201), and sought  to  differentiate  between  the  subjects  taught  in
    Pakistan and those which the daughter was  currently  studying  in  the
    United Kingdom (AB 123-124). However,  the  lack  of  specificity  made
    meaningful comparison difficult, especially in  relation  to  arts  and
    drawing. She indicated that religious education in Pakistan is  limited
    to the study of Islam as opposed to the  multi-faith  approach  in  the
    United Kingdom; and that history merely covers that of Pakistan and not
    the rest of the world.

11.  The mother took me to  a  letter  from  a  Secondary  School  in  Sindh
    Province dated 26 November 2014 (AB  146)  which  states,  among  other
    things, that a pupil seeking admission at  Secondary  Level  must  have
    Primary Education in various compulsory subjects including  Sindhi  and
    Urdu (both language and literature). This is repeated in a more  recent
    letter from the same school dated 27 July 2016 (AB 146), and  confirmed
    in a similar letter from another school dated 7 July 2016 (AB 147).

12.   The  mother  spoke  of  being  passionate  about  women's  rights  and
    undertaking academic research in gender studies and honour killing.

13.  The daughter's evidence was to the effect that she was well settled  at
    home and at school, where she was performing well  and  has  a  mix  of
    school friends. She is gifted with  languages  although  her  favourite
    subjects are mathematics, history and religious education. She has  had
    her poetry published in a school collection. Out of school, she  enjoys
    swimming with a local club and she assists an  elderly  neighbour  with
    domestic chores. She undertakes charity work, helps at a food bank, and
    has taken part in sponsored walks raising money alongside her father.

14.  She speaks only English at home, and has no written or spoken  Urdu  or
    Sindhi. On the rare occasions she speaks by telephone or Skype with her
    extended family in Pakistan, it is invariably in English.

15.  The father's evidence reinforced that of  the  wife  and  daughter.  He
    spoke of the difficulty his daughter would have in adjusting to life in
    Pakistan after her privileged and liberal education and  upbringing  in
    the United  Kingdom,  particularly  being  a  girl.  He  describes  the
    Pakistan to which she would return as an 'alien culture'. He  indicated
    that schooling in Pakistan would be very  primitive  compared  to  that
    which his daughter currently enjoys, being no more than (in his  words)
    'chalk and board'.

16.  The father emphasised that both he and his  wife  were  well-integrated
    into British society, spoke English fluently and were not a  burden  on
    the state, being largely supported by relatives in America. He suggests
    that he would find it hard to secure employment in Pakistan.

17.  The evidence of mother, daughter and father  was  largely  unchallenged
    by the Respondent, who adduced no evidence.

     Respondent's submissions

18.  Mr Armstrong submitted that the family had been  overstayers  since  26
    September 2014, and that little weight should  be  attached  to  family
    life enjoyed during the time that they have been in the United  Kingdom
    unlawfully. He described the daughter  as  something  of  a  pawn,  and
    submitted that any difficulties she might face on  return  to  Pakistan
    result entirely from her parents refusal to return on the expiration of
    their visas. He suggested  that  the  parents  had  kept  the  daughter
    distanced from her cultural heritage (and its language  in  particular)
    as a calculated means of improving her (and their) immigration  status.
    He argued that there was  no  reason  why  they  could  not  settle  in
    Pakistan as a family unit, and that there were  schools  in  which  the
    language of instruction was English so there would be no  problem  with
    the daughter's  education.  He  submitted  that  the  daughter  had  an
    aptitude for languages and would be able to pick  up  Urdu  and  Sindhi
    without too much difficulty.

    Appellant's submissions

19.  Mr de Mello pointed to the difficulties the daughter  would  experience
    at school in that she could not enter or advance in secondary education
    without certificated proficiency in both the national  language  (Urdu)
    and the local language (Sindhi). He reviewed  the  documentation  which
    was supportive of the family's case and emphasised the superior quality
    of education which the daughter was receiving in the United Kingdom  as
    compared to that which would be available in Pakistan.  Having  arrived
    in  England  age  17  months,  the  daughter,  it  was  submitted,  was
    educationally, socially and culturally British. Mr de Mello referred me
    to Guidance issued by the Government in  the  form  of  a  Green  Paper
    entitled, Every Child  Matters  (2003,  Cm  5860),  and  in  particular
    paragraphs 8-10 of the executive summary and paragraphs 1.3, 1.13,  and
    2.14 of the Report itself.

     The law

20.  Both representatives were agreed as to the relevant law to be  applied.
    The following paragraph of the Immigration Rules governs the situation:



         276ADE (1) - The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave
         to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

         (ii) has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and

         (iii) has lived continuously in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

         (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; [...] (emphasis added)

21.  There is no dispute that the daughter has  lived  continuously  in  the
    United Kingdom for more than 7  years.  The  single  issue  for  me  to
    determine, therefore, is whether it would be reasonable to  expect  the
    daughter to leave the United Kingdom.

22.  Both representatives made reference to The Queen  (on  the  application
    of MA (Pakistan) and others v Upper Tribunal and  another  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 705, which addressed how  the  test  of  reasonableness  should  be
    applied when determining whether or not it is reasonable  to  remove  a
    child from the United Kingdom once he or she has been resident here for
    seven years.

23.   The  Court  of  Appeal  restated  at  [23]  the   firmly   established
    jurisprudence that the  best  interests  of  the  child  is  a  primary
    consideration which has to be taken into account in all cases where the
    child's interests are affected.

24.  The following passages of the judgment of Elias LJ (with whom the  rest
    of the Court agreed) are of particular relevance:

         [40] ... It will generally be in the child's best interests to live
         with his or her parents and siblings as part of a family. [...] Had
         Parliament intended to  require  considerations  bearing  upon  the
         conduct and immigration history of the applicant parent to be taken
         into consideration, I would have expected it to say  so  expressly,
         not for the matter to have to be inferred  from  a  test  which  in
         terms focuses on an assessment of what is reasonable for the child.
         This does not in my view mean that the wider public interests  have
         been ignored; it is simply  that  Parliament  has  determined  that
         where the seven year rule is satisfied and the other conditions  in
         the section have been met,  those  potentially  conflicting  public
         interests will not suffice to justify refusal of leave if, focusing
         on the position of the child, it is not reasonable  to  expect  the
         child to leave the UK. [...]

         [47] [...] If Parliament had wanted the child's best  interests  to
         dictate the outcome of the leave application, it  would  have  said
         so. The concept of "best interests" is after all a well established
         one. Even where the child's best interests  are  to  stay,  it  may
         still be not unreasonable to require the child to leave. That  will
         depend upon a careful analysis of the  nature  and  extent  of  the
         links in the UK and in the country where it is proposed  he  should
         return. What could not be considered, however, would be the conduct
         and immigration history of the parents.

         [48] In EV (Phillipines) Lord Justice Christopher Clarke  explained
         how a tribunal should apply the proportionality  test  where  wider
         public interest considerations are in play, in circumstances  where
         the best interests of the child dictate that he  should  remain  in
         the UK (paras. 34-37):

             "35. A decision as  to  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children will depend on a number of factors such as:

                  (a)  their age;

                  (b)  the length of time that they have been here;

                  (c)  how long they have been in education;

                  (d)  what stage their education has reached;

                  (e)  to what extent they have become  distanced  from  the
                  country to which it is proposed that they return;

                  (f)  how renewable their connection with it may be;

                  (g)  to what extent they will have linguistic, medical  or
                  other difficulties in adapting to life  in  that  country;
                  and

                  (h)   the  extent  to  which  the  course  proposed   will
                  interfere with their family life or their rights (if  they
                  have any) as British citizens." [...]

         [49] Although this was not in fact a seven year case, on the  wider
         construction of section 117B(6), the same principles would apply in
         such a case. However, the fact that the child has been  in  the  UK
         for seven years would need to be given significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary.

25.  Regard must also be had to section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 which establishes an overriding obligation to have
    regard to the welfare of children in the Secretary of State's functions
    including those of immigration. This applies to all children present in
    the United Kingdom, whether or not they are citizens and whether or not
    they are lawfully present.

    Analysis and conclusions

26.   A  primary  consideration  (though   not   necessarily   the   primary
    consideration) is the best interests of the daughter.  On the  evidence
    which I have heard and read, the daughter's best interests are that she
    remains in the United Kingdom. She is well settled in  a  family  home,
    she is performing well at school  which  offers  a  quality  which  her
    parents regard as superior to that she would receive in  Pakistan.  She
    is growing up in a liberal and affirming  environment.  She  helps  her
    neighbour and is involved in activities such as  swimming  and  charity
    fund raising events. She is fluent in English, and all her cultural and
    social ties are in the United Kingdom which  she  has  not  left  since
    arriving when she was 17 months old.

27.  Are the daughter's best interests are  outweighed  by  public  interest
    considerations? The following passage from the judgment of Elias LJ  in
    MA (Pakistan) gives some assistance  in  assessing  the  relevance  and
    weight to be afforded to the fact that a child's parents are be illegal
    overstayers.

         [103]    [...] The purpose underlying the seven year rule  is  that
         this kind of reasoning ought not to be adopted in their case.  They
         are not to be blamed for the fact  that  their  parents  overstayed
         illegally, and the starting point is that their  status  should  be
         legitimized unless there is good reason not to do so. I accept that
         the position might have been otherwise  without  the  seven  years'
         residence, but that is a factor which must weigh  heavily  in  this
         case. The fact that the parents are overstayers and have  no  right
         to remain in their own right  can  thereafter  be  weighed  in  the
         proportionality balance against allowing the child to  remain,  but
         that is after  a  recognition  that  the  child's  seven  years  of
         residence is a significant factor pointing the other way.

28.  The indelible impression from the  evidence  is  that  the  mother  has
    cynically worked the system to her advantage and that  of  her  husband
    and daughter. Her minimal efforts to  instruct  the  daughter  in  Urdu
    strike me as having been both deliberate and calculated. But, as Mr  de
    Mello colourfully put it in his submissions, the  sins  of  the  parent
    should not be visited on the child.

29.  The Secretary of State, in her decision letter dated  7  November  2014
    provided no strong reason for refusing leave to remain: the  daughter's
    best interests and the weighty consideration of her 7 years'  residence
    are not displaced by public interest  considerations  relating  to  her
    parents. The best interests of the daughter are that she remains in the
    United Kingdom and enjoys a liberal education  through  which  she  can
    achieve her potential. Returning her to Pakistan (a country and culture
    of which she has no memory and experience not having been  there  since
    she was a baby) would have a disruptive and deleterious effect  on  her
    education, notwithstanding that she would be returning with loving  and
    supporting parents. Despite the daughter's linguistic gifts, having  no
    knowledge of Urdu or Sindu would cause  a  significant  hiatus  in  her
    education, placing her at a significant disadvantage amongst her peers.

30.  In all the circumstances  the  daughter's  appeal  succeeds  under  the
    Immigration Rules. Since it is conceded  by  the  Respondent  that  the
    parents' appeals are parasitic upon those of the daughter,  it  follows
    that notwithstanding that the mother and father's individual cases  may
    be wholly unmeritorious, they too should have leave  to  remain  during
    the daughter's minority.



Notice of Decision

(1)  The Third Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

(2)  The First and  Second  Appellants  are  entitled  to  such  immigration
    status as the Secretary of State may deem fit until such  time  as  the
    Third Appellant obtains her majority.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Third  Appellant
is granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date              3 November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47602/2014
                                                               IA/47617/2014
                                                               IA/47624/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 July 2016                               |                              |
|                                             |[11 July 2016]                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                aq (Pakistan)
                                Tr (Pakistan)
                                st (Pakistan)
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by David Tang & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Monson which was promulgated on 19 November 2015.  It relates to  three
    nationals of Pakistan who form a  family  unit,  the  most  significant
    member of which for the purposes of this appeal is  the  child  of  the
    family (whom I do not name to preserve anonymity), born  in  2003,  who
    has spent the majority of her lifetime in  the  United  Kingdom  having
    arrived at the age of about 17 months with her parents.

2.   The point came where the leave to remain on the parents' part  came  to
    an end. They had previously had  the  benefit  of  visas  for  academic
    study. They were thereafter  classified  as  overstayers.   Proceedings
    were brought for the return of the family unit to Pakistan.  That  gave
    rise to the Secretary of State's decision and in due course the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   In looking at the matter, the Judge deals fully with the  history.   He
    outlines the reasons for refusal under Rule 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the application of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights. He summarises the evidence and the  law  before  reaching
    his conclusions which focus primarily upon the  child's  education  and
    that projected were she to return to Pakistan.

4.   The issue identified in grant of permission to appeal  and  principally
    pursued before me in the appellants' submissions is the misstatement of
    the evidence in  paragraph  44  of  the  determination.   Paragraph  43
    correctly summarises the position  and  makes  reference  to  a  letter
    provided by the King Edward Secondary School in Sindh Province.

5.   I have been taken to the original of that letter. The error into  which
    the judge  fell  (which  is  effectively  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State) was that he asserted  or  assumed  that  the  child
    would be in a position to enter secondary school in the Sindh  Province
    and  study  the  conventional  curriculum  while  at  the   same   time
    undertaking catch up work in  other  subjects,  particularly  the  Urdu
    language which she currently does not speak.

6.   It is submitted and I agree that on a  proper  reading  of  the  letter
    from the school,  the  child  would  not  be  admitted  into  secondary
    education until such time as  an  entrance  test  in  those  compulsory
    subjects had been satisfied.  In other words, the hiatus to the child's
    education would be markedly more significant in reality than is  stated
    by the Judge.  Although education is only one  of  a  constellation  of
    factors which must be considered coming to the decision on  whether  it
    is reasonable for the child to be returned, it is of such  significance
    in the context of this case that  a  significant  misstatement  of  the
    evidence clearly amounts to a material error of law.

7.   This Tribunal cannot be confident that  the  later  balancing  exercise
    was properly and fairly carried out when the  issue  of  continuity  in
    education has been misstated to such a degree. The determination of the
    First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.

8.   I am fortified in coming to that conclusion having been  taken  to  the
    case of  PD and Others (Article 8 conjoined family  claims)  Sri  Lanka
    [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC). This is  a  recent  decision  of  the  President
    sitting with Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce promulgated in  March  of  this
    year, subsequent to the determination of First-tier  Tribunal  in  this
    instance.

9.   The elucidation of the law and how it is to be applied  in  cases  such
    as these are  instructive.  As  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is to be set aside, it is appropriate that when it  is  remade
    it is done through the prism of the articulation of the law to be found
    in PD.  The factual circumstances are similar in  many  ways  to  those
    here but I should make it abundantly plain that any apparent similarity
    does not of itself indicate that the final determination  will  be  the
    same.

10.  Both representatives submit that the correct  forum  for  remaking  the
    determination would be the Upper Tribunal and I  agree.   It  would  be
    wasteful of time and resources for it to be remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal and accordingly the decision is to  be  remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on a date to be fixed.



Notice of Decision

1.   Determination of First-tier Tribunal set aside.

2.   Decision to be remade in the Upper Tribunal  on  a  date  to  be  fixed
    (time estimate 1.5 hours).



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     11 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
