
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47666/2014
                                                               IA/47673/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26TH OCTOBER 2016                 |On 1st November 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                             MUHAMMAD UMAR BUTT
                                shumaila gull
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar (Counsel instructed by SZ solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton    (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  It comes before me for  consideration
    as to whether or not there is a material error of law in  the  decision
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge    Walker)("FtT")  promulgated  on  25th
    August 2015 in which  the  FtT  dismissed  the  appeal  on  immigration
    grounds with reference to Tier 1  Entrepreneur  PBS  and  human  rights
    grounds under Article 8.

Background

2.   The appellants are husband and wife and are citizens of Pakistan.   The
    appellant entered the UK initially as a student and  made  the  current
    application in September 2014. The respondent refused  the  application
    on the grounds that the appellant failed to meet the requirements under
    Appendix A as to trading.  The refusal relied on the failure to provide
    a contract of services which showed duration  and  that  there  was  no
    letter from any authorised body to confirm that  the  appellant  had  a
    business account.  There is no issue taken in respect of the Article  8
    decision.

First-tier decision

3.   The FtT found that the  contract  of  services  was  missing  specified
    information (a  date  of  termination)  and  to  which  the  evidential
    flexibility rule was applicable [30].  The FtT found that the appellant
    had not met the requirements to  show  that  he  had  a  business  bank
    account that would have met the trading requirements of the rules  [31-
    33].

Grounds of application for permission to appeal

4.   The appellant argued that the  FtT  erred  by  failing  to  distinguish
    between the requirements for evidence of trading which fall  under  AND
    or OR (paragraph 41SD).

5.   In finding that the respondent should have  applied  paragraph  245  AA
    the FtT erred  in  continuing  to  consider  the  matter  further  with
    reference to the business account.  The appellant was required to  meet
    one of other of the evidential requirements not both.

Permission to appeal

6.   Permission was refused by the  FtT  and  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ
    Coker).  Permission to appeal was granted by the Vice President of  the
    Upper Tribunal following a successful application for judicial review.

Rule 24 response

7.   The respondent opposed the appeal contending  that  she  was  under  no
    obligation to apply paragraph 245AA and there was no reason to  suppose
    that the appellant  could  have  provided  the  specified  information.
    Reliance was placed on Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2.

Submisssions

7.   The detailed submissions are set out in the record of  proceedings  and
    have been taken in to account by me, together with a  bundle  from  the
    appellant amounting to 159 pages.

Discussion and conclusion

8.   The appellant made  an  application  as  a  Tier  1  entrepreneur.   He
    provided a contract of services (which failed to show its duration)  in
    order to meet the trading requirements of the rules.   In  addition  he
    provided details of his Cashplus account and stated that this was  used
    as a business account.

9.   At the hearing before me it was accepted that the FtT  found  that  the
    evidential flexibility rule under paragraph 245AA was applicable to the
    contract which did not provide all the specified information [30].   It
    was accepted that under SD-41 the appellant was required to provide one
    or more pieces of evidence and that a contract or the letter confirming
    the business account were capable of meeting the trading  requirements.
    Further it was agreed that the flexibility rule  was  discretionary  in
    its application.

10.  It is now argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by  failing  to  restrict  its
    consideration of the appeal  at  the  point  at  which  it  found  that
    paragraph 245AA applied to the  contract.   The  FtT  should  not  have
    continued to consider the evidence of the business bank account,  which
    was not an additional requirement.

11.  I disagree as the application was refused in respect of  both  matters,
    the contract and the business account  and  the  FtT  was  required  to
    consider all aspects of the appeal as is apparent from the decision and
    reasons. The appellant is inaccurate in his contention  that  the  only
    basis of refusal was  in  relation  to  the  contract.  The  respondent
    considered the application as a whole and in considering  if  paragraph
    245AA was applicable looked at both the contract and the bank  account.
    It was entirely open to the FtT to reach the decision that  it  did  in
    that context.  The appellant failed to meet the trading requirements in
    respect  of  the  two  pieces  of  evidence  produced  to  support  his
    application and that must have been a factor for the  respondent  under
    paragraph 245AA(c) and (d). The respondent can  consider  if  there  is
    other evidence that is capable of verifying omissions in  the  evidence
    produced. The FtT did not consider the evidence of the bank account  as
    an additional requirement.  It is clear that the appellant was pursuing
    the appeal before the FtT on both grounds including that  the  evidence
    of the business account met the Rules.  I find no error in law  by  the
    FtT.

Decision

12.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.

    The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date 31.10.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




                               NO ANONYMITY ORDER


                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 31.10.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


