
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47755/2014
                                                               IA/47766/2014
                                                               IA/47767/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th September 2016               |On 22nd September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MV (FIRST respondent)
                           NMM (SECOND respondent)
                            KK (THIRD respondent)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondents:   Ms G Brown of Counsel, instructed by Farani Javid
                    Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against the decision of Judge Malone  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 1st February 2016.

 2. The Respondents before the Upper Tribunal were  the  Appellants  before
    the FtT and I will refer to them as the Claimants.

 3. The first and third Claimants are Malaysian citizens,  and  the  second
    claimant is an Indian citizen.  The  first  and  second  Claimants  are
    married and are the parents of the third Claimant.

 4. On 3rd February 2014 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Claimants'
    applications for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
    Claimants  appealed  pursuant  to  section  82  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

 5. The FtT heard the appeals together on 18th January 2016.  The FtT found
    the Secretary of State's decision to be  unlawful  on  the  basis  that
    reasons for the decision had  not  been  provided.   I  set  out  below
    paragraphs 30-32 of the FtT decision;

         "30. This Tribunal can no longer remit matters to the Respondent.

         31.  My conclusion is therefore that the Respondent's decisions  in
             all of these three appeals are not in accordance with the  law
             and are unlawful.

         32.  I accordingly allow all these appeals  and  declare  that  the
             Appellants' applications remain outstanding and  await  lawful
             determination by the Respondent."

 6. The Secretary of State then stated at paragraph 34;

         "34. All these appeals are allowed on human rights grounds."

 7. This prompted the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  an  application  for
    permission to appeal.  The Secretary of State's  application  was  that
    the FtT decision should be amended pursuant to rule 31 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014.  It was contended that the FtT had made inconsistent  conclusions
    in the decision, purporting to find the Secretary of  State's  decision
    unlawful, but thereafter allowing the appeals on human rights  grounds.
    The Secretary of State stated;

         "It is respectfully requested that the determination is amended  to
         show that the appeals have been remitted to the Secretary of  State
         and  the  applications  remain  outstanding   awaiting   a   lawful
         decision."

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Simpson of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "2.  The Respondent's ground is that the judge's decision to  allow
             the appeals is inconsistent with his findings of fact at [28]-
             [32], in which he indicated  that  the  matters  ought  to  be
             remitted to the Secretary of State pending a lawful decision.

         3.   The judge found in [16] that the Respondent's  decisions  were
             not in accordance with the  law  as  the  Respondent  had  not
             provided reasons for her decision.  However, as this  Tribunal
             no longer has the power to remit matters to the Respondent  it
             is arguable that the judge acted in error."

 9. Following the grant of permission, solicitors acting on behalf  of  the
    Claimants lodged a  response  pursuant  to  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  In  summary  it  was  contended
    that the FtT directed itself appropriately and prepared a comprehensive
    determination.  It was further contended that the  FtT  considered  all
    the evidence, including an expert report, made findings, and gave valid
    and adequate reasons for making those findings.

10. Directions were subsequently issued directing that there should  be  an
    oral hearing before the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had
    erred in law such that the decision must be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

11. Mr Whitwell relied upon the grounds contained  within  the  application
    for permission to appeal, submitting that the FtT decision must be  set
    aside due to the error of law.

12. Ms Brown relied upon the rule 24 response, and  the  skeleton  argument
    contained within the Claimants' supplementary bundle.  I was  asked  to
    find no material error of law, and to refuse the  application  made  by
    the Secretary of State.

13. After hearing oral submissions I announced that the FtT had  materially
    erred in law and the decision must be set aside.   I  gave  my  reasons
    orally and indicated that these would be set out in writing.

14. Ms Brown pointed out that the Secretary of State had not challenged the
    finding made by the FtT that the decision dated 3rd February  2014  was
    not in accordance with the law and accordingly the Upper  Tribunal  had
    no jurisdiction to find otherwise,  and  therefore  the  decision  must
    remain outstanding before the Secretary of State for a lawful  decision
    to be made.  I indicated that my provisional  view  had  been  that  it
    would be appropriate to remit this appeal back to the FtT having taking
    into  account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior   President's   Practice
    Statements.  Mr Whitwell indicated the Secretary of State  would  agree
    with such a course of action.

15. However, I decided  to  reserve  my  decision  as  to  the  appropriate
    disposal of this appeal.

My Findings and Conclusions

16. The reasons for finding that the FtT materially erred  in  law  are  as
    follows.

17. The FtT decided that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  dated  3rd
    February 2014 was unlawful, and therefore declined to make any findings
    of fact or analyse the evidence, stating in paragraph 29  that  it  was
    not appropriate for the FtT to "assume the role of primary fact-finding
    and determine these appeals".  The FtT found, in  the  same  paragraph,
    "that the matter should be re-visited by the Respondent"(the  Secretary
    of State).

18. The FtT decision that the Secretary of State's  decision  was  unlawful
    due to lack of reasons, was in my  view  open  to  challenge,  but  the
    Secretary of State did not mount such a challenge.   The  Secretary  of
    State instead requested that the FtT decision be amended to  show  that
    the decision was not in accordance with the law and therefore  remained
    outstanding before the Secretary of State to make a fresh decision.

19. It is clear that it was not appropriate to rely upon  rule  31  of  the
    2014 Procedure Rules and neither  representative  before  me  suggested
    otherwise.

20. The FtT decision contains conflicting  conclusions,  for  example  when
    paragraphs 31 and 32 are compared with paragraph 34.  The result of the
    FtT decision is that the FtT declined to consider the evidence, made no
    findings of fact, but then purported  to  allow  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds.  The decision therefore  clearly  cannot  stand  as  an
    appeal cannot be allowed on human rights grounds, when there have  been
    findings that the decision appealed against was not in accordance  with
    the law, and the FtT does  not  consider  or  make  findings  upon  the
    evidence.

21. For that reason, the decision of the FtT was set aside.

22. I accept the point made by Ms Brown, that the Secretary  of  State  has
    not challenged the findings made by  the  FtT  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision is not in  accordance  with  the  law.   Therefore,  I
    accept that I do not have jurisdiction to consider the legality of that
    decision.

23. My conclusion, therefore, is that having set aside the decision of  the
    FtT, I am constrained to accept that the decision  dated  3rd  February
    2014, which relates to all three Claimants, is not in  accordance  with
    the  law.   Therefore  the  decision  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Secretary of State for a new decision to be made.

24. It is possible to make a finding that the decision is not in accordance
    with the law, because both the application for leave to remain, and the
    Secretary of State's decision, predate the  changes  in  appeal  rights
    brought about by the Immigration Act 2014.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that the  decision  dated
3rd February  2014,  which  relates  to  all  three  Claimants,  is  not  in
accordance with the law.  The decision therefore remains outstanding  before
the Secretary of State for a lawful decision to be made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member of their family.  Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   This
direction is made because the third Claimant is a minor.


Signed   Date 13th September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the Secretary of State has not challenged the finding  made  by  the  FtT
that the decision dated 3rd February 2014 is  unlawful  and  prompted  these
appeals, I find it appropriate to make a full fee award in respect  of  each
of the three appeals.


Signed   Date 13th September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
