
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47831/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 December 2015                   |On 14 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  M A AWAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent present, with sponsor; no legal representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to the appellant as the  SSHD  and  to  the  respondent  as  the
    claimant.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Dickson, promulgated on  24  February  2015,  allowing  the  claimant's
    appeal against refusal  of  a  residence  card  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. The determination  reaches  findings  favourable  to  the  claimant  in
    respect of his relationship with the sponsor, and concludes "the appeal
    is allowed".

 4. The point raised in the SSHD's grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    is that under regulation 17(4) the SSHD has  a  discretion  whether  to
    issue a residence card to an extended family  member;  that  discretion
    has not yet been exercised in this case; and the  appeal  "should  only
    have been allowed to the limited extent that the  SSHD's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law and the application remains  outstanding
    for the respondent to consider the exercise of discretion."

 5. On 18 February 2015 permission was granted, on the  view  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge's findings "should have led him  to  remit  the
    matter to the Secretary of State for her to  exercise  discretion,  and
    should not have led to the appeal apparently being allowed outright."

 6. The grant of permission referred to Ihemedu  (OFMs  -  meaning)  [2011]
    UKUT 00340.  Mrs Saddiq referred to paragraph 12, which in turn  relies
    on 2 previous decisions to similar effect.

 7. Although Mrs Saddiq indicated that the respondent might have sought  to
    find error in the positive findings of fact, there was no scope  to  do
    so either in terms of  the  SSHD's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal or in terms of the grant of  permission.   Those  findings  of
    fact shall stand.

 8. The judge did not  have  the  advantage  of  any  submission  from  the
    Secretary of State on the form the determination  might  take,  if  the
    judge were to reach  findings  of  fact  favourable  to  the  claimant.
    Particularly in the absence of any submission  from  either  party,  it
    seems a marginal question whether saying simply "the appeal is allowed"
    discloses any error of law.  The First-tier Tribunal does not have  the
    power to "remit" matters to the SSHD for decision.  The true effect  of
    the determination may have been no more and no less than  it  ought  to
    have been.

 9. However, the SSHD's point has a good starting point in the  regulations
    and case law, and  may  have  more  than  technical  significance.   As
    proceedings have gone this far, the outcome should now  be  put  beyond
    doubt.  The determination is set aside, and the following  decision  is
    substituted: the appeal, as originally brought by the claimant  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, is allowed on the basis that the  SSHD's  decision
    was not in accordance  with  the  law.   In  effect,  consideration  of
    discretion in terms of regulation 17(4) remains outstanding before  the
    SSHD.

10.  In  view  of  the  very  protracted   history   of   this   relatively
    straightforward case, it is to be hoped that a further decision by  the
    SSHD will not be long delayed.

11. No anonymity order has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           3 December 2015
