
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47511/2014
                                                               IA/47518/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 January 2016                   |On 18 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                            MR ZULFIQAR ALI KHAN
                           MRs Syeda Masooma Zaidi
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Alarayn of Counsel instructed by Farani-Javid-
                    Taylor Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision is an amended decision. Acting under Rule 42 of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I hereby correct and give  notice  of
my failure in my original decision to identify  two  appellants:  the  first
appellant, as named, and the second appellant,  his  wife,  Mrs  Zaidi.  The
text as below is left the same as before save that by "appellant" is  to  be
understood to mean "the first appellant" and where I refer  in  para  11  to
the "appellant's" appeal being dismissed, that is now to  be  read  as  "the
appellants' appeals are dismissed".

1.   The appellant has brought this appeal as a result of  the  decision  by
the First tier Tribunal (FtT) sent on 6  July  2015  dismissing  his  appeal
against the decision made by the respondent on  10  November  2014  refusing
his application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur. The  focus  of
the respondent's refusal was the requirements of para 41-SD(e)  of  Appendix
A  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  with  reference  to  paragraph  245DD.   In
particular the respondent concluded that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
requirements of either para 41-SD(e)(iii) or (iv). To paraphrase,  para  41-
SD(e)(iii) requires an applicant to produce  a number of  documents  in  the
form of advertising materials and articles or  on  line  articles  or  other
publications  showing  the  applicant's  name  together  with  the  business
activity or personal registration with a UK  trade  body  covering  a  three
months period. Subpara (iv) requires one or more contracts  for  service  or
one or more original letters from UK-regulated financial institutions. I  am
particularly  grateful  to  both  representatives  for  their  careful   and
attentive submissions.

2.   The FtT judge dismissed the  appeal  because  he  considered  that  the
appellant  had  failed  to  meet  the  requirements  of  para  41-SD(e),  in
particular by failing to provide evidence as regards  advertising  materials
to cover a continuous period  commencing  before  11  July  2014  up  to  no
earlier than 3 months before the date of application. It is as well to  note
at this stage that the appellant submitted his application  on  6  September
2014.  In  the  appellant's  grounds,  it  was  stated  that  the  documents
submitted in support of his application were:
      i) Business cards
    (ii) Business leaflets
    (iii)    Evidence of a website registered on 29 November 2013
    (iv) Certificate of Membership of  IEE  (Institute  of  Enterprise  and
         Entrepreneurs)
    (v)  Free Index Advertisement
    (vi) Advertisement on Gumtree
    (vii)    Advertisement on Yell

3.   The grounds go on, inter alia, to level a number of criticisms  at  the
FtT judge's treatment of these documents.

4.   In the event, it is unnecessary to set out these criticisms  (save  one
relating to an alleged concession; see below) or indeed what the  judge  had
said about the documents for the following  reason. It was  accepted  by  Mr
Alarayn (with one caveat to which I shall return  below)  that  the  grounds
could only succeed if in fact the above list of documents was sent with  the
appellant's application. That acceptance was a  proper  recognition  of  the
binding force of para 245AA of the Rules which states  at  (a)  that  "Where
Part 6A or any appendices referred  to  in  Part  6A  state  that  specified
documents must be provided, the ... Secretary of State  will  only  consider
documents that have been  submitted  with  the  application  and  will  only
consider documents submitted after  the  application  where..."[the  proviso
that follows is not applicable in this  case].  In  particular,  Mr  Alarayn
accepted (save for the same caveat to which I shall return  to  below)  that
the last two aforementioned documents - the  advertisement  on  Gumtree  and
the advertisement on Yell - were critical to the  appellant  being  able  to
satisfy the relevant rules because the other documents (the business  cards,
business  leaflets  and  Certificate  of  Membership   of   Enterprise   and
Entrepreneurs) were not dated and the Free Index advertisement was  dated  4
September 2014.

5.   However, perusal of the file fails to  substantiate  that  the  Gumtree
and Yell advertisement documents were in fact  sent  with  the  application.
First, the refusal  letter  makes  no  reference  to  the  advertisement  on
Gumtree and  the  advertisement  on  Yell.  Second  its  assessment  of  the
appellant's ability to meet the requirements  of  para  41-SD(e)  states  in
categorical terms that  "the  only  evidence  that  you  have  submitted  to
demonstrate that you are active in that occupation as part of your  business
Calibre London Limited, is..." and the list that follows  does  not  include
either the Gumtree  or  Yell  advertisements.  Third,  the  appellant's  own
grounds of appeal include a page headed "Evidence". It is divided  into  two
lists.  The  first  list  (numbered  1-4)  includes  the  Gumtree  and  Yell
advertisements. The second list (numbered 1-2) is headed "Evidence  provided
with application" and lists: "1. Contract with two  companies.  2.  Contract
with the webdesigner...". Whilst it is clear that  other  items  than  these
latter two were in fact submitted with the  application,  this  sheet  is  a
strong  indication  that  the  Gumtree  and  Yell  advertisements  were  not
submitted until the stage of submitting the grounds of  appeal.  Fourth,  Mr
Alarayn was unable to produce a file copy of the application  together  with
the enclosed documents.

6.   It is  time  to  revert  to  Mr  Alarayn's  caveat  made  late  in  his
submissions that in fact the appellant was entitled to  succeed  under  para
41-SD(e) even  without  the  Gumtree  or  Yell  advertisements  because  the
leaflets were sufficient in themselves to demonstrate the relevant  activity
over the three month period. That submission is simply not borne out by  the
fill  and  indeed  Mr  Alarayn  accepted  he  was  not  in  a  position   to
substantiate that claim.  Against  that  the  respondent  had  said  in  the
refusal letter they bore no dates and the  appellant  has  never  challenged
that analysis before the hearing.

7.   This brings  me  to  the  ground  of  appeal  relating  to  an  alleged
concession. The grounds contend that the FtT judge was wrong to dismiss  the
appeal under requirement (iv) [it can be seen that in fact reference  should
have been to requirement (iii) of para 41-SD(e)] because:
    "... on the date of the hearing the Respondent took no issue  with  the
    evidence that he had submitted in support of meeting [its] requirements
    ... In particular, he submits that the Respondent  confirmed  that  she
    was satisfied with the  advertising  material  and  that  the  leaflets
    (coupled  with  the  invoice  dated  December  2013)   and   the   Yell
    advertisements (created on 2 January 2014) clearly met the requirements
    of the Rules. The Respondent then submitted that she only had an  issue
    with the website domain and this was the only point that was raised  in
    the course of the hearing itself. A duly signed  witness  statement  is
    enclosed to this effect".

8.   I am unable to accept this submission. The judge's determination  makes
no reference to such a concession and indeed if such  had  been  made  there
would have been no point to the judge  recording  in  [10]  the  appellant's
evidence as given in cross-examination in summary as covering the  issue  of
the business advertisements. Nor indeed would it have been sensible for  the
judge to have earlier summarised in some  detail  the  respondent's  reasons
for refusal as regards para 41-SD(e) or the appellant's responses: see  [3]-
[4]. To say that the website domain "was the only point that was  raised  in
the course of the hearing itself" is clearly incorrect and  is  not  in  any
event supported by the duly signed  witness  statement  from  the  appellant
which notes at para 3 that he was asked about "which  advertisements  I  had
in place...I was asked about any particular ones and  I  mentioned  my  Yell
and Gumtree adverts. I then told them about dates. I was  then  asked  about
the domain name."  Further, there is no record  of  any  concession  in  the
documentation held by the respondent, as was confirmed to me by Mr Duffy.  I
informed the parties that I would look over the  record  of  proceedings  in
their presence, which I did. I informed them that much  of  the  handwritten
script was illegible but there was nothing to indicate  any  concession  was
made. It is right to mention that the First tier Tribunal judge who  granted
permission had stated that "The FtT judge will need to be asked to  decipher
his records of proceedings  on  that  issue",  but  that  was  stated  on  3
November 2015 and despite the parties being informed  on  10  December  2015
that this case was listed for hearing  on  Monday  18th  January  2016,  the
appellant's representatives took no steps to pursue  the  lack  of  anything
further from the tribunal regarding a record of proceedings, not to  respond
to the respondent's Rule 24 notice of 16 November disputing  that  any  such
concession was made. In all the circumstance it is impossible say  that  any
such concession was made and I do not consider it would be in the  interests
of justice to take any further steps to obtain a transcribed version of  the
record of proceedings.

9.   For completeness I should mention  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  also
raised the point that the judge appeared to have dismissed the appeal  on  a
further basis, namely the genuineness of the appellant's business  activity.
He is  correct  that  no  such  basis  of  refusal  was  identified  by  the
respondent in the reasons for refusal letter. If  the  judge's  decision  on
this matter had had a material impact on the outcome of the appeal, I  would
have accepted that in this regard the FtT erred, in that it is not  apparent
that the appellant was given a proper opportunity to deal with  the  judge's
own concerns about genuineness.  But  for  reasons  set  out  earlier  I  am
satisfied that the judge properly concluded the appellant could not meet  in
full the requirements of para 41-SD (e) in any event.

10.  Mr Alarayn is right to highlight  that  the  respondent's  reasons  for
refusal appear ultimately to  depend  on  a  failure  on  the  part  of  the
appellant to produce with his application documents which were  nevertheless
in existence at the time. That may or may  not  afford  some  scope  to  the
respondent to reconsider the  appellant's  case  on  a  discretionary  basis
outside the Rules, but this can have no impact on the outcome of the  appeal
against the decision of  the  FtT  judge  and  is  not  a  matter  for  this
Tribunal. The FtT decision was unimpaired by any material error of law.

11.  For the above reasons the appellants' appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date


                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
