
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47388/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 September 2014                           |On 8 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  ILIA KROJ

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Jack, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   In this determination the Secretary of State  is  referred  to  as  the
    Secretary of State and the Respondent is referred as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national  of  Albania,  date  of  birth  13  May  1977,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated  30  October  2013  to
    refuse to issue a permanent residence permit under Regulation  15(1)(b)
    of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the  2006
    Regulations).  Refusal was on the  basis  that  the  Claimant  had  not
    adduced sufficient evidence to show that his EEA national  Sponsor  had
    for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations, exercised treaty rights as  a
    qualified  person  because  the  Claimant's  Sponsor   did   not   have
    comprehensive medical insurance to cover the period  of  time  required
    under the Regulations.

3.   An appeal against that decision by  the  Claimant  led  to  the  matter
    being heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge N Paul who, on 22 April  2014,
    promulgated a decision whereby he allowed  the  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations 2006.

4.   The Secretary of State appealed against that  decision  and  permission
    to appeal was given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 29 May  2014.



5.   By a letter dated  2  February  2014  the  claimant's  representatives,
    Kilby Jones, wrote to the Tribunal  in  connection  with  the  intended
    hearing today, 3 September 2014, to indicate that  "...  the  Appellant
    concedes the appeal in this instance in view of  the  findings  in  the
    recent case of Ahmad v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 988 (16  July  2014)."   In
    the  light  of  that  they  indicated  that  the   Claimant   and   his
    representatives would not be attending  the  hearing  today.   Standard
    directions had in fact been sent out in connection with this matter  on
    12 June 2014 and no additional documentation had been forthcoming  from
    either party.

6.   In the circumstances I agree  with  the  Respondent  that  the  judge's
    reasoning  does  not  properly  address  the  issue  of  the  necessary
    comprehensive private medical  insurance  and  the  fact  that  in  the
    absence of such evidence the appeal could not succeed, contrary to what
    the judge had concluded by reason of later arising events.

7.    I find the original Tribunal's decision cannot stand and the  decision
    will have to be remade.  I considered whether or not it  was  necessary
    or appropriate for the case to be adjourned for a resumed  hearing  or,
    in the alternative, remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  remade.
    In the absence of the evidence required to show that the  EEA  national
    did have the required insurance cover, which has not been improved upon
    or added to by events since the date of the judge's  decision,  I  find
    that there is  no  purpose  served  in  having  a  resumed  hearing  or
    remitting this matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   The fact s that the Claimant's  Sponsor  did  not  have  the  necessary
    comprehensive medical insurance for the duration of her time  spent  in
    the UK as a student.   Accordingly  the  fact  that  the  EEA  national
    obtained cover between  17  February  2014  and  1  April  2014  simply
    demonstrates that the appeal would in those circumstances  have  failed
    in any event.  Be that as it may, I find  that  the  Claimant  has  not
    discharged the burden of proof  upon  a  balance  of  probabilities  at
    either the date of  application  or  the  date  of  decision  that  the
    requirements of the Rules had been met.   .

9.   The appeal of Mr Ilia Kroj on immigration grounds is dismissed.

10.   No anonymity order was previously  made  nor  is  one  appropriate  or
    necessary.

11.  The appeal has failed and therefore a fee award in those  circumstances
    has not been made.

Signed                                  Date 6 September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


