
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/47380/2014
      ia/47387/2014
      ia/47392/2014
      ia/47403/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2016                             |On 18 May 2016                |

                                   Before
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                        MR sujith chaminda ratnaweera
               mRS DELANI VINONI SAMANTHINKA PEDURU ARACHCHIGE
                                    [S R]
                                    [K R]
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Following my error of law decision, promulgated to the  parties  on  26
    February 2016 (set out in full at Annex 1), I adjourned the appeal  for
    a continuation hearing. The current decision is  the  remaking  of  the
    decision on the Appellants' appeals.

 2. In brief, I had found that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  materially
    erred in his consideration of the Appellants' Article 8 claims. Nothing
    could be salvaged from the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

 3. The Appellants are all nationals of Sri Lanka.  The  first  and  second
    Appellants are married and are the parents of the third and fourth. The
    third and fourth Appellants were  born  on  [  ]  2000  and  [  ]  2004
    respectively. They both entered the United Kingdom on 1 October 2007.



The evidence before me

 4.  I  have  the  Respondent's  original  appeal  bundle  containing   the
    application  forms,  other  supporting   evidence,   the   notices   of
    immigration decisions (refusals to vary leave  to  remain  and  removal
    under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act  2006),
    and the reasons for refusal letters.

 5. From the Appellant I have two bundles, now marked AB1 and AB2.

 6. The first Appellant gave brief  oral  evidence,  a  note  of  which  is
    contained in the Record of Proceedings. He told me  that  he  has  been
    back to Sri Lanka alone twice since his arrival in 2006.  The  children
    have not been back since their arrival in 2007. The first Appellant has
    a father and four sisters in Sri Lanka, whilst his wife has her  mother
    there. The children do not know any Tamil, speak Sinhalese to  a  basic
    level, but cannot read or write that language.

 7. Based on instructions, Mr Jafar told me that the  third  Appellant  was
    undertaking his GCSEs in May 2016, the fourth Appellant was now in Year
    7, the second Appellant was a  nursery  teacher,  and  that  the  first
    Appellant was an IT engineer, working as a sole trading  sub-contractor
    to Thames Water.



Submissions

 8. Mr Jafar accepted that the Appellants could not meet the Rules  insofar
    as they relate to Article 8. He relied on the recent decision in PD and
    Others (Article 8 - conjoined family  claims)  Sri  Lanka  [2016]  UKUT
    00108 (IAC). There are similarities between that case and the  present,
    with reference to paragraphs 23-24 of the former. The fourth  Appellant
    is part of an observational medical study. The third Appellant is at  a
    crucial stage of his education. There are ties outside of school. I was
    asked to follow Treebhawon and others  (section  117B(6))  [2015]  UKUT
    00674 (IAC). The  best  interests  and  welfare  of  the  two  children
    indicated being allowed to remain here. There  was  no  overstaying  in
    these appeals. The time  spent  in  the  United  Kingdom  consisted  of
    formative years in the children's lives. It was suggested that  section
    117B(3) of the 2002 Act did not relate to the costs of  education,  but
    went to the ability of a family to support itself.

 9. Ms Fijiwala submitted that because the Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    Rules, compelling circumstances had to be shown in order  for  them  to
    succeed under Article 8. I was referred to EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874 and to PD at paragraph 29. The third Appellant had lived in Sri
    Lanka between the ages of one and  seven.  There  was  family  in  that
    country. The children could learn to read and write Sinhalese. The best
    interests of children were not determinative. All the  Appellants  were
    here on a precarious basis. All relevant  factors  should  be  assessed
    when considering reasonableness under section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act.
    This includes the circumstances of the parents. It  is  reasonable  for
    the children to leave the United Kingdom with  their  parents.  It  was
    accepted if the third  and/or  fourth  Appellants  succeeded  in  their
    appeals, so would the first and second.



Findings and reasons

10. The burden of proving material facts rests with the Appellants and  the
    standard of proof is that of a balance of probabilities.

11. There has been no challenge by the Respondent to the credibility of any
    of the evidence before me. I have no sound reason to doubt any of it. I
    find that the evidence provided by the Appellants in all its  forms  is
    both truthful and reliable. Based  upon  this,  I  make  the  following
    findings of primary fact.

The first Appellant

12. I find that the first Appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  22
    September 2006 and has remained with  leave  at  all  times.  The  last
    category in which he was granted leave was as a Tier 1  Highly  Skilled
    Migrant. This leave expired on 11 September  2014.  However,  the  last
    application to the Respondent was made on 8 September 2014, and so  the
    previous leave was and continues to be extended by virtue of section 3C
    of the Immigration Act 1971.

13. I find that the first Appellant is an IT engineer, and the director  of
    a company registered with Companies  House  as  SKD  Global  Networking
    Limited (25 AB2). He operates as a sole trader. I accept  that  he  has
    (along with his wife)  fully  financially  supported  the  family  unit
    without recourse to public funds, and that he would continue to  do  so
    in the future.

14. I find that he has been back alone to Sri Lanka twice  since  2006,  in
    2010 and 2011. His father and four sisters reside there.

15. I find that the first Appellant speaks Sinhalese.

The second Appellant

16. I find that the second Appellant arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  1
    October 2007, together with the third and fourth  Appellants.  She  has
    remained here ever since with leave  as  the  dependent  of  the  first
    Appellant. Her leave is also currently extended under section 3C of the
    1971 Act.

17. I find that the second Appellant is a full-time nursery teacher at [  ]
    School, and has been since November 2009 (24 AB2). The reference letter
    from the Headteacher speaks very highly of her and I find that she is a
    valued member of staff in what is clearly an important role.

18. I find that the second Appellant speaks Sinhalese and that she has  her
    mother in Sri Lanka.

The third Appellant

19. The third Appellant arrived here on 1 October  2007.  He  too  has  had
    leave ever since, leave that is also currently extended under the  1971
    Act. At the time the latest application was made to the Respondent,  he
    had been in this country for some three weeks short of seven years.  As
    at the date of the hearing before me, he had been here for eight  years
    and some six months.

20. I find that he started attending  school  very  shortly  after  arrival
    (there are award certificates dating back to  16  November  2007  -  38
    AB1). He has attended school throughout his time here and is  currently
    undertaking GCSEs at [ ] School (14 AB2). His final listed exam  is  on
    21 June 2016 (16 AB2). It is  readily  apparent  from  the  educational
    evidence as a whole that the third Appellant  has  done  very  well  at
    school.

21. Whilst I do not have very much detail about social ties, I  accept  the
    first  Appellant's  written  evidence  that  his  son  has  established
    numerous friendships within and outside of school, and that he is fully
    integrated into British life.  This  is  hardly  surprising  given  the
    length of time spent in this country and the formative years  contained
    therein.

22. I find that he is a keen Taekwondo participant (18 AB2).

23. I accept that the third Appellant has not been back to Sri Lanka  since
    his arrival here in 2007. There is no evidence of him  having  had  any
    other form of contact with that country and I find that there have been
    no meaningful connections over the course of his  time  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

24. In respect of linguistic abilities, I find that he can speak  Sinhalese
    to a basic standard only, but cannot read or write the language. He has
    no Tamil at all.

25. The third Appellant has no health problems.

The fourth Appellant

26. As with her brother and mother, the fourth Appellant arrived here on  1
    October 2007 and has had leave ever since. That leave is extended under
    the 1971 Act. She has obviously been here for the same period  of  time
    as her brother.

27. I cannot quite tell  when  she  started  at  primary  school,  but  she
    certainly progressed through the years in the normal way.  She  started
    her secondary education in September 2015 (20 AB2), and so  in  now  in
    the latter stages of Year 7. She has done well  in  her  education  and
    appears to be within the expected levels for her age (15 AB1).

28. I accept her parent's evidence that she too  has  made  friends  within
    school and beyond. Such ties may perhaps be somewhat less strong  given
    her age. I find that she too is involved in Taekwondo.

29. The fourth Appellant has  an  inherited  eye  condition  called  RPE65-
    related Leber Congenital Amaurosis, described in the medical letter  at
    23 AB2 as being "severe,  progressive,  inherited  retinal  dystrophy."
    There is  at  present  no  treatment  for  this  condition.  The  third
    Appellant appears to be involved in an  observational  study  into  the
    condition at Moorfields  Hospital.  I  do  not  have  any  evidence  of
    additional support needs at school, and I find that there are none.

30. The third Appellant has not been to Sri Lanka since her arrival here in
    2007. I find that like her brother, she has no meaningful  contacts  or
    ties with that country.

31. In respect of language, I find that she can speak Sinhalese at a  basic
    level, but cannot read or write it. She has no Tamil.



Conclusions on Article 8 within the Rules

32. Mr Jafar has accepted throughout that the Appellants cannot satisfy the
    Rules as they relate to Article 8. In my  view  he  is  right  to  have
    adopted this position.

33. By virtue of the Appellants' status in the  United  Kingdom,  the  fact
    that they live together as a single family unit, and that the  children
    had not been in the United Kingdom for seven years at the date  of  the
    application, they are not able to meet the requirements of any  of  the
    routes under Appendix FM to the Rules.

34. In respect of paragraph 267ADE of the Rules and the  first  and  second
    Appellants, Mr Jafar's concession has  the  effect  of  accepting  that
    there are no "very significant obstacles" to their re-integration  into
    Sri Lankan  society.  If  one  were  to  take  their  circumstances  in
    artificial isolation from the children for present purposes, Mr Jafar's
    position is a realistic one.

35. Turning to the children's claims under Rules, the  insuperable  problem
    here is that neither of them had been in the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    requisite seven years as  at  the  date  of  application  made  to  the
    Respondent on 8 September 2014. They may have been only just  short  of
    the qualifying threshold, but short they were. We  have  recently  been
    reminded of  the  danger  in  applying  a  'near  miss'  view  of  such
    scenarios, and I do not fall into that particular  trap  (see  Chau  Le
    (Immigration Rules - de minimis principle) [2016]  UKUT  00186  (IAC)),
    although this issue is not without relevance to the claims  outside  of
    the Rules.

36. Thus, all four appeals must fail under the Rules.



Conclusions on Article 8 outside of the Rules

37. As a conseqiunece of the foregoing, all four appeals are to be assessed
    outside the ambit of the Rules. In so doing, I am guided by PD and Miah
    (section 117B NIAA 2002 - children) [2016] UKUT  00131  (IAC),  amongst
    other decisions. I also direct myself to the need for the Appellant  to
    show "compelling" or "exceptional" circumstances in  order  to  succeed
    (see, for example, PD at paragraph 43 and SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387).

38. In addition, as Ms Fijiwala quite properly accepted, all  four  appeals
    stand of fall together. This is in keeping  with  the  reality  of  the
    Appellants' circumstances and the observations at paragraphs  26-28  of
    PD.

Family life

39. There is quite clearly strong family life  as  between  the  Appellants
    themselves.

40. There are no familial relationships with other  people  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

Private life

41. All four Appellants enjoy their own private lives in this country,  and
    there has been no dispute about this by the Respondent.

42. The first Appellant has established himself and his family here. He has
    been residing here lawfully for close  to  twelve  years,  and  runs  a
    successful business. I also infer that he has made friendships over the
    course of time.

43. The second Appellant has been here for a lengthy time as well. She  has
    been working as a teacher since 2009 and will clearly have  established
    friendships within the professional environment and very likely beyond.

44. The third and fourth Appellants' private lives consist of their  social
    and educational development and ties in this country over the course of
    eight and a half years.

Interference

45. There  is  no  question  that  the  removal  of  the  Appellants  would
    constitute a sufficiently serious interference  with  their  respective
    private lives so as to engage Article 8. As  the  Appellants  would  be
    removed together, there would be no interference with family life.



In accordance with the law and legitimate aim

46. There is no dispute about these issues.

Proportionality

47. I begin the balancing exercise with an  assessment  of  the  children's
    best interests and welfare (with reference to ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC
    4 and section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009).
    In so doing I have had  regard  to  all  of  the  evidence  before  me,
    evidence that I have found to be credible, as set out previously.

48. The third Appellant has been here for a substantive period:  over  half
    his life and throughout the important years following the attainment of
    four (see Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197(IAC)). He has been educated  by  our  system
    from the age of seven and continues  to  be  so.  He  has  passed  from
    primary education into the secondary phase. He has clearly  thrived  in
    both. As I write, he is undertaking his  GCSE  exams,  on  any  view  a
    critical juncture in his young life. I  readily  infer  that  there  is
    every intention and expectation that he will continue  to  progress  in
    his education and I have no doubt that he would seek  to  undertake  A-
    levels and eventually move onto university.

49. I have found that he has  good  friendships  both  within  and  without
    school, and takes part in extra-curricular activities.

50. He is, I conclude, a young man who  has  been  shaped  by  and  is  now
    immersed in British society, culture and values.

51. In stark contrast, I conclude that his ties to Sri Lanka  are  now,  at
    best, minimal. I have found that  his  linguistic  abilities  are  very
    limited indeed. This only highlights the extent to which his  life  and
    identity (and to a lesser degree those of his parents) are embedded  in
    this country rather than that of his birth. In returning to  Sri  Lanka
    now, he would have to rapidly learn  to  speak  fluently  in  order  to
    reintegrate socially and progress educationally (even assuming  he  did
    not have to have formal linguistic  qualifications  at  GCSE-equivalent
    level before being able to undertake A-levels there), and would have to
    learn to read and write Sinhalese from scratch. The third Appellant  is
    a bright individual, but on any view this  would  entail  a  formidable
    undertaking for a teenager already integrated in another country,  both
    intellectually and emotionally.

52. The third Appellant has not been to Sri Lanka since arriving  here.  He
    does not have meaningful contact with  people  there.  Having  left  at
    seven, this will have resulted in some memories of that  country  being
    laid down. However, one needs to apply a  degree  of  common  sense  to
    this. Young children adapt to and absorb new surroundings quickly,  and
    a previous life is likely to recede into the memorial distance during a
    lengthy period in another country in which significant roots are  being
    established, particularly when these extend beyond simply the immediate
    family (thus, the reasoning in Azimi-Moyaed relating to the  plus  four
    year-old scenario).

53. Taking all of the above into account and viewed  through  the  lens  of
    Article 8 private life, I am of  the  very  firm  view  that  the  best
    interests and  welfare  of  the  third  Appellant  are  served  by  him
    remaining in the  United  Kingdom.  In  addition,  it  has  never  been
    suggested that the third Appellant could somehow remain in this country
    without his parents and sister. It follows that his best interests  lie
    not only in remaining in the United Kingdom, but  that  this  state  of
    affairs would involve living with his family here too.

54. Turning to the fourth Appellant, some of same factors apply to  her  as
    they do to her brother. She arrived here aged three, and so  has  spent
    almost three times longer in the United Kingdom than  she  had  in  Sri
    Lanka.  It  is  right  that  she  is  younger  than  her  brother,  but
    nonetheless she has progressed through  primary  school  and  has  just
    started her secondary education which, to my  mind,  is  a  significant
    stage in a  young  person's  life.  I  have  found  that  she  too  has
    friendships within and beyond the school gates.

55. Her  linguistic  abilities  are  as  limited  as  those  of  the  third
    Appellant. Returning to  Sri  Lanka  would  entail  learning  to  speak
    Sinhalese fluently and to read and write in that language, as she would
    be compelled to obtain a GCSE-equivalent in her "mother tongue"  before
    being able to progress to A-levels (see 67 AB1).  She  would  at  least
    have some time in which to undertake the learning process. Nonetheless,
    having spent all of her educational and effective social life  in  this
    country, having to adapt to a new schooling system  and  a  new  social
    environment at the same time as learning a new language  (in  terms  of
    its three facets) would entail a very significant disruption to her.

56. In relation the fourth Appellant's medical  condition,  it  appears  as
    though she is not disabled by it (at least not  currently)  as  regards
    her education and daily life. There is no treatment for it,  and  so  a
    return to Sri Lanka would make no difference  in  terms  of  specialist
    care. I have no evidence on any studies undertaken in Sri Lanka. I have
    not been told that her presence in this country is essential as part of
    the observational study referred to earlier. On this particular  issue,
    I conclude that a return would  not  impinge  negatively  on  her  best
    interests.

57. The fourth Appellant's ties with her  home  country  are,  I  conclude,
    negligible. She will not have had the time in which  to  put  down  any
    effective memories of her life there, having left aged just three.  She
    has not been back, and  will  have  no  material  experience  of  life,
    culture and society in Sri Lanka.

58. Taking the above as a whole and viewing the matter through the  private
    life lens, I conclude that  her  best  interests  and  welfare  lie  in
    remaining in this country, together with her family. I would  say  that
    my conclusion on the fourth Appellant is not as firmly based as that on
    her brother.

59. The welfare and best interests of the third and fourth  Appellants  are
    not of course 'trump cards' in the assessment of proportionality.  With
    this in mind, I turn to other relevant matters.

60. The public interest in maintaining effective immigration control  is  a
    mandatory and weighty factor which I take fully  into  account,  having
    regard to section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act. All of  the  Appellants  are
    and have always been subject to immigration control.

61. The Appellants have not met the Rules as these  relate  to  Article  8.
    That in itself counts against their collective claim.  The  Respondent,
    with the approval of Parliament,  has  set  out  what  she  regards  as
    appropriate criteria by which Article 8 claims should be assessed  and,
    if satisfied, will lead to success. For the purposes of the Rules, that
    fact that the third and fourth Appellants missed out on the  seven-year
    qualifying criteria in paragraph 276ADE(iv) by a matter of weeks is by-
    the-by, although the time they have spent here remains highly  relevant
    in the overall balancing exercise. The consequence of failing  to  meet
    the Rules is that according to the current state of  binding  decisions
    of the Court of Appeal  (none  of  which,  it  should  be  noted,  deal
    specifically with the relevant aspects of  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act
    arising in these appeals), "compelling" or "exceptional"  circumstances
    must exist in order for the claims to succeed.

62. All of the Appellants speak fluent English. Thus, no additional  weight
    is added to the Respondent's side of the scales (section 117B(2)).

63. The first and  second  Appellant  have  supported  themselves  and  the
    children throughout their time in this country. Nothing negative arises
    on that specific point. However, as was pointed out in paragraph  34(c)
    of PD, the children have been and would  continue  to  be  educated  at
    public expense. Thus, section 117B(3) bites to an extent.

64. Section 117B(4) does not apply in these appeals. All of the  Appellants
    have been in the  United  Kingdom  lawfully  throughout.  That  is  not
    insignificant, in that so often appellants have  been  overstayers  for
    considerable periods of time (as was the case in PD itself -  paragraph
    33).

65. It is right that the Appellants' status has been  "precarious"  in  the
    sense that it is not settled. According  to  section  117B(5)  and  the
    analysis in Deelah and others (section 117B - ambit) [2015] UKUT  00515
    (IAC) I must therefore attribute "little  weight"  to  the  Appellants'
    private lives. I have to say that for what it is  worth  I  find  three
    consequences of section 117B rather problematic: first, that  there  is
    no difference in  the  reduction  of  weight  attributable  to  private
    between those lawfully here and  those  unlawfully  resident  (sections
    117B(4) and (5)); second, that the weight given to  a  child's  private
    life, established over the course of, say,  ten  or  eleven  years,  is
    automatically reduced to "little" simply as a result of not having been
    here for the requisite seven years as at the date of an application  to
    the Respondent (with reference to paragraph 276ADE(iv) of  the  Rules);
    third, I am concerned with how comfortably section  117B(5)  sits  with
    the best interests/welfare considerations and section 117B(6).

66. I turn to the question of  reasonableness.  This  is  crucial  for  two
    reasons. First, in order  for  the  third  and  fourth  Appellant's  to
    succeed in their appeals, they need initially to show that it would  be
    unreasonable to expect them to leave the United Kingdom.  This  is  the
    test established by the House of Lords in EB (Kosovo) [2008]  UKHL  41,
    and as far as I am concerned remains binding authority on  this  point.
    Indeed,  the  "reasonableness"  test  is  now  enshrined   in   primary
    legislation (section 117B(6)) and  the  Rules  (paragraph  276ADE(iv)).
    Second, the first and second Appellants seek to rely on satisfaction of
    the test in respect of their Article 8 claims,  by  virtue  of  section
    117B(6).

67. The statutory test is that  of  "reasonableness",  not  "insurmountable
    obstacles" or the like. Whilst the latter may not exist here,  that  is
    not the point: the applicable threshold is less demanding.

68. In assessing reasonableness, I consider all relevant  circumstances  in
    the round, including those of the first and second Appellants. Whilst I
    of course note what is said in EV (Philippines)  and  do  consider  the
    parents' situation, like the Upper Tribunal  in  PD  (paragraph  36)  I
    observe that section 117B(6) was not in play before the Court of Appeal
    and the children concerned had been in the United Kingdom  for  only  a
    very short period.

69. The first factor I take into account are the best interests and welfare
    of the children, as set out in some detail at paragraphs 47-58,  above.
    In short form, their removal would be wholly contrary to  this  primary
    consideration.  In  particular,   predominant   factors   include   the
    percentage of their respective lives  spent  here,  the  crucial  stage
    reached in the third Appellant's education, the immersion in  the  life
    of the United  Kingdom  (particularly  so  in  relation  to  the  third
    Appellant), and the lack of meaningful ties of their own to Sri Lanka.

70. I do not believe that the instruction in section 117B(5) can  have  the
    effect  that  "little  weight"  must  also  be  placed  upon  the  best
    interests/welfare of  the  children.  Whilst  these  interests  are  in
    reality part and parcel of their private lives, it simply  cannot  have
    been the intention of Parliament to effectively negate  the  importance
    of ZH (Tanzania), section 55 of the 2009 Act and the UN  Convention  on
    the Rights of the Child in this way. I place  very  significant  weight
    upon the best interests/welfare considerations in the  context  of  the
    reasonableness test.

71. I have full regard to the  matters  adverse  to  the  Appellants  under
    section 117B, as outlined above. That the Appellant's have always  been
    subject to immigration control tends towards removal being  reasonable.
    The failure to satisfy the Rules pertaining to Article 8 has a  similar
    effect, as does the public purse consideration relating to the  funding
    of education.

72. Having said that, it is not as though the children  and  their  parents
    have had no right to be in the United  Kingdom;  they  have  had  leave
    throughout, albeit on a temporary basis.

73. It is right that the first and  second  Appellants  have  ties  to  Sri
    Lanka. There are relatives and it is foreseeable that they could obtain
    decent employment upon return. I place weight on this factor.  However,
    for the reasons elaborated previously the third and fourth  Appellant's
    have  no  meaningful  ties  themselves,  and  this  is  important  when
    assessing the reasonableness of their departure from  this  country.  I
    attach greater weight to this factor than to the parents' ties.

74. I take into account that Sri Lanka is not a  war-torn  or  particularly
    impoverished country. There is a functioning education system in  place
    which,  subject  to  language  issues  and  everything  else   I   said
    previously, the children could gain access to.

75. I bear in mind the fact that the family unit would be removed together.
    In the context of these appeals, however,  that  is  obvious  and  adds
    little weight to the Respondent's side of the balance.

76. I have also had regard to the Respondent's own guidance on children and
    long residence, as cited in PD at paragraph 37:

           "The longer the child has  resided  in  the  UK,  the  more  the
           balance will begin to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to
           expect the child to leave the UK  and  strong  reasons  will  be
           required in order to refuse a case with continuous UK  residence
           of more than seven years."

    The third and fourth Appellants have been here for  eight  and  a  half
    years, a  not  insignificant  time  beyond  the  seven  year  mark.  In
    addition, whilst there are undoubtedly reasons why departure  could  in
    principle be reasonable, having regard to all that I  have  said,  they
    are not strong reasons.

77. Bringing all of the above together, I conclude that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the third  and  fourth  Appellants  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. My conclusion in respect  of  the  third  Appellant  is
    stronger than that on the fourth.

78. The final hurdle over which the third and fourth Appellants must  climb
    is the need to show "compelling"  or  "exceptional"  circumstances.  In
    light of my findings and conclusions in these appeals I deem  there  to
    be "compelling" circumstances. These are as follows, and can be read in
    isolation or cumulatively.

79. First, that fact that it would be not only contrary to  the  children's
    bests interests and welfare to leave the United Kingdom, but would also
    be unreasonable, amounts to a "compelling" circumstance.

80. Second, I bear in mind what is said by the Court of Appeal at paragraph
    38 of SS (Congo) about the "near miss" situation:

           "However, it cannot be said that the fact that a case involves a
           'near miss' in relation to the requirements set out in the Rules
           is wholly irrelevant to the balancing  exercise  required  under
           Article 8. If an applicant can show that  there  are  individual
           interests at stake covered by Article 8 which  give  rise  to  a
           strong claim that compelling circumstances may exist to  justify
           the grant of LTE outside the Rules, the fact that their case  is
           also a 'near miss' case may be a  relevant  consideration  which
           tips the balance under Article 8 in  their  favour.  In  such  a
           case, the applicant will be able to  say  that  the  detrimental
           impact on the public interest in issue  if  LTE  is  granted  in
           their favour will be somewhat less than in a case where the  gap
           between the applicant's position and  the  requirements  of  the
           Rules is great, and  the  risk  that  they  may  end  up  having
           recourse to public funds and resources is therefore greater."

81. Here, given that I have found that it would  be  unreasonable  for  the
    third and fourth Appellants to leave the United Kingdom, the sole basis
    for failure under the Rules was the shortfall of some  three  weeks  in
    the accrual of seven years residence prior to their parents applying to
    the Respondent in 2014 (I note that children should not  be  'punished'
    for the actions of their parents). This too amounts to  a  "compelling"
    circumstance.

82. Third,  the  combination  of  the  following  go  to  disclose  further
    "compelling" circumstances:

   a) The fact that the third and fourth Appellant's  have  now  spent  over
      half and about three-quarters of their respective lives here;

   b) The level of integration into British life;

   c) Their educational stages, particularly that of the third Appellant;

   d) The lack of ties to Sri Lanka.

83. The appeals of the third and fourth Appellants  succeed  on  Article  8
    grounds outside of the Rules.

84. I now turn to the first  and  second  Appellant's  appeals.  The  first
    matter to note is that  Ms  Fijiwala  accepted  that  if  the  children
    succeeded in their appeals, the parents would also win. On the basis of
    this concession I could truncate matters here and simply state  that  I
    am allowing all the appeals. However, it is appropriate that I set  out
    the basis for my conclusions on the first and second Appellant's appeal
    in more detail.

85. In this regard I turn then to section 117B(6).  The  third  and  fourth
    Appellants are  both  "qualifying  children"  by  virtue  of  the  long
    residence here (section 117D(1)(b)). The  first  and  second  Appellant
    clearly have a "genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship"  with
    their children. I have already found that it would be  unreasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the United Kingdom. Therefore,  the  three
    constituent parts of section 117B(6) are satisfied.

86. The primary consequence of the satisfaction of section 117B(6) is  that
    the first and second Appellant's appeal succeed on  Article  8  grounds
    outside of the Rules.  This  is  because  in  my  respectful  view  the
    analysis and conclusions of the President at paragraphs  in  Treebhawon
    and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC) are correct.  Once
    the requirements of section 117B(6) are met this  is  determinative  of
    the Article 8 public interest question.

87.  However,  I  am  aware  that  there  are  differing  views  about  the
    correctness of  Treebhawon,  and  that  the  Court  of  Appeal  may  be
    examining the point at some stage. I therefore think it appropriate  to
    provide an alternative conclusion on the first and  second  Appellant's
    appeals.

88.  If  section  117B(6)  is  not  determinative  of  the  proportionality
    exercise, I nonetheless conclude that the first and second  Appellant's
    cases succeed outside of the  Rules.  This  is  so  for  the  following
    reasons.

89. First, I refer back to what I  have  said  already  about  the  various
    factors considered within the balancing exercise, in  particular  those
    relating to Part 5A matters. There are matters which tell both for  and
    against the parents. Those against are certainly not of the import seen
    in so many cases (in particular having regard to the lawful  residence,
    employment, and fluent English).

90. Second, I take into account that the first Appellant is employed  in  a
    skilled profession, and contributes to the economy by virtue  of  taxes
    paid. The second Appellant is employed in an important sector  and  she
    makes a valuable contribution to society. I  place  weight  upon  this,
    with reference to UE (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ 975.

91. Third, the fact that their children cannot reasonably  be  expected  to
    leave the United Kingdom and  that  "compelling"  circumstances  exist,
    must be and is a telling factor in favour of the  parents'  cases.  The
    section 117B(6) factor and presence of  "compelling"  circumstances  in
    the children's cases is very significant and amounts in my  view  to  a
    "compelling" circumstance attributable to the appeals of the first  and
    second Appellants.

92. Fourth, to require the first and second Appellants to leave the  United
    Kingdom without their children has never been a position adopted by the
    Respondent. Nor has the possibility of the parents taking the  children
    back notwithstanding that it would be unreasonable for  the  latter  to
    go. The consequence of this is that a further "compelling" circumstance
    is present.

93. Fifth, the matters adverse to the first  and  second  Appellants  under
    section 117B are ultimately outweighed by points two to four, above.

94. As a result of everything I have said,  all  four  appeals  succeed  on
    Article 8 grounds outside of the Rules.





Anonymity

95. I make no direction as one has not been  requested  and  would  not  be
    necessary in any event.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeals of  all  four  Appellants  on
Article 8 grounds outside of the Immigration Rules.

Signed                                       Date: 11 May 2016
H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.
Material evidence has been submitted after the applications  were  made  and
the  success  of  the  appeals  is  based  upon  necessary  adjudication  on
contentious issues by the Tribunal.



Signed                                       Date:  11 May 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



ANNEX 1: ERROR OF LAW DECISION



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/47380/2014
      ia/47387/2014
      ia/47392/2014
      ia/47403/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2016                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                        MR sujith chaminda ratnaweera
               mRS DELANI VINONI SAMANTHINKA PEDURU ARACHCHIGE
                                    [S R]
                                    [K R]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr A Jafar, Counsel, instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
 1. These are appeals by the four Appellants against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cohen (the judge), promulgated on 15 June 2015,  in
    which he dismissed their appeals  under  Article  8,  both  within  and
    without the Immigration Rules (the Rules).

 2.  The  appeals  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been   against   the
    Respondent's decisions dated 11 November 2014, refusing applications to
    vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  giving  directions  for
    removal under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
    2006.  The first two Appellants are husband and wife and they  in  turn
    are the  parents  of  the  third  and  fourth  Appellants.   The  third
    Appellant was born on [ ] 2000 and the fourth  Appellant,  his  sister,
    was born on [ ] 2004.


The judge's decision
 3. At paragraph 5  of  his  decision  the  judge  states  that  the  third
    Appellant was about to commence his GCSEs and that  the  younger  child
    was about to start secondary school in  September  of  that  year.  The
    judge makes reference to the "substantial amount of evidence"  relating
    to the children's education in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 11 the
    judge refers to Appendix FM to the Rules and concludes that none of the
    Appellants could satisfy the relevant provisions.  He then goes  on  to
    consider Article  8  outside  of  the  Rules.   The  substance  of  his
    considerations is all contained within paragraph 15.  The judge  refers
    to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, and
    to the Court of Appeal judgment in EV  (Philippines)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874.  Reference is made to the lack of settled status  of  any  of  the
    Appellants, and that none of them had a legitimate expectation of being
    able to remain in this country permanently.  The judge  finds  that  it
    would be in the children's best interests to return to Sri  Lanka  with
    their parents, where they could  enjoy  extended  family  relationships
    with grandparents, aunts and uncles and  other  close  family  members.
    The judge finds that there would be adequate educational facilities for
    the two younger Appellants in Sri Lanka.  He notes what he describes as
    the "similarities" between the  appeals  before  him  and  the  factual
    matrix of EV (Philippines).  He concludes that it  would  be  "entirely
    reasonable" to expect the children to go with their parents back to Sri
    Lanka.  The judge then adds: "the UK cannot educate the world".

 4. The appeals were dismissed under the Rules and on freestanding  Article
    8 grounds.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission
 5. The Appellants sought permission to appeal  essentially  on  the  basis
    that the judge failed to deal adequately with the circumstances of  the
    third and fourth Appellants, and in particular the length of time  that
    they had spent in the United Kingdom.  Permission was refused initially
    by the First-tier Tribunal but then granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Goldstein on 4 November 2015.


The hearing before me
 6. At the outset Mr Jafar agreed that although the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider paragraph 276ADE of the Rules in  respect  of  the  third  and
    fourth Appellants, this made  no  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeals  given  the  age  of  the  third  appellant  at  the  date  the
    applications for further leave to remain were made.  Mr Jafar relied on
    the grounds and confirmed that the core of his argument related to  the
    age of the third and fourth Appellants, the time spent in this  country
    and their best interests.
 7.  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  the
    children's schooling in the United Kingdom and  she  referred  in  this
    respect to paragraph 5 of the decision.


Decision on Error of Law
 8. I find that there are material errors of law in the judge's decision.

 9. The judge has failed  to  have  any  or  any  adequate  regard  to  the
    significant factor of the third and fourth Appellants' educational ties
    in this country, as opposed to simply what they may be able  to  access
    if returned to Sri Lanka.  It was not in dispute before the judge  that
    the third Appellant was (contrary to the error in paragraph 5) about to
    start the second year of his GCSEs.  Further, the fourth Appellant  was
    finishing Year 6 of primary school and was therefore about to  commence
    her secondary level schooling.  These  were  obviously  very  important
    factors, and  they  were  coupled  with  the  children's  ages  and  in
    particular the fact that the third Appellant had been in  this  country
    for over seven years. That period of time accrued after the  attainment
    of 4 years of age, and it is clear  from  cases  such  as  Azimi-Moayed
    [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC), E-A [2011] UKUT 315 )IAC) and SC [2012] UKUT  56
    (IAC) (amongst others) that factors such as  the  time  spent  in  this
    country and the particular educational stage  reached  are  significant
    and need to be dealt with properly.  Indeed there is  judicial  comment
    to the effect that "strong countervailing reasons" are  required  if  a
    conclusion is to be reached that removal would be reasonable  in  cases
    with similar factual matrixes to the present appeals.

10. In my view the factors taken into account and considered  in  paragraph
    15 of the judge's decision in effect all  relate  to  the  position  on
    return to  Sri  Lanka  and  there  is  nothing,  or  at  least  nothing
    adequately expressed, on the United Kingdom-based factors. There is  no
    consideration or reasoning in respect  of  the  substantial  amount  of
    evidence adduced on the  Appellants'  behalf  relating  to  educational
    progress   The  passing  reference  to  the  children's  schooling   in
    paragraph 5 of the decision does not in any way rescue the  defects  in
    paragraph 15.


11. In addition, the judge's comment that there were  similarities  in  the
    factual matrix between these appeals and EV (Philippines) is misplaced,
    particularly given that the children in that  case  had  been  in  this
    country for only three years.

12. In short, the judge has failed to adequately  address  highly  relevant
    factors and this renders his conclusion that it would be reasonable for
    the  third  and  fourth  Appellants  to  leave   the   United   Kingdom
    unsustainable.


13. I therefore set aside the judge's decision.

14. I would just add that comments such  as  "the  UK  cannot  educate  the
    world" are not particularly helpful and are best avoided.


Disposal
15. Both representatives were agreed that if material errors  of  law  were
    found these appeals should remain in the Upper Tribunal.  That  is  the
    appropriate course of action.

16. In the normal course of events I would be remaking  the  decision  now,
    and on the evidence currently before me.  However, Ms  Willocks-Briscoe
    had not had the opportunity of reading much of the  relevant  paperwork
    in advance of the hearing (through no fault of her own) and it was felt
    as though further oral evidence from the first  and  second  Appellants
    would be useful in providing me with the best possible picture  of  the
    family's current circumstances.


17.  In  light  of  these  two  factors  I  adjourn  these  appeals  for  a
    continuation hearing before me.   My  decision  on  error  of  law  and
    relevant directions will be issued to the parties forthwith.


Anonymity
  18. No direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal, and  none  has  been
      sought from me. There is no particular reason for making one.  I  make
      no direction.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I adjourn these appeals for  a  continuation  hearing  before  me  at  Field
House.


Directions to the parties

    1. The Appellants are, no later than  14  working  days  prior  to  the
       continuation hearing, to file and serve on the  Upper  Tribunal  and
       Respondent any further evidence relied upon;


    2. The Appellants are, no later than  14  working  days  prior  to  the
       continuation hearing, to file and serve on the  Upper  Tribunal  and
       Respondent a skeleton argument setting out relevant  arguments  with
       reference to the evidence and case-law relied upon.


Directions to Listings

   1. The Error of Law decision is to be sent out to the parties forthwith;


   2. These appeals are adjourned for a continuation hearing  before  Deputy
      Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor at Field House on 19 April 2016  at
      10am;

   3. There is a time estimate of 1 � hours;

   4. No interpreter is required.


No anonymity direction is made

Signed                                             Date: 24 February 2016
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

