
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47376/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 May 2014                                |On 19th June 2014            |
|Oral determination given following the hearing|                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    mr Mohamed Abdelmid Abdelgawad Shawkh

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State):  Mr T Wilding, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Mr Shawkh):  Mr F Gaskin, Counsel, instructed by Roli
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal but for  ease  of  reference  I
    shall refer to the parties as they were originally described.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt who was born on 15  May  1985.   He
    applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence in
    this country on the basis of his marriage to Ms Irdos Edit, a Hungarian
    citizen said to be exercising her treaty rights in  this  country.   In
    support of his application as evidence of his relationship to  Ms  Edit
    he provided an Islamic marriage certificate but it appears to have been
    his case that he had married this lady in a civil ceremony conducted by
    proxy in Egypt.  His application was refused by  the  respondent  on  1
    November 2013 and the refusal letter is dated the same date.

 3. The respondent did not accept that  the  appellant  and  Ms  Edit  were
    validly married and accordingly the appellant was  not  entitled  to  a
    residence  card  pursuant  to  Regulation  7.   The   respondent   then
    considered whether  or  not  the  appellant  might  be  entitled  to  a
    residence card under Regulation 8(5) on the basis  that  he  was  in  a
    "durable relationship" with Ms Edit but  considered  that  insufficient
    evidence had been provided to establish that this was the case.

 4. The appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  and  his  appeal  was
    considered on the papers by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Maxwell  sitting
    at Richmond on 21 February 2014.

 5. In a very short determination promulgated on  24  February  2014  Judge
    Maxwell allowed the appellant's appeal.  He found for reasons  set  out
    within the determination that the appellant and Ms  Edit  were  validly
    married placing reliance on guidance to proxy  marriages  conducted  in
    Egypt which had previously been given by the respondent.  He  did  not,
    however, have regard to the reported decision of this Tribunal  in  the
    case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24  which
    had been reported a month earlier and gives  definitive  guidance  with
    regard to proxy marriages and what needs to  be  established  before  a
    Tribunal can find that  an  applicant  has  contracted  a  valid  proxy
    marriage.  The judge did not make any finding as to whether or not  the
    appellant and Ms Edit were in a durable relationship.

 6. The respondent has appealed against this  decision  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Simpson  on  14  March
    2014.  When setting out her reasons for granting permission  to  appeal
    Judge Simpson stated as follows:

         "...2.   The respondent argues that the  judge's  approach  to  the
             issue of proxy marriages involving EEA nationals erred in  law
             in that he ought to have referred to the  decision  in  Kareem
             (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24,  which  was
             promulgated a month prior to the hearing.

         3.   The grounds identify an arguable material error of law".

 7. This appeal was then listed before me for hearing on 15 April 2014  but
    there was no appearance either by the appellant or  anybody  acting  on
    his behalf.  When the appellant's  solicitors  were  contacted  someone
    from that firm informed the Tribunal that his firm had not received any
    notification of the hearing.  On examining the file  it  appeared  that
    the communication which had been sent to the appellant on 18 March 2014
    informing him that the respondent had been granted permission to appeal
    was returned as "unknown at this address".  The solicitors formerly  on
    the record  who  had  now  come  off  the  record  were  contacted  and
    subsequently in a letter dated  25  March  2014  and  received  by  the
    Tribunal the following day the appellant's current solicitors  notified
    the Tribunal that they were  now  instructed  and  that  "we  would  be
    grateful if you could address all correspondence in that  case  to  our
    office".

 8. Because the notification of the hearing had been  issued  on  25  March
    2014 it was possible  that  this  had  not  been  communicated  to  the
    appellant's current solicitors and in those circumstances I  considered
    that in accordance with the  overriding  objective  I  could  not  deal
    justly with the appeal on that occasion but I did make directions which
    were  sent  to  the  parties  before  this  hearing.   Regrettably  the
    directions were not sent out immediately following the hearing but they
    were sent by fax on 12 May 2014 and also  formal  notification  of  the
    date of this hearing had been sent  on  25  April  2014.   Clearly  the
    appellant's solicitors were aware of the date of this hearing because a
    large bundle was received from them on 12 May 2014.

 9. In the directions which I gave and which were sent to and  received  by
    the appellant's solicitors the parties were reminded of  the  direction
    previously given that they must prepare for the hearing  on  the  basis
    that if a decision was made to  set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination  any  further  evidence  including   supplementary   oral
    evidence that the Upper Tribunal might need to consider if  it  decided
    to remake the decision could be so  considered  at  the  hearing.   The
    parties  were  also  put  on  notice  that  in  the  event   that   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside the Tribunal may
    draw an adverse inference in  the  event  that  the  appellant  is  not
    supported at the Tribunal by his partner and a direction was also  made
    that in the event that it was intended by the appellant to  adduce  any
    further evidence at the adjourned hearing in the event that an error of
    law was found such  evidence  must  first  be  set  out  in  a  witness
    statement and served on the respondent and filed with the  Tribunal  by
    no later than yesterday.

The Hearing

10. As I have already noted there was no attendance by the appellant but he
    was represented by Mr Gaskin of Counsel who attempted  to  persuade  me
    that although he could not legitimately argue that there had  not  been
    an error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  by  his  failure  to  have
    regard to the decision in Kareem, nonetheless it  had  not  been  shown
    that this error was material.  In my judgment it cannot be doubted that
    this error was material.  The relevance of the decision  in  Kareem  is
    that it is clear from what the Tribunal found in that case at paragraph
    11 that in order to  establish  that  there  has  been  a  valid  proxy
    marriage between an applicant  and  an  EU  citizen  exercising  treaty
    rights in this country it must be established  that  that  marriage  is
    regarded as valid in the country of  nationality  of  the  EU  national
    spouse.  At paragraph 11 the Tribunal of Kareem concluded as follows:

         "11. We conclude that in EU law the question of whether a person is
             in a marital relationship is governed by the national laws  of
             the member states.   In  other  words,  whether  a  person  is
             married is a matter that falls within the  competence  of  the
             individual member states".

    It is clear from the head note also at g. that there is a burden on any
    applicant to establish this.  I set out this head note:

         "g.  It should be assumed that, without  independent  and  reliable
             evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the  laws
             of the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took
             place, the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
             sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge the  burden
             of proof.  Mere production of legal  materials  from  the  EEA
             country or country where  the  marriage  took  place  will  be
             insufficient evidence because they will rarely show  how  such
             law  is  understood  or  applied  in  those  countries.   Mere
             assertions as to the effect of such  laws  will,  for  similar
             reasons, carry no weight".

11. In this case although there is an abundance of material provided in the
    further documents none of it appears to be relevant to the issue  which
    has to be determined which is following the decision in Kareem  whether
    the marriage said to have taken place would be  regarded  as  valid  in
    Hungary, which is the country of nationality of  the  EEA  spouse  upon
    whose rights this appellant is dependent.  As this was the issue  which
    had to be established, clearly Judge Maxwell's failure to  have  regard
    to what in Kareem it was found was the crucial  issue  was  a  material
    error and I so find.  Accordingly the decision  will  now  have  to  be
    remade by this Tribunal.

12. Notwithstanding the direction which has been given that  this  Tribunal
    would be likely to draw an adverse interest from  the  failure  of  the
    appellant's partner to attend there was as I have already indicated  no
    attendance either by the appellant or by his partner.  What is moreover
    crucial is that no evidence has been provided to  establish  that  what
    was said to have been a proxy marriage  conducted  in  Egypt  would  be
    regarded as a valid marriage in Hungary.  In those circumstances  there
    is simply no basis upon which this Tribunal can find that the appellant
    and Ms Edit are validly married.  It follows that on this rehearing his
    appeal against the original decision of  the  respondent  refusing  his
    application  for  a  residence  permit  under  Regulation  7  must   be
    dismissed.

13. I turn now briefly to consider whether or not he might be entitled to a
    residence card under Regulation 8 on  the  basis  that  the  respondent
    ought to have exercised her discretion to issue him  with  a  residence
    card because he was in a durable relationship with Ms Edit.   This  was
    not a matter which was considered by Judge Maxwell.  I  can  deal  with
    this very briefly.  The respondent considered whether or not she  could
    be satisfied on the evidence which had been put before  her  that  this
    appellant was in a durable relationship with Ms Edit and concluded that
    she could not.  The appellant has put no evidence before this  Tribunal
    capable of persuading the Tribunal that he is in a durable relationship
    with Ms Edit and neither he nor Ms Edit  have  chosen  to  attend  this
    Tribunal notwithstanding the direction which had been given.  In  these
    circumstances there is no basis upon which I could find that he is in a
    durable relationship with Ms Edit and I do not do so.

14. It follows that this appellant's appeal must be dismissed and I will so
    find.

Decision

I set aside the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Maxwell  as
containing a material error of law and I substitute the following decision:

The appellant's appeal is dismissed under the EEA Regulations.



Signed:                                 Date:  18 June 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

