
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47227/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 August 2016                     |On 2 September 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                         DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                BROWN OKPEGWA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Aghayere of Melrose, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid) allowing an appeal by  the  applicant
    against the decision made on 10 November 2014 refusing him a  residence
    card as the spouse of an EEA national  exercising  treaty  rights.   In
    this decision I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal, the applicant as the  appellant  and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 13 February 1992.  On  19
    December 2013 he applied for a residence  card  as  confirmation  of  a
    right to reside in the UK on  the  basis  that  he  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship with his partner, a Portuguese national exercising  treaty
    rights.  However, the application was refused for the reasons  set  out
    in the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  dated  10  November  2014.   The
    respondent noted that  the  appellant  had  previously  applied  for  a
    residence card on 8 February 2011 on the basis of his claimed  marriage
    to a French national and that this application had been refused  on  10
    May 2011.  As  far  as  the  present  application  was  concerned,  the
    respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant  had  shown  that  any
    previous marriage had been dissolved prior to the present marriage  and
    he was free to marry his current partner.

3.   Further, in the light of the responses given at interview by  both  the
    appellant and his partner,  it  was  the  respondent's  view  that  the
    discrepancies were such that  his  claim  that  he  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship with his partner had  been  irreparably  undermined.   The
    respondent found that the marriage was one of convenience for the  sole
    purpose of remaining in the UK  and  the  application  was  accordingly
    refused.

4.   The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    at Taylor House on 6 January 2016.  The appellant adopted his statement
    of 3 July 2015 and said that he had entered  into  a  genuine  marriage
    covered by the relevant regulations [7].  The judge  heard  submissions
    from the appellant's representative, which he summarised at [12] of the
    decision.  It was submitted the allegation that the marriage was one of
    convenience had been amply proved to be groundless by the oral evidence
    of the appellant and his wife who had said that they  had  been  living
    together since October 2013.  It was argued that  this  was  a  genuine
    marriage and there had been evidence that there had been no exchange of
    money to render the marriage fraudulent.  The appellant's wife  had  no
    link with Nigeria and it was argued  that  the  marriage  was  patently
    genuine and that his wife was exercising treaty rights.

5.   When allowing the appeal, the judge set out his conclusions in [23]  as
    follows:

         "Faithful to the dictum in the  preceding  paragraph,  I  am  fully
         conscious of the 'legal  requirements'  stipulated  by  immigration
         law.  It is incumbent upon me to advert to  the  new  rules  giving
         respect to the democratic intention expressed  by  the  legislature
         dictated by the supremacy of Parliament.  The rule of  law  demands
         that  this  appellant  should  be  allowed  to  benefit  from   the
         regulations.  I  am  aware  that  I  am  dealing  with  an  appeal.
         Therefore, the facts that have led the JR judge in the  High  Court
         to shut the door on this appellant cannot  be  regarded  as  final.
         The new legal documents available to me will  indubitably  persuade
         any judge that this is a genuine marriage and should be  supported.
         I am absolutely clear  that  the  regulations  of  the  EEA  should
         benefit this appellant who has told me in his oral evidence that he
         has no reason for assuming that the respondent  could  assert  that
         his relationship is a marriage of convenience; the Portuguese  wife
         corroborated her husband's evidence and said 'I  am  in  love  with
         this appellant.  We are living as husband and  wife  at  the  Lewes
         House address for more than three years.  Today we  have  travelled
         to the Tribunal by using buses.  We were dropped in  front  of  the
         Tribunal by bus 53.'"

The Grounds and Submissions

6.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge erred in law by  failing  to
    set out the respondent's reasons for refusing  the  application  simply
    referring at [2] and [11] to the fact that  that  the  reasons  were  a
    negative decision.  Accordingly, so it is argued, it is not clear  that
    the judge properly engaged with those reasons.  Secondly, it is  argued
    that the judge's treatment of the evidence was inadequate.  At [4]  the
    judge referred to the appellant's statement of  4  July  2015  with  no
    further details and  at  [6]  to  the  fact  that  he  had  read  those
    statements and other documents in the bundles but no further indication
    was given as to their contents.  Thirdly, it is argued that  the  judge
    gave inadequate reasons  for  his  findings.   In  [23]  there  was  no
    indication whether and  in  what  circumstances  the  matter  had  been
    considered by a judge in the High Court.  No explanation was  given  of
    what new legal documents were  referred  to  which  would  "indubitably
    persuade any judge that this is a genuine marriage".  In  summary,  the
    judge had failed adequately  to  address  the  matters  raised  by  the
    respondent including whether the appellant was in fact  free  to  marry
    his current partner.

7.   Mr Tufan adopted his grounds submitting that the judge had not  engaged
    with the relevant issues.  He had  made  a  number  of  comments  which
    appeared to be irrelevant such as his reference to Sir Frederick Lawton
    in [15] and to the judgment in Forrester v Secretary  of  State  [2008]
    EWHC 2307 where Sullivan J had expressed concerns  about  the  way  the
    respondent  had  dealt  with  the  decision  under  challenge  in  that
    judgment.  He referred to the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Malaba
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 820 and in
    particular to para 20 where the court underlined that it was imperative
    for an adjudicator  to  explain  how  the  main  conclusions  had  been
    reached.  He submitted that the judge had failed to make it clear  that
    he had considered all relevant issues to explain how he had reached his
    findings and conclusions.

8.   Mr Aghayere submitted that the judge could not reasonably  be  expected
    to set out the entire  contents  of  the  decision  letter  or  of  the
    evidence  produced  at  the  appeal.   He  accepted  that  whilst  some
    criticisms might be made of  the  judge's  reasoning  that  should  not
    undermine the fact that it was clear from the decision that  the  judge
    had accepted the appellant's evidence.  He argued that any error of law
    so far as adequacy of reasons was concerned was  not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

Consideration of whether the judge erred in law.

9.   I must consider whether the judge erred in law such that  the  decision
    should be set aside.  In Malaba at [29], Pill LJ said that:

         "In assessing the adequacy of a fact-finding exercise, an Appellate
         Tribunal expects  findings  to  be  adequately  reasoned.   By  its
         reasoning, the fact-finding Tribunal  not  only  tells  the  losing
         party why he has lost but may also be able to demonstrate  that  it
         has adequately and conscientiously  addressed  the  issue  of  fact
         which has arisen...".

    In the present case the reasons given by the  judge  do  not  tell  the
    respondent why he lost this appeal.  Serious issues were raised in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter  and  in  particular  the  validity  of  the
    appellant's marriage to  his  current  partner  and  the  discrepancies
    arising at interview which were fully identified and  commented  on  in
    that letter but there is no reference to these in the judge's  decision
    and nothing to indicate that they were considered by him.

10.  In Atputarajah [2001] Imm AR 566 Elias J said  that  reasons  would  be
    inadequate if they gave rise  to  a  real  cause  for  concern  that  a
    relevant matter had not been properly taken into account and that if it
    had, there was a real prospect of a different decision  being  reached.
    I am satisfied that this is the situation in the present case. There is
    nothing to indicate that the  judge  gave  any  adequate  consideration
    either to the validity of the marriage or to the discrepancies  in  the
    accounts given by the appellant and his wife at interview.  This  gives
    rise to a real concern that matters clearly relevant to the outcome  of
    the appeal were not properly taken into account.

11.  I am satisfied that the judge erred in law by failing to give  adequate
    reasons for his decision.  The error is such that the  decision  should
    be  set  aside.   Both   representatives   accepted   that   in   these
    circumstances the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a full rehearing before a different judge.

Decision

12.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  reconsideration
    by way of a full rehearing before a different judge.


Signed   H J E Latter                            Dated: 30 August 2016

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

