
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47722/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 September 2016                      |On 13 September 2016             |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Muhammad Sheraz
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the appellant:     Not represented
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Khan  promulgated  9.2.15,  allowing   the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    8.9.14, to refuse his application made on 15.7.13 for leave  to  remain
    in the UK as a Tier 4 Student migrant.  The Judge heard the  appeal  on
    14.10.14.

 2. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Holmes  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    20.7.16.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 12.9.16 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4.  The  appeal  was  dealt  with  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal   without
    representation on behalf of either the claimant  or  the  Secretary  of
    State. In respect of the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, the claimant sent  a  letter  requesting  the  appeal  to  be
    decided on the papers. However, the Upper Tribunal does not employ that
    procedure and, in any event, this is the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of
    State and she is entitled  to  be  heard  orally  on  the  appeal.  The
    claimant was notified of this and informed that it was  up  to  him  to
    decide whether to attend or not, but that the  appeal  would  be  dealt
    with as an oral appeal.

 5. There was no attendance by or on  behalf  of  the  claimant  but  I  am
    satisfied that he is aware of  the  hearing  and  that  it  is  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed.

Error of Law

 6. For the reasons briefly set out below, I found no material error of law
    in the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require the decision of Judge Khan to be set aside.

 7. I note from the case file that there is no copy  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's bundle present, only those documents submitted with the  notice
    and grounds of appeal, including the  claimant's  indexed  bundle.  The
    refusal decision suggests that the claimant was invited to  attend  for
    interview on 22.8.14, which he failed to do so, and  on  which  failure
    the application was additionally refused under paragraph 322(10) of the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. The claimant complains that having  received  a  letter  dated  30.7.14
    asking him to submit a  new  English  Language  test  by  24.9.14,  his
    application was refused on 8.9.14. He had attended a previous interview
    on 2.12.13. Effectively, the claimant asserts that he did  not  receive
    the invitation to interview on 22.8.14. Judge Khan found the  Secretary
    of State failed  to  provide  documentary  evidence  of  invitation  to
    interview and that the process was unfair, thus allowing the appeal  on
    the limited basis stated.

 9. I have searched the case file and can find no copy  of  the  letter  of
    invitation to interview. Mr Jarvis showed me a copy of the letter  from
    his own file, dated 8.8.14, but that is not with  the  Tribunal's  case
    papers.

10. Mr Jarvis very properly also drew my attention to a further  difficulty
    in relation to the invitation to interview, that it  was  sent  to  the
    claimant at an address at Plashett Road, and another copy to  what  may
    have been his previous representatives, Go Global. That address is  not
    that which the Tribunal has for the claimant, and not the address given
    in his notice of appeal. Mr  Jarvis  conceded  that  it  could  not  be
    demonstrated that the invitation to interview  was  ever  sent  to  the
    claimant at the correct address.

11. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Holmes misconstrued the earlier
    invitation to interview from 2013 as being the one referred to  in  the
    refusal decision,  suggesting  that  as  this  was  in  the  claimant's
    possession the Secretary  of  State  was  correct  to  apply  paragraph
    320(10).

12. I am satisfied that Judge Khan's decision was entirely correct  on  the
    information before the Tribunal at the time, and even now  it  has  not
    been demonstrated that the  claimant  was  invited  to  interview.  The
    refusal decision was unfair to the claimant and not in accordance  with
    the law.

Conclusions:

13. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains allowed to the  limited  extent  that  it
                    remains for the Secretary of State to make a decision in
                    accordance with the law.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated    13 September 2016


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did  not  make  an  order.  Given  the  circumstances,  I  make  no
anonymity order.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The outcome of the application remains to be decided.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        13 September 2016



