

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/47354/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 23rd July 2014                                  |On 4th August 2014      |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                            MUHAMMAD QASIM ANSARI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           In person
For the Respondent:          Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan  born  on  17th  May  1986.  He
      appeals against the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated
      14th February 2014 dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision of 24th October 2013 refusing to vary leave to  remain  as  a
      Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant and the decision  to  remove  him  to
      Pakistan under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality
      Act 2006.

2.    The Appellant arrived in the UK on 14th August  2010  with  leave  to
      enter as a student until 31st January 2012. His was granted  leave  to
      remain  on  4th  February  2012  until  25th  May  2013.  He  made  an
      application for further leave to remain on 24th  May  2013  which  was
      refused on 24th October 2013 on the grounds  that  his  CAS  had  been
      withdrawn and was therefore invalid.

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on  9th
      June 2014 on the grounds that it was  arguable  that,  by  analogy  to
      Patel (revocation of sponsor licence -  fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT
      00211 (IAC), it may be unfair and unlawful if the Respondent  did  not
      inform the Appellant that his CAS had been withdrawn by  the  Sponsor,
      even though it was  not  the  Respondent's  action  that  led  to  the
      Appellant not meeting the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

4.    The Appellant submitted that the CAS was valid  at  the  time  of  the
      application and  he  could  not  attend  classes  unless  he  obtained
      permission. He received the refusal letter and contacted  the  Sponsor
      (European College of Higher Education), but they  would  not  give  an
      answer as to why they had withdrawn the CAS.  The  Appellant  was  not
      notified by the Respondent or  the  Sponsor  that  his  CAS  had  been
      withdrawn. The Sponsor had acted unfairly in  taking  the  Appellant's
      fees and then withdrawing the CAS. The Respondent had  acted  unfairly
      in  refusing  the  application  without  giving   the   Appellant   an
      opportunity to get another CAS.

5.    Mr Duffy relied on the refusal of permission to appeal  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge TRP Hollingworth and submitted  that  the  findings  at
      paragraph 8 of the determination, as to why this  case  differed  from
      Patel, were cogent and well reasoned. In the cases of Patel and Naved,
      the Respondent had created the situation that led  to  unfairness.  In
      this case, the Sponsor  had  created  the  unfairness.  There  was  no
      explanation for why the CAS had been withdrawn and it was open to  the
      Sponsor to administer its own affairs.

6.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Duff decided the appeal  on  the  papers  at
      the Appellant's request. He found that it was  a  requirement  of  the
      Immigration Rules that the Appellant must have a valid  CAS  and  that
      Appendix A paragraph 116(c)  provided  that  the  CAS  would  only  be
      considered to be valid if the Sponsor  had  not  withdrawn  the  offer
      since the CAS was issued. The Judge properly directed himself in law.

7.    In this case the Appellant's CAS was withdrawn by the  Sponsor.  There
      was no evidence before the Judge as to the circumstances in which  the
      CAS was withdrawn. The Judge  found  that  the  Appellant's  arguments
      based on "Patel" unfairness were misplaced since that authority  dealt
      with the  situation  where  the  Respondent  cancelled  the  Sponsor's
      licence, but in this case the Sponsor had  cancelled  the  Appellant's
      CAS. This situation was envisaged by the Immigration Rules at Appendix
      A paragraph 116(c) and therefore the Respondent cannot be said to have
      acted unfairly.


8.    I find that this conclusion was open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence
      before him. There was no evidence as to the circumstances in which the
      CAS was withdrawn. The Immigration Rules provided for  this  situation
      and therefore the Respondent's decision was not  unlawful  or  unfair.
      There was insufficient evidence to  show  that  the  CAS  was  wrongly
      withdrawn or that the Appellant was unaware of  the  situation  as  he
      claimed. In any event, this was a matter between the Appellant and the
      Sponsor. The  Appellant  had  not  shown  that  the  Respondent  acted
      unfairly in refusing the application.

9.    There was no challenge to  the  Judge's  findings  on  section  47  or
      Article 8. Given that the Appellant was unrepresented, I have reviewed
      the determination as a whole and I find that there was no error of law
      in the Judge's decision to dismiss the appeal.  It  was  open  to  the
      Appellant to made a fresh application and  Mr  Duffy  stated  that  he
      would use best endeavours to return  the  original  documents  to  the
      Appellant to enable him to do so without delay.

10.   The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  14th
      February 2014 shall stand.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
24th July 2014
