

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47574/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT(IAC)                                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Birmingham Employment Tribunal                  |                                 |
|On 7th September 2015                           |On 30th September 2015           |
|                                                |                                 |
|                                                |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                AREK BEBENEK
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant SSHD was granted permission to appeal  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Mathews promulgated on 7th  April  2015  who
      allowed Mr Bebenek's appeal against a  decision  dated  17th  December
      2014  to  deport  him  in  accordance  with  regulation  19(3)(b)  and
      regulation 21 of the Immigration (European Economic  Are)  Regulations
      2006 ("EEA Regulations").  Although  the  decision  by  the  SSHD  was
      certified under regulation 24AA of the EEA Regulations, Mr Bebenek was
      not removed from the UK prior to the hearing of his appeal.
   2.  The  grounds  upon  which  permission  was  sought  are  verbose  and
      confusing. In summary they appear to be asserting:


   i) In [3] to [10] the grounds take issues with the findings of the First-
      tier Tribunal judge as to risk of future offending, the interpretation
      and weight given to the OASys report; the lack of consideration  given
      to the nature of the educational course undertaken by Mr Bebenek;
  ii) In [7] the grounds assert that insufficient weight was  given  by  the
      First-tier Tribunal judge to the wider impact  that  street  robberies
      have upon the community, the feeling of insecurity and fear engendered
      in society by such crimes;
 iii) In [11] the grounds assert there has been  no  clear  finding  on  the
      credibility of Mr Bebenek , whether he poses  a  current  risk  ([12],
      [13] and [14]) and if so the magnitude  of  the  risk  and  that  this
      infects the assessment of rehabilitation which in [20] which  in  turn
      had little merit because Mr Bebenek only merited the lowest  level  of
      protection having been resident in the UK for less than five years;
  iv) The grounds submit that the judge erred in  attaching  weight  to  the
      fact of the appellant's mother and siblings living in the UK  for  the
      purposes of Article 8
   v) The grounds assert that the judge gave inadequate reasons for  finding
      that Mr Bebenek's rehabilitation prospects were better in the UK; that
      his finding that Mr Bebenek had no ties in Poland was unreasonable  on
      the evidence and that the appellant cannot, contrary to the finding of
      the judge, be said to have integrated  into  the  UK  given  that  his
      residence in the UK has been of short duration  with  a  large  period
      spent in prison.


        Background


   3. Mr Bebenek, a Polish citizen date of birth 19th October 1993, came  to
      the UK on 29th June 2009 aged 15 with his mother and two  sisters.  He
      has a grandfather in Poland and the  evidence  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal was that neither he, his mother  nor  his  siblings  had  any
      contact with his father, who remains in Poland. It was  asserted  that
      the father was an alcoholic and Mr Bebenek's mother 'had  a  difficult
      life' with him when she lived with him.


   4. Mr Bebenek attended school for a short  time,  until  he  was  16,  on
      arriving in the UK. His evidence was  that  after  leaving  school  he
      found employment in a number of jobs and supported his  mother  during
      periods of her unemployment.

   5. On 4th June 2014 he was convicted  of  robbery  and  sentenced  to  30
      months detention in a young offenders institution. He  had  previously
      been convicted of making threats at common law with sentence  deferred
      and admonished in January 2011.

   6. It was accepted by both parties that Mr Bebenek has not acquired  five
      years continuous residence and thus he has only the  lowest  level  of
      protection from deportation.

        Error of law

   7. Mr McVeety submitted that there had been little or no consideration of
      the OASys report by the judge in reaching his findings; in  particular
      the judge had failed to give consideration to the  discussion  in  the
      OASYs report. He had erred  in  law  in  assessing  present  risk.  He
      submitted that the judge had set out numerous positive features relied
      upon by Mr Bebenek but had failed to consider the negative features in
      particular  the  nature  of  the  offence,  that   the   offence   was
      particularly nasty, that although assessed as being at low risk of re-
      offending he was a medium risk to the public if he did so.


   8. In [26] to [28] and [30] the  judge  records  having  read  and  taken
      account of the index  offence,  the  sentencing  judge's  remarks;  he
      refers to the OASys reference to an acknowledgment by  Mr  Bebenek  of
      the need to address and maintain abstinence form  alcohol.  The  judge
      considered the oral evidence and made findings  that  Mr  Bebenek  had
      shown significant progress in addressing the risk  factors  associated
      with the index offence.

   9. Although the judge did not make a specific credibility  finding  using
      those words it is plain that the judge considered the evidence of  the
      mother and  Mr  Bebenek  in  the  context  of  the  OASys  report  and
      sentencing remarks. The judge states, and there was no suggestion that
      the judge had erroneously so stated, that he had considered and  taken
      account of the OASYs report, the reasons given by the SSHD for  taking
      the decision and the sentencing remarks. He specifically made findings
      as to the availability of accommodation and assistance if returned  to
      Poland.

  10. The judge referred to and made specific findings that the  combination
      of  the  progress  made  during  sentence,   the   supportive   family
      environment in the UK together with proper motivation was important in
      his 'finding that the appellant's low risk of  offending  is  receding
      further'.

  11. The respondent herself n the  reasons  for  the  deportation  decision
      states (in[26]) "Whilst the risk of you reoffending is  considered  to
      be low, the serious harm which would be caused  as  a  result  of  any
      instances of offending is such that it is not considered reasonable to
      leave the public vulnerable to the effects of your re-offending".

  12. The judge made clear findings that Mr Bebenek had addressed the issues
      that prompted the offence and that there had been improvements in  his
      personal circumstances.

  13. In order to sustain the decision of the respondent  there  must  be  a
      "genuine, present and  sufficiently  serious  threat  "  that  matters
      "isolated from the particulars of the case or which relate to  general
      prevention do not justify the decision"  and  the  decision  "must  be
      based exclusively on the personal conduct of the person concerned".

  14. The judge (although incorrectly referring to the  EEA  regulations  as
      Immigration Rules and allowing the appeal under the Immigration Rules)
      plainly addressed the correct issues and made findings of fact on  the
      evidence before him.

  15. The objections by the respondent are disagreements with  the  findings
      of the judge. Those findings were open to the judge  on  the  evidence
      before him. Another judge may not have reached the same  findings  but
      the findings are not unreasonable or perverse or irrational




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal stands.






    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
           Date 29th September 2015

