
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47450/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 27 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                MOMINA SEEMAB
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, Counsel instructed by Hussain Immigration
Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D N Harris promulgated on 18 May 2015  who  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  11
    November 2014 to refuse to grant her a Residence Card under  Regulation
    8(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as  an  extended  family
    member of her brother in law Ghazanfar Mahmood and  her  niece  Rishmin
    Fatima who are EEA nationals. The Respondent did not  accept  that  the
    Appellant  had  provided  sufficient  evidence  of  dependency  on  her
    relatives  either  in  Pakistan  or  the  UK  as  required  under   the
    Regulations.

The Judge's Decision

 3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Harris ("the Judge") allowed the appeal against the  Respondent's
    decision. The Judge considered the case on the papers.

 4. He accepted that on the basis of the documentary evidence now available
    to him that there was clear evidence of money transfers over  a  period
    of five years showing that Mr Mahmood had been making contributions  on
    a monthly basis to the Appellant while she was  in  Pakistan  and  this
    dependency continued while the Appellant lived in the  United  Kingdom.
    He  therefore  found  that  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements   of
    Regulation 1(a) of Regulation 8(2).

 5. He also accepted that the Appellant  lived  in  the  household  of  the
    second sponsor Ms Rishmin while in  the  United  Kingdom  but  was  not
    satisfied that there was sufficient evidence of dependency in the  case
    of the second Sponsor.

 6. He concluded that the Appellant was therefore entitled to  a  Residence
    Card as an extended family member dependent on Mr Mahmood  and  allowed
    the appeal.

 7. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  arguing  that  having  found  that  the
    Appellant was an extended family member of the sponsor  the  Judge  was
    obliged to remit the matter to the Respondent for her to  exercise  the
    discretion available under  Regulation  17(4)  rather  than  allow  the
    appeal.

 8. On 15 July 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Holmes  gave  permission  to
    appeal.

 9. There was a Rule 24 Response from Hussain Law conceding that  an  error
    of law had been made by the Judge.

10. Before me Ms Khan also conceded that the Judge made an error of law and
    that the decision should be remade.

Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made a material error of law.

12. There was no challenge to the findings  made  by  the  Judge  that  the
    Appellant was an extended  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under
    Regulation 8(2) of the EEA Regulations. The only matter  in  issue  was
    what the Judge should have done thereafter.

13. I am satisfied that Regulation 17(4) makes the  issue  of  a  residence
    card to an extended family member a matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
    Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most  an
    Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow the appeal as being not
    in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether  to  exercise
    this discretion in the Appellant's favour or not to the  Secretary  of
    State. This is what the Judge should have done in this case.

Decision

14. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal with regard to the exercise of the discretion available  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations such that the decision  is  set
    aside

15. I remake the appeal.

16. I allow the appeal as being not in accordance with the law leaving  the
    matter of whether to exercise this discretion in the Appellant's favour
    or not to the Secretary of State.


Signed      Date 22.11.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
