
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47879/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 4 January 2015                            |On 9 February 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE PATTERSON
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACDONALD

                                   Between

                              Mr Saqlain Abbas
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss D Qureshi, Counsel instructed by Ilford Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    promulgated on 25 June 2014.  In that  decision  letter  the  appellant
    appealed the decision of the respondent to refuse to  vary  and  extend
    his leave to remain to that of a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant  and
    to remove him by way  of  directions  made  under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  That application to  the
    respondent was dismissed.

2.   The appellant appealed  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's assessment of proportionality was  flawed.   It  was  contended
    that he had erred in his assessment.  The appellant  simply  wished  to
    gain work experience which would enhance his  academic  qualifications.
    The fact that the post-study work route has  now  been  closed  by  the
    respondent did not necessarily result in a finding that  he  should  be
    removed.  The case of CDS v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2010] UKUT 00305 was relied upon as is the fact that  the  appellant's
    course from  the  outset  involved  a  requirement  to  gain  practical
    experience.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on 8 December 2014 on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that the proportionality exercise was flawed.

4.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He entered the United  Kingdom
    on 15 September 2015 with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student
    Migrant that was valid until 23 January 2012.  On 23 January  2012  the
    appellant applied to vary and extend his leave to remain to that  of  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.  On 9 May  2012  a  letter  from  the
    University of Wales  confirmed  that  the  appellant  had  successfully
    completed his masters in business administration degree and  said  that
    the degree certificate would be sent to  his  educational  institution,
    the London College of Business.

5.   The respondent refused the appellant's application on  the  basis  that
    the  educational  award  postdated  the  application.   The  respondent
    submitted that based upon the Court of Appeal decision in Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department v Raju & Ors [2013] EWCA Civ  754  points
    for attributes under T 10 of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules  could
    only be awarded if that qualification was obtained before the  date  of
    the application.

6.   That refusal was appealed with the  appeal  proceeding  solely  on  the
    argument that the appellant's removal was incompatible with  his  right
    to a private life under Article 8 of the European Convention.

7.   The appellant asserted at the appeal that his removal  would  interfere
    with his right to a private life in a sufficiently serious  way  as  to
    engage the European Convention.

8.   In the decision letter, in paragraph 12, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    found that the appellant did not have a  partner  or  children  in  the
    United Kingdom and so could  not  qualify  under  the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM and he did not qualify under the  Immigration  Rules  under
    Rule 276ADE.

9.   The decision letter  then  moved  to  consider  the  appellant's  human
    rights claim.  In that regard, in paragraph 15 of the  decision  letter
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge, said:

         "15. The appellant has produced some evidence to show that  he  has
             studied in the UK and  is  likely  to  have  obtained  an  MBA
             although the degree  certificate  has  not  been  produced  in
             evidence.  No other evidence has been  produced  to  show  any
             particular ties in the United Kingdom.  There is  no  evidence
             of employment, relationships with friends or of  other  strong
             connections in the United  Kingdom.   The  appellant  has  not
             lived in the United Kingdom for a period of  time  that  would
             normally be considered long residence  under  the  Immigration
             Rules.   No  doubt  he  has  made  some  friends  and  limited
             connections in the three years that he has resided in  the  UK
             but I find that the appellant has failed to produce sufficient
             evidence to show that removal in consequence of  the  decision
             is likely to interfere with his right to a private life  in  a
             sufficiently grave way  so  as  to  engage  the  operation  of
             Article 8 of the European Convention (points (i) and  (ii)  of
             Lord Bingham's five stage approach in  Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]
             INLR 349)."

10.  The decision then went on, in paragraph 16, to say as follows:

         "16. In assessing whether the appellant's removal in consequence of
             the decision would be justified and proportionate I have given
             weight to the fact that the private and family life provisions
             of the Immigration Rules now reflect the respondent's position
             as to where the  balance  should  be  struck  in  relation  to
             Article 8 (see paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM) but  cases  that
             fall outside those requirements can still engage the operation
             of Article 8 in certain circumstances: see Huang v SSHD [2005]
             UKHL 11 and Patel & Others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72."

11.  The decision continued,

         "17.  The  appellant  does  not  meet  the  requirements   of   the
             Immigration Rules and the normal course of action would be  to
             require him to leave the United Kingdom.  While maintenance of
             effective immigration  control  is  an  important  factor  the
             balancing exercise under Article 8 can be complicated and must
             take into account a number of different factors balancing  the
             public interest against the  specific  circumstances  of  each
             individual.


         18.  The purpose of the post-study work  category  was  to  provide
             young people who had completed their course of study  with  an
             opportunity to gain some work experience in the United Kingdom
             before returning home.  The category provided  no  expectation
             or route to settlement and has now been closed.  The Secretary
             of State is  entitled  to  change  the  Immigration  Rules  as
             necessary.  The appellant is a foreign national who is subject
             to immigration control.  While it is understandable  that  the
             appellant might prefer to remain and gain some work experience
             in the UK,  unfortunately,  his  desire  to  remain  does  not
             necessarily equate to a right to remain."

12.  In conclusion the judge found that the  appellant's  desire  to  obtain
    further  work  experience  did  not  disclose   sufficient   compelling
    circumstances to show  that  his  removal  would  breach  the  European
    Convention and,  for  that  reason,  he  concluded  that  it  would  be
    justified and proportionate to  require  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Pakistan  if  he  did  not  otherwise  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, which, in the circumstances of  this  case,  he  did
    not.

13.  The issue of post-study work and its  relationship  to  Article  8  was
    considered in the case of Nasim and  others  [2014]  UKUT  25  and,  in
    particular, in the paragraphs at the end of section C of the  judgement
    which is entitled "Article 8 in the context of work and  studies".   At
    the end of that section the Tribunal concluded as follows:

         "21. In conclusion on this first general matter, we find  that  the
             nature of the right asserted by each of the appellants,  based
             on their desire, as former students, to undertake a period  of
             post-study work in the  United  Kingdom,  lies  at  the  outer
             reaches of cases requiring an affirmative answer to the second
             of the five  Razgar  questions  and  that,  even  if  such  an
             affirmative  answer  needs  to  be   given,   the   issue   of
             proportionality is to be resolved decisively in favour of  the
             respondent, by reference to her functions as the  guardian  of
             the system  of  immigration  controls,  entrusted  to  her  by
             Parliament."

14.  The decision also considered the case of CDS Brazil, which  was  relied
    upon by the appellant in his grounds of appeal.  That decision is dealt
    with in section I of the  judgment  in  the  case  of  Nasim  which  is
    entitled "Scope of CDS Brazil".  The relevant paragraphs in relation to
    that read:

         "40. So far as the present point is concerned, what was said in CDS
             has   no   material   bearing.    That   case   involved   the
             interpretation of Immigration Rules, rather than the effect of
             changes in  such  Rules.   Furthermore,  it  is  important  to
             emphasise  that  the  appellant  in  CDS  was  faced  with   a
             hypothetical removal, which  would  have  prevented  her  from
             completing the course of study for which she  had  been  given
             leave.  In the present  cases,  each  of  the  appellants  has
             finished the course (or latest course) to which their leave to
             remain as a student related.  Their  complaint  is  that  they
             were not afforded the opportunity of undertaking two years  of
             post-study work in the United Kingdom, which they  could  have
             taken, had the Rules not changed."

          "41.    Mr Jarvis urged us to find that the obiter remarks in  CDS
             regarding Article 8 were no longer good law, in the  light  of
             Patel and Others.  We find that would go too far.  It is  true
             that the Tribunal in CDS  made  reference  to  the  particular
             passage of the judgment of Sedley LJ in Pankina regarding  the
             need for the Home Office 'to exercise some commonsense', which
             drew comment from Lord Carnwath at [57] of  Patel  and  Others
             (see above).  The Tribunal did, however, expressly acknowledge
             that it was unlikely a person would be able to show an Article
             8  right  by  coming  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  temporary
             purposes.  The chances of such a right carrying the day  have,
             we consider, further diminished, in the light of the judgments
             in Patel and Others.  It would, however, be wrong to say  that
             the point  has  been  reached  where  an  adverse  immigration
             decision in the case of a person who  is  here  for  study  or
             other  temporary  purposes  can   never   be   found   to   be
             disproportionate.  But what is clear is that, on the state  of
             the present law, there is no justification for  extending  the
             obiter findings in CDS, so as to equate a person whose  course
             of study has not yet ended with a person who, having  finished
             their course, is  precluded  by  the  Immigration  Rules  from
             staying on to do something else."

15.  The Upper Tribunal then proceeded  to  consider  the  individual  cases
    that were before it. We  can  see  no  basis  for  taking  a  different
    approach in the instant case.

16.  Counsel for the appellant today has been extremely realistic.  She  has
    relied upon the grounds of appeal which  have  been  lodged  and  added
    simply that the appellant had a legitimate expectation to  remain.   We
    reject those submissions.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  entirely
    correct in his approach which followed, although did not cite, the case
    of Nasim.

17.  What was being sought here in reality was  an  extension  to  leave  to
    remain for socio-economic purposes to enable the appellant to obtain  a
    good job on his return to his country.  That in  itself  cannot  engage
    Article 8.  In  any  event,  removal  in  the  circumstances  would  be
    proportionate to the legitimate public end, namely the operation  of  a
    coherent and fair system of immigration control.  There  was  no  basis
    for the appeal to succeed on the grounds as originally  formulated  and
    as orally supplemented in terms of legitimate  expectation.   No  basis
    for a legitimate expectation was put before us by the appellant.  There
    is no basis upon which a legitimate expectation can  be  found  in  the
    circumstances of this case.

18.  For those reasons we dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date     6 February 2015


Mrs Justice Patterson

