
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47805/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 September 2016                     |On 15 September 2016              |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                              FELICIA NYAMEKYE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Ikoku, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a  citizen  of  Ghana  born  on  19  April  1989.  Her
    application for a residence card as a family member of an EEA  national
    exercising Treaty rights was refused and she appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on 20  January  2016  the  Tribunal
    dismissed her appeal. The Tribunal found  that  the  appellant's  proxy
    marriage to Mr Yeboah Nyamekye, a Spanish  national,  was  valid  under
    Ghanaian law but the appellant had not established it was  valid  under
    Spanish law. She was not therefore a family member of an EEA  national.
    After considering the evidence  that  the  couple  were  in  a  durable
    relationship, the Tribunal found it had not been established  they  had
    resided together in a relationship akin to marriage for two years or at
    all. The appellant was not therefore the extended family member  of  an
    EEA national.

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted
    by the Upper Tribunal on renewal. Permission to argue all  grounds  was
    granted but the principal concern appears to have  been  the  delay  of
    three months between the hearing and the promulgation of the decision.

 3. The respondent filed a rule 24 response opposing the appeal and arguing
    there is no error of law in the decision.

 4. The representatives made submissions on the issue of whether the First-
    tier Tribunal decision contained  a  material  error  of  law.  I  have
    recorded these in full in the record of proceedings and taken them into
    account.

Error of law

 5. I find the decision does not  contain  a  material  error  of  law.  My
    reasons are as follows.

 6. Mr Ikoku's first point was essentially that, having found the  Ghanaian
    marriage was valid, the First-tier Tribunal  should  have  allowed  the
    appeal or,  alternatively,  the  provision  of  the  Spanish  Code  was
    sufficient evidence to show that the  marriage  would  be  valid  under
    Spanish law.

 7. To the extent Mr Ikoku argued that the Judge  erred  by  following  and
    applying the decision in Kareem (Proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC),  I  reject  his  argument.  The  decision  was
    confirmed and explained in in TA (Kareem explained) Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
    00316 (IAC) and  neither  case  has  been  overturned  on  appeal.  The
    principles established in those cases are to  be  regarded  as  settled
    law. The question whether a marital relationship has been entered  into
    must always be examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State
    of the sponsor, in  this  case  Spain.  Evidence  proving  the  private
    international law of  another  country  must  identify,  not  only  the
    relevant legal provisions, but also how these are applied  in  practice
    (see Kareem, paragraph 14).  Absent such evidence  a  Judge  cannot  be
    satisfied that the appellant's marriage  would  be  recognised  in  the
    Member State.

 8. That is precisely the approach taken by the Judge  in  this  case.  She
    noted the text of the Spanish Civil Code but also noted the absence  of
    any other evidence showing how this provision is applied  in  practice.
    This was a question to be established by the  appellant  with  evidence
    and the Judge was entitled to find that burden had not been discharged.
    It is true the Code refers back to the position under the  law  in  the
    place in which the marriage was celebrated. However, that was also  the
    position with the Dutch Civil code examined in Kareem.

 9. Mr Ikoku's next point focused on the delay between  the  Judge  hearing
    the appeal on 27 October 2015  and  promulgating  her  decision  on  20
    January 2016. I pointed out the Judge had signed  her  decision  on  18
    January 2016 and the delay between the hearing and the  decision  being
    signed off amounted to less than three  months.  Mr  Ikoko  argued  the
    Judge had "lost her impression of the case" in the  intervening  weeks.
    However,  when  asked  for  examples  of  any  errors  of  recollection
    appearing in the decision, he could only refer me to  paragraph  50  in
    which the Judge recorded that the appellant, in answer to a  particular
    question, had stated "she could not remember/did not  know".  Mr  Ikoku
    suggested this  was  an  inconsistent  finding  but  I  do  not  agree.
    Something has to be known to be forgotten but it can also be said  that
    something forgotten is no longer  known.  In  any  event,  overall  the
    decision is replete with detail and careful analysis  of  the  evidence
    and I see no signs of the Judge struggling to recollect the  case  when
    she came to write her decision.

10. In SSHD v RK (Algeria) [2007] EWCA Civ  868,  Wilson  LJ  dismissed  an
    appeal in which there had  been  a  "lamentable"  delay  of  29  months
    between a hearing and a decision, although  the  decision  appeared  to
    have been written six months after the hearing.  Wilson  LJ  emphasized
    that, in order to succeed in an argument alleging that  the  delay  had
    infected a decision with legal  error,  it  was  necessary  to  present
    reasoned arguments as to why the decision was  unsafe.  In  Arusha  and
    Demushi (deprivation of citizenship - delay)  Albania  [2012]  UKUT  80
    (IAC), the UT gave similar guidance and explained there must  be  shown
    to be a nexus between the delay and the safety of the decision. The  UT
    looked at earlier authorities which had held that, in an asylum  appeal
    where credibility was in issue, there was a  duty  on  adjudicators  to
    decide appeals within a reasonable time, which would be  no  more  than
    three months but this was only a rule of thumb.

11. For the  reasons  already  stated  above,  I  do  not  find  any  error
    consequent to the delay, which was in any event only in the  region  of
    82 days.  I find  nothing  in  the  decision  to  suggest  the  Judge's
    recollection of the case was in any way impaired.

12. Mr Ikoku's final point was simply to challenge the Judge's finding that
    there was no durable relationship. He pointed to the bundle of evidence
    which had been submitted to show  there  was  a  durable  relationship.
    However, as Mr Tufan pointed out, the Judge committed no less than four
    and a half pages to assessing the evidence and it cannot  be  said  she
    was not entitled to come to an adverse conclusion. Her decision was not
    irrational and she based her decision on the  evidence.  As  said,  her
    decision is thorough and she gave cogent reasons for  her  conclusions.



    NOTICE OF DECISION

    The First-tier Tribunal did not make a material error of  law  and  its
    decision dismissing the appeal shall stand. No anonymity direction  has
    been made.




    Signed   Date 14 September 2016


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
