
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47993/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 June 2014                               |On 1 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             IRVINE ODETTE DOSSA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bajwa, A Bajwa & Co Solicitors
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination refers to parties as they  were  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2. The appellant, a national of Benin, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal
  against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to  issue  her  with  a
  residence card as confirmation of her right of residence in the UK as the
  extended family member of an  EEA  national.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
  Mahmood allowed the appeal and the Secretary of State  now  appeals  with
  permission to this Tribunal.

3. The appellant had entered the  UK  as  a  student  in  January  2004  and
  obtained subsequent extensions of leave to remain until  July  2013  when
  she applied for a residence card on the basis of her claim  to  be  in  a
  durable relationship with an EEA national. The respondent did not  accept
  on the evidence produced that the appellant had been living with the  EEA
  national for a period of two years  and  refused  the  application  under
  regulation 8 (5) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006
  Regulations) . The Judge heard evidence from the appellant,  her  partner
  and three other witnesses. The Judge decided on the basis of the oral and
  documentary evidence that the  couple  were  in  a  durable  relationship
  having been in the relationship for at least two years. The Judge decided
  that the appellant met the requirements of  regulation  8(5).  The  Judge
  then went on to say that the appellant is entitled to a residence card as
  confirmation of a right to reside in the UK [49].

4. The respondent does not challenge any of the findings but challenges  the
  Judge's decision to allow the appeal outright as set out in paragraph 49.
  The respondent contends  that  the  Judge  could  not  allow  the  appeal
  outright as the respondent had not yet  exercised  her  discretion  under
  regulation 17 (4) of the 2006 Regulations. The grounds of appeal  contend
  that the Judge  failed  to  follow  the  approach  set  out  in  FD  (EEA
  discretion: basis of appeal) Algeria [2007] UKAIT 0049.

5. Regulation 17 (4) and (5) of the 2006 Regulations provides for the  issue
  of a residence card to an extended family member of an  EEA  national  as
  follows;


      17 (4) The Secretary of  State  may  issue  a  residence  card  to  an
      extended family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who  is  not
      an EEA national on application if-
           (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to the extended family
           member is a qualified person or an EEA national with a permanent
           right of residence under regulation 15; and
           (b) in all the circumstances it  appears  to  the  Secretary  of
           State appropriate to issue the residence card.
      (5) Where  the  Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application  under
      paragraph (4) he shall  undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the
      personal  circumstances  of  the  applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the
      application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless  this  is
      contrary to the interests of national security.

6. In FD the Tribunal held;


      "12. If the actual decision against which the  appellant  appeals  was
      one in which the Secretary of State failed to exercise  an  applicable
      discretion, the appellant's only remedy is to have his appeal  allowed
      on Abdi (D S) v SSHD [1996]  Imm  AR  148 principles,  in  that  the
      decision was not in accordance with the  law: SY  and  others  [2006]
      UKAIT 00024. Where the discretion  has  been  exercised,  however,  it
      seems to us that despite the provisions to which we have  referred  in
      the previous paragraph, it is open to  a  person  in  the  appellant's
      situation to claim that a discretion under the Regulations should have
      been exercised differently, and that the Tribunal has jurisdiction  to
      substitute its own  view  of  how  the  discretion  should  have  been
      exercised. ..."

7. Having decided that the appellant had not established that she was  in  a
  durable relationship with the EEA national the respondent did not  go  on
  to consider whether to exercise the discretion contained in regulation 17
  (4)  and  (5).  Therefore  the  respondent  has  not  yet  exercised  her
  discretion in this case. In those  circumstances,  as  Mr  Bajwa  rightly
  accepted at the hearing before me, the Judge erred in allowing the appeal
  outright at paragraph 49. The correct approach, in  accordance  with  the
  2006 Regulations, is to allow the appeal to the extent that it is not  in
  accordance with the law and that the decision remains outstanding  before
  the respondent for the exercise of her discretion under regulation 17.

8. I therefore set the decision aside and remake it by allowing  it  to  the
  extent that the decision is not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the
  decision remains outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the
  exercise of her discretion under regulation 17.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

      I re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  it  to  the  extent
that it remains outstanding before the Secretary of State  under  regulation
17 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.



Signed
                       Date: 30 June 2014



A Grimes


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal























