
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: IA/47825/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 25 July 2014                        |On 7 August 2014          |
|Prepared on 25 July 2014               |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                    G. P.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hossain, London Law Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Respondent is a citizen of Sri Lanka. On 27  September  2010
           he was granted entry clearance as a Tier  4  (General)  Student,
           and then granted a period of LTR expiring on 27  September  2013
           as a Tier 1 (PSW) Migrant.
        2. On 25 September 2013 the Respondent applied for LTR as a Tier  4
           (General) Student Migrant, which application was refused  on  28
           October  2013,  and  in  consequence  a  decision  was  made  by
           reference to s47 of the 2006 Act to remove him from the UK.
        3. The sole reason given  by  the  Appellant  for  these  decisions
           concerned the CAS submitted by the Respondent in support of  his
           application. Upon checking  the  CAS  on  28  October  2013  the
           Appellant noted that it had been withdrawn by the  sponsor,  and
           thus  she  took  the  view  the  Respondent  did  not  meet  the
           requirements  of  paragraph  117(b)  of  Appendix   A   to   the
           Immigration Rules.
        4. The Respondent's appeal against those immigration decisions were
           heard on 22 May 2014, and  they  were  allowed  to  the  limited
           extent the decisions were not made in accordance  with  the  law
           leaving  the  application  outstanding  and  awaiting  a  lawful
           decision, in a Determination promulgated on 22 May 2014 by First
           Tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.
        5. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Astle dated  12  June
           2014 the First Tier Tribunal granted the Appellant permission to
           appeal on the basis it was arguable the Judge had erred  in  his
           approach,  which  had  turned  upon  a  policy  that   was   not
           specifically identified, and which did not in any event exist.
        6. The Respondent filed  no  Rule  24  Notice,  and  neither  party
           applied for permission to rely upon further  evidence  that  had
           not been before the First Tier Tribunal.
        7. Thus the matter comes before me.


      The CAS
        8. It was not in dispute before the Judge that the CAS submitted in
           support of the application for LTR, and thus relied upon by  the
           Respondent, stated upon its face that it was assigned to him  on
           5 September 2013, and that the latest  acceptance  date  was  18
           September 2013. Nor was there any issue before  the  Judge  over
           the fact that this CAS had been withdrawn by the sponsor  before
           the 28 October 2013 when the Appellant undertook her checks upon
           the application. Again there was no issue before the Judge  over
           the fact that the reason for the withdrawal of the CAS  was  the
           Respondent's failure to attend  his  college  and  commence  his
           course of study by the due date of 9 September 2013.  The  Judge
           ought therefore to have found as a fact that the Respondent  did
           not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The  failure
           to do so was plainly an error of law.


      The basis for the Judge's decision
        9. The Determination  records,  but  makes  no  finding  upon,  the
           Respondent's assertion that he had not realised  the  date  that
           his course was due to commence, and his  assertion  (unsupported
           by any corroborative document  from  Kingston  University)  that
           were his appeal to be allowed, he had been promised that a fresh
           CAS would be issued to him. However unlikely they might be,  and
           whether or not he genuinely believed those assertions were true;
           they could not provide a basis upon which the  appeal  could  be
           allowed under the Immigration Rules.
       10. The Judge  appears  to  have  formed  the  view  [10]  that  the
           Appellant was bound by virtue of the terms of a published policy
           (which he did not identify by date, or title) to  grant  to  the
           Respondent a period of time in which  to  submit  a  fresh  CAS.
           Quite simply there was no  basis  for  this  approach.  No  such
           policy exists, or has ever existed. The Judge  appears  to  have
           fallen into error  through  a  misunderstanding  of  the  proper
           approach to be taken by the Appellant in circumstances in  which
           a sponsoring college's  licence  is  withdrawn  by  her  without
           notice to an applicant and after the applicant  has  made  their
           application. The situation in this case was very different.  The
           Judge's whole approach was therefore vitiated by  error  of  law
           that requires me to set aside his decision, and remake it.


      The decision remade
       11. The Respondent did not meet the requirements of paragraph 117 of
           Appendix A to the Immigration Rules, because the CAS relied upon
           had been withdrawn by the sponsor. Accordingly  the  application
           and the appeal were bound to be refused,  and  dismissed,  under
           the Immigration Rules.
       12. The Respondent relied in the  grounds  of  appeal  submitted  in
           support of his IAFT-1 upon his Article 8 rights, asserting  that
           his removal from the UK would prevent him  from  completing  his
           studies. He did not assert the existence of any "family life" in
           the UK, and thus the Article 8 appeal could only ever have  been
           considered in the context of his "private life". No evidence was
           offered to the Judge to suggest, and the grounds of  appeal  did
           not suggest, that there was any material element to the "private
           life" relied upon beyond the Respondent's continuing  education.
           As such the evidence, and the grounds, did not engage  with  the
           fact that the Respondent had failed to attend  his  college  for
           the start of the course relied upon, and had failed to  commence
           that course, and  thus  his  CAS  had  been  withdrawn  and  his
           application refused. That was the context in which his Article 8
           appeal had to be considered.
       13. The Respondent has always had the ability to return to Sri Lanka
           in safety;  he  has  never  sought  to  suggest  otherwise.  The
           Respondent did not meet the  requirements  of  either  paragraph
           276ADE, or Appendix FM at the date of the hearing.  I  note  the
           guidance to be found upon the  proper  approach  to  a  "private
           life" case in the decisions of Patel [2013] UKSC 72,  and  Nasim
           [2014] UKUT 25.
       14. I note the Judge did not engage with the Article 8  appeal,  and
           that he failed to identify any unjustifiably harsh  consequences
           that would result for  the  Respondent  from  his  removal.  The
           closest the Respondent came to doing so himself is recorded [5];
           he considered the cost  of  return  to  Sri  Lanka  to  make  an
           application for entry clearance as a student was very high,  and
           that the subject he wished to study was not one offered  in  Sri
           Lanka. Mr Hossain accepted that he could not identify any  other
           argument that was advanced. On the other hand the Respondent was
           only ever granted LTR for a limited period, and he  plainly  has
           family in Sri  Lanka  who  he  could  visit  whilst  making  his
           application. His argument boils down to the assertion that it is
           unreasonable and  disproportionate  in  these  circumstances  to
           require him to be put to the cost of an airfare to Sri Lanka, in
           order that he might return to visit his family, and then make an
           application from Sri Lanka  for  entry  clearance  in  order  to
           pursue the course of study to which he claims to  have  been  so
           committed that he managed to fail to attend its commencement. Mr
           Hossain argued in addition that  the  Respondent  might  not  be
           granted the entry clearance he would then seek, on grounds  that
           he did not care to identify; but as he eventually accepted, that
           possibility points firmly in favour of the Appellant's removal.
       15. In my consideration of the  Article  8  appeal  pursued  by  the
           Appellant I have to determine the following separate questions:
            . Is there an  interference  with  the  right  to  respect  for
              private life (which includes the right to physical and  moral
              integrity) and family life?
            . If so  will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such
              gravity as to potentially engage Article 8?
            . Is that interference in accordance with the law?
            . Does that interference have legitimate aims?
            . Is the interference proportionate in a democratic society  to
              the legitimate aim to be achieved?
       16. The Appellant has completed a course of degree study in the  UK,
           and a period of post study work experience. He has only ever had
           a grant of temporary leave for purposes that are now complete. I
           note the public  interest  in  removal;  Patel  and  Nasim.  The
           following passage in Nasim sets out the relevant principles;
          14. Whilst the concept of a "family life"  is  generally  speaking
              readily identifiable, the concept of a "private life" for the
              purposes of Article 8 is inherently less clear. At one end of
              the "continuum" stands the  concept  of  moral  and  physical
              integrity  or  "physical  and  psychological  integrity"  (as
              categorised by the ECtHR in eg Pretty v United Kingdom (2002)
              35 EHRR 1) as  to  which,  in  extreme  instances,  even  the
              state's interest in  removing  foreign  criminals  might  not
              constitute a proportionate response. However,  as  one  moves
              down the continuum, one encounters aspects  of  private  life
              which, even if engaging Article 8(1) (if not alone,  then  in
              combination with other factors) are so far removed  from  the
              "core" of Article 8 as to  be  readily  defeasible  by  state
              interests, such as the importance of maintaining  a  credible
              and coherent system of immigration control.
           15. At this point on the continuum the essential elements of the
              private life relied upon will normally  be  transposable,  in
              the sense of being capable of replication in their  essential
              respects, following a person's return to their home  country.
              Thus, in headnote 3 of MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8;  private  life)
              Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 0037 we find that:-
               "3. When determining the issue  of  proportionality  ...  it
               will always be important  to  evaluate  the  extent  of  the
               individual's  social  ties  and  relationships  in  the  UK.
               However,  a  student  here  on  a  temporary  basis  has  no
               expectation of a right to remain in order to  further  these
               ties and relationships if the criteria of  the  points-based
               system are not met. Also, the character of  an  individual's
               "private life" relied upon is ordinarily by its very  nature
               of a type which can  be  formed  elsewhere,  albeit  through
               different social ties, after the individual is removed  from
               the UK."
           16.  As  was  stated  in  the  earlier  case  of  MG  (assessing
              interference with private life) Serbia and Montenegro  [2005]
              UKAIT 00113:-
               "A person's job and precise  programme  of  studies  may  be
               different in the country to which he is to be  returned  and
               his network of friendships and other acquaintances is likely
               to be different too, but his private life will  continue  in
               respect of all its essential elements."
           17. The difference between these types of "private life" case and
              a case founded on family life is instructive. As was noted in
              MM, the relationships involved in  a  family  life  are  more
              likely  to  be  unique,  so  as  to  be  incapable  of  being
              replicated once an  individual  leaves  the  United  Kingdom,
              leaving behind, for example,  his  or  her  spouse  or  minor
              child.
           18. In R (on the application of the Countryside Alliance)  v  AG
              and others [2007] UKHL 52, Lord Bingham, having described the
              concept of private life in Article 8 as "elusive", said that:
               "... the purpose of the article is in my view clear.  It  is
               to protect the individual against intrusion by agents of the
               state, unless for  good  reason,  into  the  private  sphere
               within which individuals expect to be left alone to  conduct
               their personal affairs and live their personal lives as they
               choose" [10].
           19. It is important to bear in  mind  that  the  "good  reason",
              which the state must invoke is not a fixity. British citizens
              may enjoy friendships, employment and studies that are in all
              essential respects the same as those enjoyed by persons  here
              who  are  subject  to  such  controls.  The  fact  that   the
              government  cannot  arbitrarily  interfere  with  a   British
              citizen's enjoyment of those things, replicable  though  they
              may be, and that, in practice, interference is likely  to  be
              justified only by strong reasons, such as imprisonment for  a
              criminal offence, cannot be used to restrict the government's
              ability to rely on the enforcement of immigration controls as
              a reason for interfering  with  friendships,  employment  and
              studies enjoyed by a person who  is  subject  to  immigration
              controls.
          20. We therefore agree with Mr  Jarvis  that  [57]  of  Patel  and
              Others is a significant exhortation from the Supreme Court to
              re-focus attention on the nature and  purpose  of  Article  8
              and, in particular, to recognise its limited  utility  to  an
              individual where one has moved along the continuum, from that
              Article's core  area  of  operation  towards  what  might  be
              described as its fuzzy penumbra. The limitation arises,  both
              from what will at  that  point  normally  be  the  tangential
              effect on the individual of  the  proposed  interference  and
              from the fact that, unless there are  particular  reasons  to
              reduce the public interest of enforcing immigration controls,
              that interest  will  consequently  prevail  in  striking  the
              proportionality  balance  (even  assuming   that   stage   is
              reached).
           21. In conclusion on this first general matter, we find that the
              nature of the right asserted by each of the appellants, based
              on their desire, as former students, to undertake a period of
              post-study work in the United  Kingdom,  lies  at  the  outer
              reaches of cases  requiring  an  affirmative  answer  to  the
              second of the five "Razgar" questions and that, even if  such
              an affirmative  answer  needs  to  be  given,  the  issue  of
              proportionality is to be resolved decisively in favour of the
              respondent, by reference to her functions as the guardian  of
              the system of  immigration  controls,  entrusted  to  her  by
              Parliament.
       17. To the extent that the Appellant relies upon his good character,
           and his desire to  undertake  further  education  the  following
           passage in Nasim is applicable;
          25. A further seam running through the appellant's submissions was
              that, during their time in the United Kingdom, they had  been
              law-abiding,  had  not  relied  on  public  funds   and   had
              contributed to the United Kingdom  economy  by  paying  their
              students' fees. Their aim  was  now  to  contribute  to  that
              economy by working.
           26. We do not consider that this set of  submissions  takes  the
              appellants' cases anywhere. It cannot rationally be contended
              that their Article 8 rights have been  made  stronger  merely
              because, during their time in this  country,  they  have  not
              sought public funds, have refrained from committing  criminal
              offences  and  have  paid  the  fees  required  in  order  to
              undertake their courses. Similarly,  a  desire  to  undertake
              paid employment in the United Kingdom  is  not,  as  such,  a
              matter that can enhance a person's right to  remain  here  in
              reliance on Article 8.
           27. The only significance of not having criminal convictions and
              not  having  relied  on  public  funds  is  to  preclude  the
              respondent from pointing to any public interest in respect of
              the appellants' removal, over and above the basic  importance
              of maintaining a firm  and  coherent  system  of  immigration
              control. However, for reasons we have already enunciated,  as
              a general matter that  public  interest  factor  is,  in  the
              circumstances of these cases, more than  adequate  to  render
              removal proportionate.
       18. To sum up then, the Appellant's appeal does not  rely  upon  the
           core concepts of moral and physical integrity. The  only  reason
           offered to the Judge for not returning to Sri Lanka and  seeking
           entry clearance was the cost of the airfare to which he would be
           put in doing so. The Appellant is not  currently  studying,  and
           his place on the course of study to which he claims to have been
           committed was withdrawn following his own failure to attend  and
           enrol upon it. In my judgement the evidence  placed  before  the
           Judge  did  not  establish  that  there  were   any   compelling
           compassionate circumstances that meant the refusal to  grant  to
           the Appellant DLR, and the consequential decision to remove  him
           to Sri Lanka, led to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.


   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      22 May 2014 did involve the making of an error of  law  that  requires
      that decision to be set aside and remade.


      I  remake  the  decision  so  as  to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
      Immigration Rules, and on Article 8 grounds.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal directs  otherwise  the  Respondent  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  him.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated  25 July 2014
