
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/47270/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1st October 2015                  |On 7th October 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                   Mr AHMED El DESSOUK ADB RABBOU IBRAHIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini (counsel) instructed by David Tang & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby- Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Griffith promulgated on 5th May  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds .

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 1st July 1983 and is a national of Egypt.

4.    On 24 June  2013  the  Appellant  applied  for  a  residence  card  as
confirmation of his derivative right of residence in the UK as  the  primary
carer for his infant son, who is a  British  citizen.  The  application  was
made on the basis that the British citizen child has  been  reliant  on  the
appellant since birth.

5.    On 4th November 2013 the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's
application.

The Judge's Decision

6.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Grifftih ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 13 July 2015  Judge  Colyer  gave
permission to appeal

The Hearing

8.    Mr Bazini,  counsel  for  the  appellant,  argued  that  the  decision
contains material errors of law and focused [38] of  the  decision,  telling
me that the second sentence of [38]  is  irrelevant  and  that  the  judge's
attempts to define the term "primary carer"were flawed. He noted that at  37
the judge drew parallels between  the  expression  "sole  responsibility"and
"primary carer" - and argued that she should not have done  so  because  the
two expressions are discrete and distinct. He was critical of the judge  for
not considering regulation 15 A(4A)(c) of the 2006 regulations. He  told  me
that there is no great dispute about the facts in this case and urged me  to
allow the appeal, set aside the decision and substitute a decision  allowing
the appeal.

9.    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, for the respondent told me that  the  decision
does not contain any material  errors  of  law,  but  that  is  a  carefully
worded, well-reasoned  decision  containing  adequate  findings  leading  to
conclusions which were open to the judge to make. She  that  the  judge  had
focused correctly on the primary responsibility for care and  had  not  only
arrived at a sustainable definition of the phrase "primary carer",  but  had
also demonstrated the logic employed to reach that definition. She urged  me
to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

10.   Reg 15A(7) states that a person, P, is to be regarded  as  a  "primary
carer" of another person if (a) P is a direct relative or a  legal  guardian
of that person; and (b) P- (i) is the person who has primary  responsibility
for that person's care; or (ii) shares equally the responsibility  for  that
person's care with one other person who is not an exempt person.

11.   Regulation 15A(6)(c) defines an 'exempt person' as a person who:

    (i) who has a right to reside in the  UK  as  a  result  of  any  other
    provision of these Regulations; (ii) who has a right of abode in the UK
    by virtue of section 2 of the 1971 Act;(iii) to whom section 8  of  the
    1971 Act, or any order made under subsection  (2)  of  that  provision,
    applies; or iv) who has indefinite leave to enter or remain in the UK.

12.   The undisputed facts in this case are  that  the  appellant's  British
citizen spouse is the breadwinner for this family  and  that  the  appellant
stays at home to look after his children, who are both British citizens.  At
the time the decision was made in this  case  the  appellant  had  only  one
child and the focus was on the relationship between the  appellant  and  his
firstborn. Because the appellant's spouse is a British citizen,  she  is  an
"exempt person" and so  the  test  in  regulation  15A(7)(b)(ii)  cannot  be
satisfied.

13.   It is beyond dispute that the appellant satisfies the test set out  in
regulation 15A(7)(a). The focus turns to regulation  15A7(b)(i).  The  focus
in the decision promulgated on 5th May 2015 drew only on part of  regulation
15 A(7), and not on the test as it is set out in its entirety there.

14.   Between [36] and [38] of the decision, the  judge  wrestles  with  the
definition of "primary carer"  as  the  words  are  used  in  regulation  15
A(7)(b)(i). It is there that a material error of law is created. At  [37]  &
[38} the judge, while  searching  for  a  definition,  conflates  the  terms
"sole" and "primary". The judge then expressly  states  that  she  will  not
consider regulation 15A(4A) of the 2006 rules, when a full consideration  of
this case requires consideration of that part of the regulations.

15.   I therefore find that the decision is tainted by a material  error  of
law. I set aside the decision.

16.   The facts in this case are not in dispute. I find that I  am  able  to
remake decision on the information placed before me.

17.   Regulation 15 A7(b)(i) defines "primary carer" as "the person who  has
primary responsibility for that  person's  care".  The  weight  of  evidence
indicates that it is the appellant who shoulders the responsibility for  the
day to day care of his eldest child, who is a British citizen. The  test  is
not one of "sole responsibility". The test is "primary responsibility".  The
primary carer, the person with primary responsibility, is the  first  person
to whom one turns.

18.   The weight of evidence indicates that the majority of the  child  care
for the British citizen child is undertaken by the appellant. The weight  of
reliable evidence indicates  that  in  the  appellant's  family  it  is  the
appellant who is relied on to take care of  his  oldest  child.  He  is  the
first person responsible for the care and supervision of his  oldest  child.
He must therefore be the primary carer;  there  is  no  carer  who  takes  a
position of precedence over the appellant in matters relating  to  the  care
of his British citizen child.  He  therefore  fulfils  the  requirements  of
regulation 15 A(7)(b)(i).

19.   But that is not the end of the  matter.  I  must  consider  regulation
15A(4A)(c), which provides

    "15A(4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

         (a) P is the primary carer of a British Citizen ("the relevant
         British citizen");

         (b) the relevant British citizen is residing in the United Kingdom;
         and

         (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the
         UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave."

20.   In Maureen Hines v London Borough of Lambeth [2014] EWCA  Civ  660  it
was said that, in applying the test under regulation 15A(4A)(c) is clear  it
was necessary to consider the welfare of the British citizen child  and  the
extent to which the quality or standard of his life will be impaired if  the
non-EU citizen is required  to  leave.  This  is  all  for  the  purpose  of
answering  the  question  whether  the  child  would,   as   a   matter   of
practicality, be unable to remain in the UK. This requires a  consideration,
amongst other things, of the impact which the removal of the  primary  carer
would have on the child, and the alternative care available for  the  child.
For this purpose it was generally accepted that  an  available  adoption  or
foster care placement would not be adequate because the quality of the  life
of the child would be so seriously impaired by his removal from  his  mother
to be placed in foster care  that  he  would  be  effectively  compelled  to
leave. It was also said, however, that all things being  equal  the  removal
of a child from the care of one responsible parent to the  care  of  another
responsible parent would not normally be expected  so  seriously  to  impair
his quality and standard of life that he  would  be  effectively  forced  to
leave the UK. Apart from anything else, he would,  even  if  he  did  leave,
still only have the care of one of his previously two joint carers

21.   The case-law is against the appellant. The appellant  is  the  primary
carer of a British citizen child, and so satisfies regulation 15A(4A) (a)  &
(b). If he leaves the UK, he will leave  his  children  in  the  care  of  a
British citizen. The appellant's wife may suffer from back pain,  but  there
is no reliable  before  me  to  indicate  that  the  appellant's  back  pain
prevents her from pursuing the ordinary activities of daily living.  If  the
appellant leaves, his two children will still have their  mother.  There  is
no reliable evidence to suggest  that  either  of  the  appellant's  British
children will be unable to continue to reside in the UK if the appellant  is
required to leave the UK.

22.    The  second  ground  of  appeal  challenged  the  adequacy  of   the
consideration of the appellant's article 8 ECHR rights. In Amirteymour  and
others (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT  00466   it  was  held  that
where no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has been served and where
no EEA decision to remove has been made, an appellant cannot bring a  Human
Rights challenge to removal in an appeal under the EEA Regulations. Neither
the factual matrix nor the reasoning in JM (Liberia) [2006] EWCA  Civ  1402
has any application to appeals of this nature.  The second ground of appeal
is no longer arguable.

Decision

23.   The decision of the First-tier  tribunal  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law.

24.   I set aside the decision & substitute the following decision.

25.   I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


Signed      Date 5 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
