
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47372/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2014                               |On 29 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                 Mr Abdullah
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Nasim
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 5 March 2014.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal found that the respondent in this appeal,  whom
    we will call the appellant for ease of reference and  for  consistency,
    was an extended family member of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the UK, in terms of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006.
    He relied on certain written and oral evidence into which we do not  go
    for present purposes.

3.   The background to the appeal is that on the  day  of  the  hearing  the
    appellant's bundle was received. It contained  a  number  of  documents
    which went to the question of the relationship and also the question of
    the exercise of the treaty rights.  The Presenting  Officer  sought  an
    adjournment on the basis that the respondent wished to undertake checks
    on these documents and had not  had  an  opportunity  to  do  so.   For
    reasons set out in the determination the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused
    the adjournment but allowed a certain amount of time to the  Presenting
    Officer to consider the papers.

4.   The failure to grant an adjournment was a  ground  of  appeal  to  this
    Tribunal but Ms Everett has abandoned that ground on the basis that she
    has not been able to identify which particular documents were concerned
    and is not in a position to advance the argument.  We are  grateful  to
    her for her proper response to the difficulty in which  she  now  finds
    herself.

5.   There are two other grounds of appeal, however.  The first  effectively
    is that the First-tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons for its
    findings, and the grounds of appeal mention a number of inconsistencies
    in the evidence which could, on one view, undermine the credibility  of
    the core of the appellant's case.  The judge  who  heard  the  evidence
    found that the appellant's claim at its core was credible, however, and
    that the relationship was durable.  It is  fair  to  say  that  another
    judge hearing the same evidence and relying on the same documents might
    have come to a different conclusion but  that  is  not  the  issue.  Ms
    Everett, understandably in our view,  did not seem to argue this ground
    with much enthusiasm.  We are satisfied that  the  findings  have  been
    adequately  reasoned.   The  judge  heard  the  evidence,   noted   the
    inconsistencies and was obviously aware of them but that did not  deter
    him from making the decision which he did and we are satisfied that the
    decision was one which was open to him, so that ground of appeal fails.

7.    Nonetheless  there  is  a  further  ground  of  appeal  in  that   the
    determination at paragraph  92  simply  says  "I  therefore  allow  the
    appellant's appeal".  This, however, is a case  which  is  governed  by
    Regulation 17(4), which is to the effect that the  Secretary  of  State
    may issue a residence card to an extended  family  member  not  falling
    within Regulation 7(3) who is not an EEA national, on  application,  if
    certain conditions are met.  The Secretary of State has a discretion to
    exercise but has not yet exercised  this  discretion.   All  the  judge
    could do was allow the appeal on the basis that the decision was not in
    accordance with the law and thereafter, having  done  so,  should  have
    remitted the case to the Secretary of State to allow  her  to  exercise
    her discretion.

8.   In the circumstances we propose to allow the appeal to the extent  that
    the matter should be remitted to the Secretary of State in  order  that
    her discretion, whatever it is going to be, may be exercised.

                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

