
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47699/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2016                |On 8 February 2017                   |
|                                  |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                tahir hafeez
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance or representation
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of  Mr  Hafeez  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 11 November 2014 refusing  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.  He entered the United Kingdom as a  Tier
    4 student on 14 June 2011 with leave to remain until 27 July 2014.

2.   The application for leave to remain was not as a  Tier  4  student  but
    was made by submitting form FLR(FP) with a covering  letter  explaining
    that his college had closed down.  There was an indication on his  data
    protection file that his visa had been curtailed and he was  submitting
    a further leave  to  remain  application  requesting  the  exercise  of
    discretion to enable him to continue as a student on the basis that  he
    had not yet obtained a degree and had spent a substantial sum of  money
    on his education to date and he relied on Article 8.   He  was  refused
    under the Rules and outside the Rules by the respondent and  in  regard
    to exceptional circumstances the  respondent  noted  that  the  Tier  4
    sponsorship had been withdrawn by the college by non-attendance.

3.   The judge heard evidence and submissions and concluded that the  appeal
    could not succeed under the  Rules  or  outside  the  Rules  and  as  a
    consequence dismissed the appeal.  The grounds of appeal are not clear,
    I think it is fair to say.  It is  possible  that  one  can  take  from
    paragraph 4 a suggestion  that  there  was  something  wrong  with  the
    standard of proof employed.  It is said that the  judge  dismissed  the
    appeal on the basis that the decision ought to  be  made  with  a  keen
    importance given to the standard of probability from both parties.   It
    is also said that it is regrettable that if the standard of probability
    was applied in favour  of  the  appellant  he  would  have  been  given
    sufficient time in obtaining a CAS from an education provider prior  to
    his  leave  expiring.   When  making  a  decision,  it  was  said,  the
    Honourable Judge failed to address the fact that  if  the  standard  of
    probability was applied the appellant would have valid leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

4.    Thereafter  there  are  references  to  the  outcome  not  being   the
    appellant's fault, that the judge did not look into why  the  appellant
    was not at fault.  The right to educate oneself is said to be  a  basic
    human right and again that was no fault of the appellant, he  had  done
    his best to get the relevant documentation, he had  been  requested  to
    provide evidence of the money spent in educating him and  the  decision
    maker was asked to refer to the respondent's  maintenance  requirements
    and the GDP in Mr Hafeez's country Pakistan is very low,  it  is  said.
    It is said that he has tried his best to get documentation.  In  saying
    that he could get a job in Pakistan  this  was  directly  contradictory
    with the job offer letter attached  in  the  appeal  bundle  which  was
    related to him obtaining the qualification in question and it was  said
    therefore that the decision should be set aside.

5.   The First-tier Judge who granted permission  took  the  view  that  the
    grounds did not suggest that there was an  arguable  error  of  law  or
    errors of law in the decision but of his own motion considered that the
    judge had not referred to or appeared to apply the burden and  standard
    of proof which was arguably a  material  misdirection  of  law  and  so
    permission was granted.

6.   I should say also that at the hearing today there was no appearance  by
    or on behalf of Mr Hafeez and I am satisfied that the notice of hearing
    was sent to  him  and  his  representative  on  22  November  2016  and
    accordingly it is appropriate to proceed to hear the appeal.

7.   With regard to the  sole  point  in  issue,  that  of  the  burden  and
    standard of proof, in my view it is not necessary  for  a  judge  as  a
    matter of incantation to set these matters out.  It may  be  of  course
    helpful for a judge to do  so  reminding  himself  or  herself  of  the
    importance of being clear as to where the burden and standard  lie  but
    otherwise it seems to me that unless it becomes manifest from a  proper
    reading of the judge's decision that the correct burden and standard of
    proof have not been  applied,  and  particularly  in  the  case  of  an
    experienced judge such as Judge Hall in this case that is not a  matter
    that can be said to show an error of law.  There is nothing in my  mind
    inconsistent with the proper burden and standard  in  the  judgment  in
    this case.

8.   The judge's findings and conclusions are to be  found  from  paragraphs
    37 onwards where he makes it clear he had taken into  account  all  the
    documentation,  the  evidence  and  the  submissions.   The   appellant
    accepted he had no family life in the United Kingdom and so  could  not
    place reliance on Appendix FM.  He also accepted that he could not rely
    on paragraph 276ADE(1) and therefore accepted that there were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his return to Pakistan.  The judge found  that
    he had not provided satisfactory evidence as to what  progress  he  had
    made on the course between June 2011 and February 2014, no  documentary
    evidence had been provided to  prove  what  modules,  if  any,  he  had
    passed, nor had documentary evidence been provided by the respondent to
    support the contention  that  the  college  had  withdrawn  sponsorship
    because of non-attendance.  The judge made a finding that the appellant
    had not submitted satisfactory evidence of progression  in  his  course
    because he had accepted in his witness statement that he  attempted  to
    gain admission to other colleges but they refused him because  of  lack
    of progression in his course and that is unarguably a sound finding for
    the judge to make in light of the appellant's own evidence.

9.   With regard to the reference to a 60 day letter,  the  judge  made  the
    point there was no satisfactory evidence that the appellant's leave had
    been curtailed, no letter had been produced by either  side  indicating
    curtailment of leave and as the judge said, if the  college  closed  in
    February 2014, the appellant still had leave until 21 July of that year
    and could have tried to get admission to another  college  during  that
    period and  he  had  done  so  and  was  refused  because  of  lack  of
    progression as a consequence.  There was no need for the respondent  to
    issue a 60 day letter.  Again that was an entirely proper finding.

10.  The judge then went on to consider Article 8 outside the Rules and  set
    out the terms of Article 8, set out the  five  stage  Razgar  approach,
    found as is usually the case in an assessment of Article 8 outside  the
    Rules that the matter came down to proportionality.  That  I  think  is
    clearly right in this case.

11.  The judge then went on at paragraph 46 with regard  to  proportionality
    to make the entirely proper point that the respondent has to prove  the
    decision is proportionate so there can be no argument about the  burden
    of proof in that regard as indeed I think there is not elsewhere.   The
    judge took into account section 117B of the 2002 Act  and  the  factors
    that assisted him and did not assist the appellant in the evaluation of
    the public interest, noted the precarious immigration status  that  the
    appellant had always had, noted what had been said at paragraph  57  in
    Patel, that Article 8 is  not  a  general  dispensing  power,  attached
    significant weight  to  the  need  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    control and that the appellant could not satisfy the Immigration  Rules
    in order to be granted leave to remain as a student or under the  Rules
    with regard to his private life and did not find that the  evidence  in
    the appeal disclosed compelling circumstances  which  would  warrant  a
    grant of leave to remain under Article 8 outside the  Rules,  that  the
    weight to be attached to maintenance of effective  immigration  control
    outweighed the weight to be attached to the wishes of the appellant  to
    remain in the United Kingdom notwithstanding he could not  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules.   That  in  my  view  is  a  very  full  and  proper
    evaluation of Article 8 as it  applied  in  this  case.   There  is  no
    indication that the judge failed to take proper account of  the  burden
    or standard of proof and indeed every indication that he got the  point
    of the burden entirely right so for all these reasons I see no error of
    law in this decision and the appeal is accordingly dismissed.

Notice of Decision

12.  The appeal is dismissed.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


