
[pic]
IAC-HW-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47286/2014
                                                               IA/47251/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2015                   |On 29 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                   ranjith gottimukkala (first appellant)
                      mahesh jadala (second appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr C Mannan of Counsel, instructed by Kumar Legal
                    Limited, solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The Appellants are citizens of India, born respectively on 9 June  1987
    and 17 February 1988.  They each entered the United Kingdom with  leave
    as Tier 4 (General) Student Migrants and subsequently obtained leave as
    Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrants  and  thereafter  made  a  combined
    application as team members for further leave as Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrants under the Points-Based System.

The Respondent's Decisions

 2. On 19 November 2014 the Respondent refused each of  their  applications
    under paragraph  245DD(h)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  for  Non-Points
    Scoring reasons, namely  that  the  Respondent  did  not  consider  the
    Appellants had the requisite experience for the day-to-day  running  of
    their business or that their business venture was viable.

 3. On 14 January 2015  the  Appellants  lodged  Notices  of  Appeal  under
    Section 82 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds are needlessly long and  save  for
    paragraphs 13(iii), (vi),  (vii),  (ix)  they  appear  to  be  entirely
    generic to Tier 4 (Entrepreneur) appeals.

 4. The relevant grounds  assert  the  genuineness  and  viability  of  the
    Appellants' proposed business venture.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 5. On 10 June 2015 the appeals were  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Majid.   The  Respondent   was   not   represented.    By   a
    determination promulgated on 12 June 2015 he allowed both  the  appeals
    outright and without acknowledging the impact  of  paragraph  245DD(k);
    the effect of which is that if an appeal against refusal for  Non-Point
    Scoring reasons is allowed it should be remitted to the  Respondent  to
    consider the points scoring aspects of the application.

 6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    Judge had given insufficient reasons for his decision and had failed to
    make explicit reference  to  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  or  the
    particular issues of  concern  identified  by  the  Respondent  in  the
    Notices of Decision.  The second ground was that  the  Judge  had  mis-
    directed himself on the admissibility of evidence in respect  of  which
    the Respondent relied on the exceptions referred to in Section  85A  of
    the 2002 Act and further, the Judge had  not  taken  into  account  the
    jurisprudence in Ahmed and Another (PBS:  admissible  evidence)  [2014]
    UKUT 00365 (IAC).

 7. On 26 August 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Heynes  granted  the
    Respondent permission to appeal on the ground it was arguable the Judge
    had failed to identify or address the issues between the  parties,  the
    relevant Immigration  Rules  or  the  evidence  and  had  made  neither
    findings nor given reasons for his decision.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. Both Appellants attended the hearing at which they were represented  by
    Mr Mannan who had appeared for them in the First-tier Tribunal.

 9.  The  representatives  for  both  parties  agreed  that   despite   the
    deficiencies in the documentation contained  in  the  Tribunal's  files
    each Appellant was appealing the Judge's decision.

Submissions for the Respondent

10. Mr Kotas relied on the permission grounds  and  submitted  the  Judge's
    decision showed a singular lack of reasoning. He had not identified the
    issues in contention between  the  parties  or  the  substance  of  the
    appeal.  Para.10 of his decision stated his conclusions.  At para.10(a)
    he had stated the "caseworker appears to be happy with  the  investment
    required by the Rules".  This was factually incorrect.  The  Respondent
    was not happy with the proposed investment for  the  reasons  given  in
    each of the two decision.

11. In para.10(b) the Judge had disagreed with  the  Respondent  about  the
    business plan but had given no reasons for his disagreement and had not
    addressed the  reasons  for  the  Respondent's  conclusions  about  the
    business plan contained in each of the decisions.

12. Para.10(c) referred to the Appellants being "legally obliged  to  work"
    part-time in Sainsbury's.  This was incorrect.  The Appellants were not
    legally obliged to work and the gravamen of the Respondent's  objection
    was that they were not working in their proposed business venture.

13. Para.10(d) referred to the insurance certificate.  The  issue  was  not
    the insurance arranged by the Appellants but the  risks  against  which
    they had failed to insure as identified in each decision.  The  concern
    was that the policy did not include public indemnity insurance.

14. Mr Kotas referred to those parts of the decisions  explaining  why  the
    Respondent had refused the applications.

15. The Respondent had identified an inconsistency in the evidence, whether
    the Appellants were developing a website for Baby Designer  or  whether
    they were permitting Baby Designer to sell products on the  Appellants'
    own e-commerce platform.  There was no explanation why  the  Appellants
    had registered their company's website domain through another  company.
    Their business plan's projected net  profits  were  not  based  on  any
    previous business operations.  This undermined the weight that could be
    given to the business plan and had led the Respondent to  conclude  the
    forecasts were neither viable nor credible.

16. The Appellants had  little  idea  of  what  insurance  cover  they  had
    arranged and could not agree on what market research they  had  carried
    out.  Each of  them  had  failed  to  demonstrate  sufficient  business
    experience which suggested to the Respondent that their business  model
    was not viable.

17. The Judge had failed to address these points or where he had  addressed
    them had missed the point.  Looking at the decision, the Respondent  as
    the losing party simply had no idea why the appeals had been allowed.

18. Mr Kotas turned to the second ground of appeal and referred to  paras.5
    and 6 of the  determination  in  Ahmed  and  Another  (PBS:  admissible
    evidence) [2014] UKUT 365 (IAC).  The Judge had at para.8 referred to a
    consideration of all documents but Mr Kotas  submitted  some  of  those
    documents were not admissible by reason of Section 85A of the 2002  Act
    and in  particular  pages  83-99  of  the  Appellants'  bundle,   being
    correspondence and management accounts both dated 15 July 2014 prepared
    by the Appellants' accountants.

19. He also submitted that s.85A of the 2002 Act effectively made any  oral
    evidence at the hearing before the Judge inadmissible.  In answer to  a
    question  from  myself  it  appeared  that  the  Appellants  had   been
    interviewed after their  applications  but  not  given  any  chance  to
    comment on the interview records before the decision had been made.  Mr
    Kotas concluded the SSHD's appeal should be allowed.

Submissions for the Applicants

20. Mr Mannan first addressed the SSHD's  second  ground  for  appeal.   He
    submitted the determination in Ahmed was about new evidence and in fact
    the Appellants had not  submitted  any  new  evidence.   The  documents
    referred to by Mr Kotas were in fact in the Respondent's own bundle.  I
    noted that the accountants had submitted their letter and  accounts  on
    15 July 2014 and the Applicants' claims were sent on the  same  day  to
    the SSHD although the accounts were not listed as an enclosed  document
    in the application forms.

21. Mr Mannan referred to the record of the interview  with  Mr  Jadala  in
    which  the  interviewing  officer  had  concluded  he   was   credible.
    Credibility is an important element in any immigration appeal but it is
    not a sufficient condition to entitle an applicant to the grant of  the
    requested leave or success in any appeal against refusal of that leave.
     An applicant may well be credible but simply fail to establish that he
    or she satisfies the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It is  the
    meeting of these requirements  which  enables  an  applicant  to  claim
    entitlement to the grant of leave.

22. Mr  Mannan  continued  that  the  Appellants  had  not  been  given  an
    opportunity to respond to the interview records and in the case  of  Mr
    Jadala he referred me to the finding of the interviewing  officer  that
    Mr Jadala was credible.  There was no new evidence before the Judge and
    the witness statements of the Appellants  contained  no  new  evidence.
    Consequently the SSHD's second ground for appeal must fail.

23. Mr Mannan then turned to the first ground for appeal.  He  pointed  out
    it was clear the Judge had  considered  all  the  evidence  before  him
    because  he  had  said  so.   He  had  considered  all   the   relevant
    jurisprudence, again because he had explicitly said so.  There  was  no
    explanation why the Judge had also said at para.3 that  he  was  taking
    into account the changes in the Immigration Rules which came into force
    on 9 July 2012 affecting the application of Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention.  There was no claim under Article 8 and the Judge  did  not
    deal with any claim under Article 8.

24. He referred to para.10(a) of the decision and noted the  SSHD  had  not
    commented on the source of funds available to the Appellants but  could
    have done so.  I pointed out there was no obligation on the SSHD to  do
    so, particularly because whether the Appellants met the requirements of
    Appendix A had been deferred in  the  decision  because  the  SSHD  had
    refused the applications for Non-Points  Scoring  reasons.   Mr  Mannan
    said that in any event the  Appellants  had  not  submitted  any  fresh
    documents.

SSHD's Response

25. Mr Kotas submitted that the failure of the Respondent to be represented
    at the hearing was irrelevant and he compared the situation to  a  case
    where an Appellant had asked for an appeal to be determined  without  a
    hearing on the basis of the  papers  in  the  Tribunal  file.   In  all
    events, the parties were entitled to know from the decision the reasons
    for the conclusions reached by the Judge.  In these appeals  the  Judge
    had failed to address the reasons detailed in the SSHD's decisions  and
    consequently the SSHD did not know why the appeals  had  been  allowed.
    This amounted to a material error of law.

Findings and Consideration

26. It is insufficient for a Judge to state in a decision that he has noted
    the relevant law and read all the documents in the file and taken  them
    into account as the sole reason for his conclusions.  It is with regret
    that just as the grounds for appeal were  generic,  so  indeed  is  the
    Judge's decision.  A Judge must not only do justice but must be seen to
    do justice which means that he must give adequate  reasons  to  justify
    his decision.  Failure so to do is a material error of law and does not
    demonstrate the transparency  of  justice  which  the  parties  rightly
    expect from the Tribunal and to which the Tribunal is committed.

27. Adopting this criterion, the Judge has failed to  address  the  lengthy
    reasons given in  the  decision  notices  under  appeal  why  the  SSHD
    considered the Applicants' business plan  to  be  neither  genuine  nor
    viable.

28. I would mention in passing that  it  is  of  note  that  there  was  no
    indication either at the end of the interview or subsequently  that  Mr
    Jadala accepted it was a true  and  accurate  reflection  of  what  had
    happened.

29. The Respondent claimed the Judge took account of inadmissible evidence.
     I have already dealt with this to the extent that I  have  found  that
    there was no subsequently filed evidence.  I do not have to decide  the
    apparent inconsistency of the dates in the management accounts prepared
    for the period ending June 2015 but dated July 2014.

30. The effect of the generic nature of the Judge's decision is that it  is
    a material error of law such that it must be set aside in its  entirety
    and the appeals heard afresh.

31. Having regard to the nature of the error of law and the absence of  any
    relevant findings and the likely extent of the fact  finding  exercise,
    the provisions of s.12(2) Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007
    and the President's Practice Statement 7.2(b) I conclude  the  decision
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to decide afresh.

Anonymity

32. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeals I find that none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law such that it must be set aside in its entirety and  the  matter  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh by a Judge other
    than Judge Majid.


Signed/Official Crest  Date: 14. xii. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

