
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
IA/47159/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27th January 2016                     |  On 7th April 2016                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                          mr Taofik Babatunde Amao
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Rai of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 23rd December 1962.   The
    Secretary of State's records show that the Appellant was given leave to
    enter the UK as a visitor for six months on 9th October  2000.   It  is
    apparently unclear as to whether the Appellant left the  UK  after  the
    six month period, however on 26th July 2005 he applied for leave  under
    the 2006 EEA Regulations as the dependant of his spouse Lucilia  Morais
    Pereira Rubio a Portuguese national and on 13th  October  2005  he  was
    granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK.  The Secretary  of  State
    accepts that the Appellant is a family member of an EEA national and as
    such qualifies for  consideration  under  the  2006  Regulations.   The
    Appellant first came to the adverse attention in 2012.  He was involved
    in a commission of breach of UK immigration law by a non-EU person.  On
    12th September 2013 he was convicted of conspiracy to commit an act  to
    facilitate the commission of breach of UK immigration law by  a  non-EU
    person  and  was  sentenced  on  10th  October  2013  to   30   months'
    imprisonment.

 2. On 7th November 2013 the Appellant was notified  that  because  of  his
    criminal conviction behaviour in the UK  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    decided to make a deportation order  against  him  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy in accordance with Regulation 19(3)(b) and Regulation  21
    of the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   In
    response to  that  decision  the  Appellant  completed  the  notice  of
    liability for deportation questionnaire stating that he was a  Nigerian
    national born in Ibadan.  However he failed to provide the  exact  date
    of his entry to the UK but stated that he did  have  a  UK  born  child
    residing with her mother in the UK.

 3. On 18th November 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  issued  a  notice  of
    deportation decision.  That decision noted that the Secretary of  State
    concluded that there was a real risk that the Appellant may reoffend in
    the future and that given the threat of serious harm that the Appellant
    posed to the public it was considered that his  personal  circumstances
    did not preclude his deportation being pursued.

 4. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal R Callender Smith sitting at Taylor House  on  17th  July
    2015.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated on 7th  August  2015  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed under the Regulations, the Immigration
    Rules and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 5. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  18th
    August 2015.  The grounds, which are extensive, set  out  predominantly
    two contentions that the First-tier Tribunal had  materially  erred  in
    law.  Firstly they contended that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to
    place  appropriate  weight  on  the  evidence  when  finding  that  the
    Appellant remained a serious risk of reoffending and further had failed
    to properly determine whether the Appellant  was  in  fact  "a  genuine
    threat"  in  accordance  with  paragraph  21(5)  of  the   Regulations.
    Secondly it was contended that the judge had erred as a matter  of  law
    by failing to apply the proper legal test to  the  Appellant.   It  was
    contended that the appropriate test should be  "imperative  grounds  of
    public security" and not confined to "serious grounds of public  policy
    or public security.".

 6.  On  4th  December  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler   granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Pooler considered  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had failed to take account of all  relevant  matters  in
    assessing the risk posed by the Appellant at the date of  hearing.   He
    also found that it was arguable that the Appellant had failed to make a
    finding as to whether the Appellant had been resident in the UK for ten
    years prior to his imprisonment  and  was  entitled  to  be  considered
    against the test of "imperative grounds."  Finally he considered it was
    arguable that the judge had failed to consider the  proportionality  of
    removal either under the 2006 Regulations or in respect of Article 8.

 7. On 16th December 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  That response contended that that  the  judge
    had properly directed himself.  It further contended in  the  light  of
    the ruling in Secretary of State v  MG  the  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was correct to consider the Appellant on a  "serious  grounds"
    basis and that the Secretary of State considered  that  the  judge  had
    given careful consideration to the risk of the  Appellant  re-offending
    and its impact and he was entitled to reach the conclusions he did  and
    the grounds were consequently nothing more than a disagreement.

 8. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me to consider whether
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by  his  instructed  Counsel  Mr
    Rai.  Mr Rai is extremely  familiar  with  this  matter.   He  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal, he is the  author  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the Upper Tribunal and he has provided  me  with  a  skeleton
    argument.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office Presenting
    Officer Mr Walker.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Walker starts by pointing out that it is necessary to start with the
    Appellant's vagueness as to when he arrived in the UK.  He acknowledges
    that under the Regulations the Appellant had a right to  reside  within
    the UK with his spouse and that  considering  bearing  the  Appellant's
    date of marriage and entry to the UK it was the  Secretary  of  State's
    contention that even at the date of conviction in October 2013 it would
    only be possible to deport the Appellant on "imperative  grounds".   Mr
    Rai contends that the judge has not looked at that.

10. Taking the issues in the Grounds of Appeal in chronological order it is
    the contention of Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  that
    this ground is merely a disagreement when read against  the  sentencing
    remarks of the judge.  In response Mr Rai contends that when addressing
    Regulation 21(4) of the 2006 Regulations the judge has not  had  regard
    to all the relevant factors just the  culpability  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant is likely to reoffend.  He acknowledges the comments made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 40 and 52  and  points  out
    they only take into account one  factor  of  many  and  indeed  in  his
    direction to himself the judge has suggested that  the  judge  has  not
    properly dealt with the law and that  that  is  material.   He  further
    points  out  that  the  Appellant  has   family,   has   been   through
    rehabilitation and that the judge has had no note to the  OASYS  Report
    and that this is highly relevant.  The Secretary of State has submitted
    that there has been no rehabilitation which would  affect  the  judge's
    analysis.  He points  out  that  the  judge  has  only  looked  at  one
    determinative risk and that the judge has placed decisive weight on the
    Appellant minimising his culpability in the initial offence and  places
    significant weight on what he considers  to  be  a  one-sided  view  of
    Vasconcelos (risk  -  rehabilitation)  [2013]  UKUT  000378  (IAC)  and
    therefore that the judge has materially erred in law  in  the  analysis
    required by Regulation 21 in particular (3) and (4).

11. In submission Mr Rai sets out to analyse paragraphs 35 and 40 to 52  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination where he states that  the
    judge has made the following findings:

      a) he has distinguished Vasconcelos from the Appellant's facts on only
         the one point that Vasconcelos had been in the  UK  for  less  then
         five years;

      b) he finds significant features "cast a shadow"  over  the  Appellant
         not committing further offences in the future which go to the heart
         of the serious nature of the offence; and

      c) the Appellant did not plead guilty to the offence;

      d) he contends the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept  the  true
         criminality of what the Appellant had done; and

      e) then finds that he is not satisfied that if  placed  in  a  similar
         situation the Appellant would clearly and instantly recognise  that
         he should walk away from whatever the opportunity is and  not  take
         part of it;

      f) the Appellant still seeks to  minimise  his  past  in  what  is  an
         extremely serious crime;

      g) and then the First-tier Tribunal Judge relied heavily at paragraphs
         37 and 38 of Vasconcelos.

12. He consequently contends that the judge has erred:

      a) By Regulation 21(5) the conduct must represent "a genuine,  present
         and  sufficient  serious  threat."   He  states  the  analysis  and
         findings of the judge do not suggest such a  threat  and  that  the
         findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge "cast a shadow" and  that
         reasons  given  are  based  on  historic  events  all  because  the
         Appellant does not allegedly accept the true criminality  and  that
         does not of itself show that the Appellant poses the requisite risk
         as required by Regulation 21(5).   He  further  contends  that  the
         judge was wrong on reliance on Vasconcelos for the proposition that
         not accepting his criminality represents a genuine  and  sufficient
         serious risk and points out that there were aggravating features in
         Vasconcelos.  Further he points out that Vasconcelos can be  easily
         distinguished on its facts and that the judge has  failed  to  give
         weight to other factors in his analysis such as acceptance that the
         Appellant had been exercising treaty rights for at least ten years;
         that he has family life with his daughter with whom he continues to
         have a subsisting relationship and that he has developed a  private
         life in the UK since 2000 including relationships with  his  sister
         and brother.  He submits that the judge should have had  regard  to
         the Appellant's rehabilitation but he has failed to do so  and  has
         therefore materially erred in law.

      b) Secondly Mr Rai contends that the decision does not comply with the
         principles of proportionality and Article 8 and that the judge  has
         failed to make findings  as  to  whether  the  Appellant  has  been
         resident in the UK for ten years  prior  to  imprisonment  and  the
         Appellant  is  entitled  to  be  considered  against  the  test  of
         imperative  grounds.   He  submits  that  the  Appellant  has  been
         exercising  treaty  rights  since  2000,  being  granted  permanent
         resident in 2005 and that  consequently  he  has  been  in  the  UK
         exercising such right for fourteen years.   He  contends  that  the
         time spent in  prison  should  be  included  when  calculating  the
         relevant period for consideration (Essa  [2013]  UKUT  00316).   He
         contends that a distinction between the family  member  of  an  EEA
         national  and  an  EEA  national  is  contrary  to  the   Directive
         2004/38/EC and that no distinction should be made  between  an  EEA
         national and the family member of an EEA national for  the  purpose
         of expulsion.  He consequently contends there is a  material  error
         of law.

The Law

13.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Relevant Regulations under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006

         15. "21. (1) In this regulation a 'relevant decision' means an EEA
             decision  taken  on  the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
             security or public health.

         (2)  A relevant decision may not be taken to serve economic ends.

         (3)  A relevant decision may not be taken in respect  of  a  person
             with a permanent right of residence under regulation 15 except
             on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

         (4)  A relevant decision may not  be  taken  except  on  imperative
             grounds of public security in respect of an EEA national who-

             (a)  has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous period
                  of at least ten years prior to the relevant decision; or

             (b)  is under the age of 18, unless the relevant  decision  is
                  necessary in his best interests, as provided  for  in  the
                  Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  adopted  by  the
                  General Assembly of the United Nations  on  20th  November
                  1989(1).

         (5)  Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy
             or public security it shall, in addition to complying with the
             preceding  paragraphs  of  this  regulation,   be   taken   in
             accordance with the following principles-

             (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with   the   principle   of
                  proportionality;

             (b)  the decision must be based exclusively  on  the  personal
                  conduct of the person concerned;

             (c)   the  personal  conduct  of  the  person  concerned  must
                  represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
                  threat affecting  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
                  society;

             (d)  matters isolated from the  particulars  of  the  case  or
                  which relate to considerations of  general  prevention  do
                  not justify the decision;

             (e)  a  person's  previous  criminal  convictions  do  not  in
                  themselves justify the decision.

         (6)  Before taking a relevant decision on  the  grounds  of  public
             policy or public security in  relation  to  a  person  who  is
             resident in the United Kingdom the decision  maker  must  take
             account of considerations such as the age,  state  of  health,
             family and economic situation  of  the  person,  the  person's
             length of residence in the United Kingdom, the person's social
             and cultural integration  into  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
             extent of the person's links with his country of origin."

Findings

16. I start by reminding myself that I have only heard  submissions  as  to
    whether there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  I am not rehearing the matter.  The thrust of the
    Appellant's appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has failed  to
    place appropriate weight on the evidence  when  finding  the  Appellant
    remained a serious risk of reoffending  and  has  failed  to  determine
    whether the Appellant is in fact a genuine threat as is required within
    paragraph 21(5) of the Regulations.  I note that  the  evidence  relied
    upon by the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal included the OASYS
    Report with regard to the Appellant being at a low risk,  the  decision
    letter of the  Respondent  analysing  the  risks  of  reoffending,  his
    Islamic studies  and  functional  skills  and  working  part-time,  his
    financial gain and his emotional wellbeing and then acceptance  by  the
    Secretary of State that the Appellant takes full responsibility for his
    crime.

17. However I note that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  relies  upon  the
    Appellant not accepting his part in generating the offence  itself  and
    that nowhere prior to this does the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  explain
    what he means by this where the Appellant after completing  the  victim
    awareness course claims not  to  accept  his  part  in  generating  the
    offence.  Of course the First-tier Tribunal Judge  heard  the  decision
    and is entitled to make findings of fact but I agree with the  detailed
    submissions made by Mr Rai the judge has  given  undue  weight  to  the
    culpability of the offence and the weight given therein in  Vasconcelos
    and has materially heard the matter of law with regard to  the  genuine
    risk that the Appellant has of reoffending when giving consideration to
    that risk.

18. I acknowledge that it is the view of the Secretary of  State  that  the
    submission made on this point merely goes to disagreement  but  if  due
    consideration is given  to  the  factors  within  Vasconcelos  and  the
    failure to consider the OASYS Report I consider it justifies a  finding
    that there is a  material  error  of  law.   Secondly  and  perhaps  on
    stronger grounds than  the  first  finding  it  is  accepted  that  the
    Appellant has a permanent right of residence and Regulation 21(3) makes
    it clear that a relevant decision may not be  taken  against  a  person
    with such rights except on grounds of public policy or public security.
     However in relation to an EEA national a relevant decision  cannot  be
    made except on imperative grounds if the EEA national has been residing
    for a continuous period of at least ten years prior to that decision.

19. I accept the submissions made by Mr Rai on  this  point  and  that  the
    judge materially  erred  in  making  the  distinction  between  an  EEA
    national and a family member of an EEA national  particularly  for  the
    purpose of deportation and that in itself constitutes a material  error
    of law.

20. Finally the judge has failed to  address  the  Article  8  contentions,
    particularly the claim that the Appellant has an entrenched life in the
    UK and has worked for thirteen continuous years and that he has  family
    life and a daughter.  His only analysis regarding these issues is to be
    found at paragraphs 53 to 56 and the  judge  has  failed  to  give  due
    consideration to the  balancing  or  proportionality  aspect  of  those
    factors.  In such circumstances I agree that there is a material  error
    of law therein.

21. In such circumstances the correct approach is to set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and remit the matter back  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Supplementary Issue

22. Mr Walker acknowledges that in the event this matter is  remitted  then
    it would be appropriate for the Secretary  of  State  to  look  at  the
    evidence as to whether it is appropriate that  it  would  lead  to  the
    removal of the Appellant as a family member of an EEA national and  for
    a new Notice of Refusal reason to be produced.

Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 2) That the appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard on
    the first available date 56 days hence at Taylor House with an  ELH  of
    three hours.  It is recorded that the appeal is to be before any First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than Immigration Judge R Callender Smith.

 3)  That  the  Secretary  of  State  give  notice   to   the   Appellant's
    representatives and the Tribunal within 28 days of receipt of the error
    of law notice as to whether the original Notice of  Refusal  is  to  be
    withdrawn.  It is recorded and accepted that if it is to withdrawn then
    the issue will be reconsidered by the Secretary of State and  either  a
    new Notice of Refusal issued or the Notice of Refusal withdrawn in  its
    entirety.   It  is  further  noted  that  in  the   event   that   such
    circumstances apply and a new Notice of  Refusal  is  issued  then  the
    correct approach is to rehear the matter afresh as  an  appeal  against
    that  Notice  of  Refusal.   In  such   circumstances   it   is   still
    inappropriate for  any  appeal  to  be  reheard  by  Immigration  Judge
    Callender Smith.

 4) In the event that the remit to the First-tier Tribunal  is  to  proceed
    then leave is granted to both parties to file and serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of documents at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 5) No interpreter is required.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

