
 [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/47868/2014
                                                               IA/47872/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2016                    |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mrs Mumtaz Sharmela Hanif
                          Miss Aneesa Saleema Hamid
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   No Appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this case there are two respondents, Mumtaz Sharmela Hanif, who  was
    born on 12 February 1973, and her daughter, Aneesa Saleema  Hamid,  who
    was born on 27 May 1993.  They are both citizens of  Guyana.  They  did
    not attend the hearing because  they  made  a  voluntary  departure  to
    Australia on 18 November 2015, having been granted temporary  residence
    in Australia. On 4 January 2016 their solicitor wrote to  the  Tribunal
    saying that they wished to withdraw from their appeal hearing today.  I
    note that they have already departed but as  it  was  the  respondent's
    appeal it was right to continue and resolve the appeal today.

2.   On 2 July 2009 they were issued with residence cards  because  at  that
    point the First Respondent was married to  Tony  Liparoti  but  it  was
    subsequently discovered  that  she  had  not  been  divorced  from  her
    previous husband, Faizan Khan, in Guyana. Therefore, this marriage  was
    dissolved by the High Court in the United Kingdom.  On 30  August  2014
    the First Respondent married David Morin, who is a French national, and
    on  12  September  2014  she  applied  for  residence  cards,  as   his
    dependents, on behalf of herself and the Second Respondent.

3.   The Appellant refused to grant them  residence  cards  on  11  November
    2014 and they both appealed on 26 November 2014.  On 26 May 2015 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman allowed both their  appeals.   However,  in
    paragraph 22 of his decision he did  not  reach  any  conclusion  about
    whether or not the First Respondent had been legally divorced from  her
    previous husband, Faizan Khan, when she married David  Morin.   Instead
    he allowed  her  appeal  on  the  basis  that  she  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with David Morin.

4.   On 3 June 2015 the Appellant appealed submitting that there had been  a
    material  misdirection  of  law  in  the  first-tier  tribunal  judge's
    decision.  In relation to the Second Respondent  she  also  noted  that
    there was no provision in Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations  for  the
    daughter of a person in a durable relationship, to  be  treated  as  an
    extended family member  of  an  EEA  national  and  be  entitled  to  a
    residence card.

5.   The Appellant also asserted  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wiseman
    should not have been allowed the First  Respondent's  appeal  outright.
    She argued that in  cases  where  reliance  was  placed  on  a  durable
    relationship established within the United Kingdom,  the  Secretary  of
    State should have had the opportunity to exercise her discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the Regulations and consider  whether  or  not  she
    wished to grant a residence cards.

6.   She relied upon the case of Ihemedu (OFMs  -  meaning)  Nigeria  [2011]
    UKUT 00340 (IAC) which held that the issue of a residence card to other
    family members was a matter of discretion and that Section 17(4) should
    be considered.  The Appellant submitted that the proper procedure would
    have been for First-tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman  to  allow  the  appeal
    insofar as it was not in accordance with the law and let the  Secretary
    of State consider whether to exercise her discretion.

7.   I also find that there was no basis upon which  the  Second  Respondent
    was entitled to a residence card  as  the  daughter  of  someone  in  a
    durable relationship.

8.   For both these reasons I find that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did
    make errors of law in his decision.



Notice of Decision

9.   I allow the Secretary of State for the Home Department's appeal.

10.  I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wiseman.

11.  I do not remit the Respondent's appeals to the First-tier  Tribunal  as
    the Respondents have left the United Kingdom.

12.  If either party has any submissions to make in relation  to  (11)  they
    should make representations to me within 21 days  of  service  of  this
    decision.


Signed   Date 2 February 2016

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

