
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/47222/2014

                                                   IA/47223/2014

                                                   IA/47224/2014

                                                   IA/47225/2014

                                                    IA/47226/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 February 2016                           |On 17 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE H J E LATTER


                                   Between

                                     AB
                                     PKB
                                     HB
                                   PriKOB
                                   PryKOB
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Harris, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer.




                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Henderson) dismissing their  appeals  against  the
    respondent's decisions  dated  14  November  2014  refusing  the  their
    applications for leave to remain on human rights grounds.

Background

2.   The appellants are all citizens of Nigeria. The  first  appellant  born
    on 13 February 1971 is the mother of the  second  to  fifth  appellants
    born respectively on 22 July 2000 in Nigeria, 6 November  2005  in  the
    UK, 18 August 2001 in Nigeria and 7 April 2012 in the UK. The  children
    all have the same father, the first appellant's husband also a Nigerian
    citizen.

3.   The first appellant, the second and fourth appellants arrived  together
    in the UK on 7 October 2005 as visitors with leave to remain in until 7
    April 2006. The third appellant was born in November 2005 a month after
    their arrival. Further applications for leave to be granted outside the
    Immigration Rules were refused on 11 May 2006 and 11 November 2011.  On
    10 November 2011 the first  and  fourth  appellants  were  served  with
    removal papers. The fifth appellant was born in the UK  in  April  2012
    and on 27 September 2012 a further application was made  for  leave  to
    remain on human rights grounds. This was refused on 25  September  2013
    and an appeal subsequently dismissed. A further application was made on
    the basis of family and private life and this was refused on 27 October
    2014. The decision was  reconsidered  but  the  refusal  of  leave  was
    maintained on 14 November 2014.

4.   It was the respondent's view that  it  was  not  unreasonable  for  the
    children to leave the UK with their mother  and  younger  sister  as  a
    family unit. The second and fourth appellants had been born in  Nigeria
    and the first appellant had spent the majority of her  life  there  and
    would be able to assist the children adapt  to  Nigerian  culture.  The
    respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  could  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules and having considered her duties  under  s.55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 found  that  there
    were no exceptional circumstances which would warrant consideration  of
    a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge

5.   The judge heard oral evidence from the  first  appellant  and  she  had
    witness  statements  from  the  second,  third  and  fourth  appellants
    together with a bundle  of  documents  including  medical  reports  and
    letters  from  the  children's  schools.  The  judge  found  the  first
    appellant to be a credible witness overall on most points and  although
    some of the evidence she gave lacked plausibility, she found no  reason
    to doubt her credibility generally. Her evidence about her marriage was
    that it was a turbulent relationship. Her husband had initially  helped
    to support her and the children and she had lived with him sometime  in
    2009 when he was in the UK studying for his Master's degree  [27].  She
    had last seen him in June or July 2011 when she was pregnant  with  the
    fifth appellant. She had received a letter from her  husband's  lawyers
    asking for a divorce but she had not replied because she had heard that
    he was living with another woman in Nigeria and she had not  wanted  to
    co-operate with the divorce [28].

6.   The first appellant confirmed that she and the children  were  in  good
    health, although she herself was suffering from  stress  and  had  been
    losing her hair. The witness  statements  from  the  second  to  fourth
    appellants said that they were well-established at  their  schools  and
    had lots of friends. They had no ties to Nigeria, they loved living  in
    the UK and were afraid of returning to Nigeria because  of  the  things
    they had heard about that country.

7.   The judge found that the first appellant had not shown that there  were
    any "very significant obstacles" to prevent her from  integrating  into
    Nigeria. She was well educated, had previously run a successful  retail
    business and had lived in Nigeria for  most  of  her  adult  life.  She
    considered the test relating to the children under  appendix  FM  EX.1.
    She noted that the children did not have any health issues which  would
    make it unreasonable for them to leave. They all did well at school and
    had settled well into life in the UK. She took note of what  they  said
    in their witness statements that they were apprehensive about going  to
    live in Nigeria because of negative  things  they  had  heard  of  that
    country but that was not enough to make it is unreasonable for them  to
    leave the UK [39].

8.   The judge went on  to  consider  article  8  taking  into  account  the
    provisions of s.117B. She also considered the decision in EA (article 8-
    best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT  315.  She  concluded  her
    decision as follows at [46]:

         "The first appellant's evidence was essentially that  she  believed
        it was best for her children to live and be educated in the UK  and
        that she had done all she could to ensure this. Whilst I understand
        that as a  mother  she  wants  what  is  most  beneficial  for  her
        children, that is not the test I am required to apply. On  applying
        the factors set out in Zoumbas, I find that the best  interests  of
        the children in this case must be to remain with their  mother  and
        siblings; those best interests are not at odds with the  assessment
        that the removal of  their  mother  would  be  proportionate  under
        article 8 (2). I, therefore, find  that  any  interference  by  the
        respondent's decisions with the appellants' rights under article  8
        ECHR, is proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought  to  be
        achieved."

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

9.   In the grounds it is argued that the judge misdirected herself in  law,
    made no adequate findings, failed to give adequate reasons,  failed  to
    take relevant matters into consideration and  reached  an  unreasonable
    conclusion. It is argued that a number of relevant  factors  were  left
    out of  account  in  assessing  whether  there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to the family returning to Nigeria particularly in the  light
    of the fact that the first appellant had been found to  be  a  credible
    witness. It is further argued the judge  failed  properly  to  consider
    issues under s.55 and generally had acted contrary to the principle  of
    natural justice by making a decision based on one side of the story.

10.  Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    granted by the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Bruce) on the basis that  there  was
    an arguable concern about the tribunal's approach to para  276  ADE  of
    the Rules as it could be inferred that the children had advanced  their
    own cases on their private lives. Further, the question of  whether  it
    was reasonable for the children to leave after more  than  seven  years
    residence had only been assessed through the prism of EX.1 and  it  was
    arguable that in  taking  this  approach  the  relevant  case  law  and
    guidance was obscured and that the Tribunal did not ask itself  whether
    there were "strong reasons" for these children now to be refused leave.

11.  Mr Harris focused his submissions on whether  the  judge  had  properly
    considered para 276 ADE in so far as the children were  concerned.  She
    had not properly analysed their private life in the UK, so  he  argued,
    failing to give proper  weight  to  their  ties  established  by  their
    lengthy presence in the UK or to  give  proper  weight  to  their  best
    interests. Further, she had  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were
    strong reasons justifying their removal with their  mother.  The  judge
    had commented at  [44]  that  the  s.117  factors  were  fairly  evenly
    balanced. In such circumstances he submitted that it was  difficult  to
    see why there were strong reasons justifying removal.

12.  Mr Kotas submitted that in substance the  grounds  raised  two  issues,
    whether para 276 ADE had  been  properly  considered  and  whether  the
    question of reasonableness had been properly assessed in the  light  of
    the children's best interests. He submitted that the judge had properly
    directed herself and reached findings properly open  to  her.  She  had
    made clear findings on credibility taking into account  the  children's
    ages and their evidence. She was entitled to note that  the  children's
    witness statements were very similarly drafted. This was a  case  where
    further leave to remain had been refused  on  a  number  of  occasions.
    There was no proper basis, so he submitted, for  interfering  with  the
    judge's decision.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

13.  I must consider whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law such  that
    its decision should be set aside. The first main  argument  is  whether
    the judge properly considered the private  lives  of  the  children  as
    distinct from their family life with their mother. The judge set out in
    [38] why she was not satisfied that the first  appellant  was  able  to
    meet the requirements of para 276 ADE(1)(vi) but she did not  expressly
    consider the children under sub-para (iv)  which  relates  to  children
    under the age of 18 who have lived continuously in the UK for at  least
    7 years and it would not be reasonable to expect them to leave the  UK.
    It is not clear whether or not that submission was made  to  the  judge
    but it is clear that she considered the issue  of  reasonableness  when
    looking at the position under Appendix FM EX.1. I am not satisfied that
    there is any difference in the test set out in that  provision  or  for
    that matter as set out in s.177B (6), where again the issue is  whether
    it is reasonable for a child to be expected to leave the UK.

14. I am satisfied that on the evidence before her the  judge  was  entitled
    to find that it had not been shown that it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect the children to leave the UK. The judge was aware of their  ages
    and the fact that they were at school in the UK. She took into  account
    their witness statements, which are expressed in  similar  and  general
    terms. She also took into account the guidance in EA and in  particular
    the comment  that,  absent  other  factors,  a  period  of  substantial
    residence as a child may become a weighty  consideration  in  balancing
    the competing factors. When granting permission  to  appeal  UTJ  Bruce
    identified as arguable that the issue of whether it was reasonable  for
    the children to leave the UK after more than seven years residence  had
    only been assessed through the prism of EX.1  and  without  considering
    whether there were "strong reasons" for the children now to be  refused
    leave.

15.  This is a reference to the  guidance  in  the  Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions, November 2014 which refers at 11.2.4 to the fact that the
    longer a child has resided in the UK, the more the balance  will  begin
    to swing in terms of it being unreasonable to expect the child to leave
    the UK, and strong reasons will be required in order to refuse  a  case
    with continuous UK residence of more than seven years. It is not  clear
    whether this IDI was referred to at the hearing but, nonetheless, I  am
    satisfied that the judge was fully aware that the length  of  residence
    was an important factor and there is no reason to believe that this was
    left out of account. The fact  that  the  judge  used  the  phraseology
    "weighty consideration" in [43] indicates that she was well aware  that
    in cases where children had lengthy residence, strong reasons would  be
    required. I am not satisfied that the judge left  out  of  account  the
    length of  the  children's  residence  or  erred  in  her  approach  to
    assessing the issue of reasonableness.

16.  It is also clear that the judge properly took  into  account  the  best
    interests of the children as a primary consideration. She set  out  the
    guidance from the Supreme Court in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 and there  is
    no reason to believe that she did not take it properly into account. In
    the grounds it is argued that having found the first  appellant  to  be
    credible, the judge failed to give  proper  weight  to  the  impact  on
    removal to  Nigeria  when  assessing  whether  there  were  significant
    obstacles to integrating on return. However, whilst the judge  accepted
    the first appellant's general credibility she did find that some of the
    evidence she gave lacked plausibility  [24].  There  is  no  reason  to
    believe that the judge left any relevant matters out  of  account  when
    considering the impact of a return to Nigeria.

17.  In substance, the grounds challenge the weight given by  the  judge  to
    the various factors identified in her decision. I am satisfied that she
    reached findings and conclusions properly open to her for  the  reasons
    she gave. It was  for  her  to  balance  the  importance  of  effective
    immigration  control,  particularly  in  a  case  where  none  of   the
    appellants had had leave to remain  since  April  2006  and  subsequent
    applications had been unsuccessful, with the interference the  decision
    to remove would have  on  the  private  and  family  life  of  all  the
    appellants. The comment that  the  factors  under  s.117  were  equally
    balanced does not  indicate  any  error  of  approach.  The  judge  was
    entitled to take into account the other considerations set out in [44]-
    [46] including the fact that the family would be returning  as  a  unit
    and to conclude that the respondent's decisions were  proportionate  to
    the legitimate public end sought to be  achieved.   In  summary,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge reached findings and conclusions properly open
    to her for the reasons she gave.

Decision

18.  For these reasons I am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law and its decision stands. An anonymity order  was  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal and no application has been  made  to  vary  or
    discharge that order.





Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter                                          Date: 1 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


















