
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47945/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th May 2016                         |On 1st June 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                         mr kehinde monsuru balogun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria who applied for leave to  remain
    here on the basis of his family and private life in the United  Kingdom
    and his appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Wylie  in  a
    decision promulgated on 21st October 2015.

 2. The judge noted that the Appellant and his wife  married  in  2002  and
    that they had three children, one of whom was a British citizen  namely
    [S] born on [ ] 2005.  The judge found that it would  be  possible  for
    the child to remain in the United Kingdom with extended family  members
    who are British citizens who had leave to remain.  The  paternal  uncle
    had given evidence that it would be better for him to  stay  with  them
    here.  The judge concluded that it was in the  best  interests  of  all
    three children that they lived in the family unit with each  other  and
    their parents and if the parents felt that there will be benefits  such
    as to outweigh this if the eldest child remained in the United  Kingdom
    with his uncle or other family members that was a matter for them.

 3. Grounds of application were lodged.  It was said that the Appellant was
    the primary carer of his oldest child and yet in  the  judge's  finding
    that [S] could remain with extended family members  was  not  something
    that was ever put to the Appellant or any of the witnesses  during  the
    hearing.  Secondly the judge's approach was contrary to the clear dicta
    of the Court of Justice in Ruiz Zambrano v ONEM (Case  C-34/09)  (CJEU)
    (8th March 2011).  Thirdly the judge's own finding clearly  highlighted
    factors that it would make it unreasonable to expect  [S]  to  move  to
    Nigeria.     Fourthly   the   judge's   consideration   of    paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iv) was incomplete  - reference was made to Sanade and Others
    (British children  -  Zambrano  -  Dereci)  [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC).
    Fifthly there were very significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  and
    his wife's integration in Nigeria; sixthly the judge's consideration of
    Article 8 was flawed and finally the judge had failed  to  make  proper
    findings in relation to the reasonableness of the Appellant's  children
    being expected to go and live in Nigeria.

 4. Permission to appeal was duly granted.

 5. A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the Secretary of State  submitting  that
    the judge provided  sustainable  reasons  including  that  the  British
    national child could remain here with the extended family members.  The
    nationality of the child  was  not  a  trump  card  and  the  place  of
    residence would be the  choice  of  the  child's  parents  but  in  the
    circumstances was a very real viable carer alternative.

 6. Thus the appeal came before me on the above date.

 7. For the Appellant Mr Hawkin relied on  the  terms  of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  The child [S] was a British citizen.  There  was  considerable
    well-established case law that indicated it would not be reasonable  to
    send the child to Nigeria and Section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  was
    primary legislation.  The public interest did not require her  removal.
    I was referred to PD and Others (Article 8 - conjoined  family  claims)
    Sri Lanka [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) where it was said  that  it  was  the
    obligation of a judge to firstly apply the Immigration  Rules  to  each
    individual applicant and if appropriate then consider Article 8 outside
    the Rules.  Had the judge done that then the judge would have seen that
    the child was a British national who could not be returned  to  Nigeria
    and, as such, the appeal could only go one way.  So  material  was  the
    error that the appeal should simply be allowed outright.   Furthermore,
    the judge had engaged in speculation by making a  "massive"  procedural
    error in relying on the account of the uncle that he could  look  after
    the child without that matter being put to the Appellant or any of  the
    witnesses.

 8. For the Secretary of State Mr Walker relied on the terms of the Section
    24 notice.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

10. It has often been said that although nationality is not a "trump  card"
    it is of particular importance in assessing the best interests  of  any
    child and as Mr Hawkin indicated it is trite law that  that  a  British
    national child cannot be removed. To conclude that the child can simply
    follow their parent to the parent's country of nationality ignores  the
    fact that the child would be deprived of the country of their  own  and
    their citizenship and all the  advantages  that  this  entails.   There
    would be a social and linguistic disruption of their childhood as  well
    as a  loss  of  their  homeland,  including  the  loss  of  educational
    opportunities.  There is an intrinsic importance of citizenship.

11. The best interests of the child are a primary consideration which means
    they must be considered first.  In this case we  have  the  benefit  of
    primary legislation in terms of Section 117B(6) of the 2002  Act  which
    indicates that removal of this Appellant is not required where it would
    not be reasonable  for  the  child  to  go  to  Nigeria.   Accordingly,
    contrary to the judge's decision, the terms  of  the  legislation  were
    very much in favour of the Appellant remaining  here  under  Article  8
    ECHR.  It would plainly be wrong to separate this family.  No  argument
    to the contrary was suggested and for [S] to enjoy the benefits of  her
    nationality she needs the Appellant and her family to be with her.

12. In passing it has to be said the judge also fell into material error in
    concluding that the British citizen child [S]  could  remain  with  her
    uncle and the extended family.   There  was  next  to  no  evidence  to
    justify such a conclusion.  The uncle's  remarks  go  no  further  than
    showing the closeness of a family as a family unit.   In  the  unlikely
    event that this was a real issue before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    judge would have had to have recalled the witnesses,  particularly  the
    Appellant, to put  the  issue  on  a  formal  footing.   No  doubt  the
    Appellant would be aghast to find that the judge was using kind remarks
    from his brother to justify separation of the family.

13. However, for the reasons stated, it is clear that the  judge  erred  in
    law in concluding that the child [S] could either be removed to Nigeria
    or remain here with the Appellant's  brother.   Whether  the  Appellant
    would face significant obstacles to the reintegration of  him  and  his
    wife in Nigeria was not the  point  -  the  Appellant  is  entitled  to
    succeed in this appeal because he should  not  be  separated  from  his
    daughter [S] who is entitled to stay here and cannot be removed.







Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision.

16. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

No anonymity direction is required or is made.






Signed                              Date 1st June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
