
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47629/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                   |                          Decision &       |
|                                   |Reasons Promulgated                        |
|On 10 December 2015                |                          On 20 January    |
|                                   |2016                                       |
|                                   |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                 SUMIT KUMAR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Caskie, instructed by Maguire Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Sumit Kumar, was born on 24 August 1982 and  is  a  male
    citizen of India.  By a decision dated 30 November 2014, the respondent
    resolved that the appellant's removal to India would not breach Article
    8 ECHR.  The appellant appealed against that decision to the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Debra Clapham) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  9
    March 2015, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 7 August 2006 on a business
    visitor visa.  At the expiry of that visa, he did not return to  India.
    On 15 January 2013, the appellant was served with a form  IS151A.   The
    appellant has a daughter (E) who is under the age of 18 years  and  who
    the judge [84] was prepared  to  accept  is  a  British  citizen.   The
    appellant has contact with E at a  contact  centre.   There  have  been
    problems between the appellant and E's mother, the  appellant's  former
    partner.  The appellant currently has a relationship with another woman
    but he does not live with her.  That woman has a son and the  appellant
    claims that he stays with his current partner and her son 2-3 times per
    week at the home of a third party [31].

 3. The parties are agreed that the appellant was not entitled to remain in
    the United Kingdom under the provisions of HC  395  (as  amended);  his
    application to the respondent and  his  subsequent  appeals  are  based
    entirely  upon  Article  8  ECHR.    Judge   Clapham   considered   the
    relationships which the appellant has with his current partner, her son
    and his own child (E) and concluded that the appellant's  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would not be disproportionate.

 4. There are two  grounds  of  appeal.   Ground  1  concerns  the  judge's
    comments at [84]:

         84.   In  relation  to  [the  appellant's]  relationship  with  his
             daughter E it is probably fair to argue that the daughter is a
             British citizen.  Whilst I saw no evidence of this per se I am
             prepared to take the evidence of the appellant at  face  value
             in this regard.  I have to say though that I find  it  curious
             that the contact difficulties with E began at  the  time  when
             removal looked likely.  Even if I am wrong  in  this  and  the
             attempt to initiate contact was genuine I saw no  evidence  to
             show that it is in the best interests of E for contact  to  be
             maintained or indeed increased.  The evidence provided by  the
             positive  contact  centre  certainly  falls  short  of  making
             assertions and it in fact only deals with the  contact  as  it
             took place.

 5. The appellant argues that the judge seems to infer that the attempt  to
    initiate contact had not been a genuine one.  The appellant argues that
    it is not a finding which is clear or, in any event, supported  by  the
    evidence.  Secondly, the appellant argues that family  ties  should  be
    developed, where possible, notwithstanding family breakdown.  There was
    no evidence for the judge's finding that it was in the  best  interests
    of E for contact not to be increased.

 6. Taking the last point first, the judge considered the  contact  between
    the appellant and E on the basis  of  the  evidence  before  her.   Her
    observation that there was "no evidence" which would show that  it  was
    in the best interests of E for contact to be  maintained  or  increased
    was available to the judge given that the only independent evidence she
    had regarding contact did no more than to state that it took place  and
    the frequency of its occurrence.  I agree, however,  that  the  judge's
    reasoning at [84] is somewhat obscure.  The judge's statement that  she
    found it "curious" that contact difficulties with E  began  at  a  time
    when removal looked likely does not, in my opinion, amount to  a  clear
    finding of fact.  Indeed, it  is  not  clear  whether  the  appellant's
    attempts to have contact with E were related to his possible removal or
    the "difficulties" in contact that occurred at that time.  The  judge's
    comments at [84] become more problematic in the  light  of  the  second
    ground  of  appeal.   This  ground  invokes  Section  117B(6)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended):



    (6) In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
    public interest does not require the person's removal where-

    (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with
a qualifying child, and

    (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
Kingdom.





 7. As Ground 2 points out, the judge has  made  no  reference  at  all  to
    Section 117 in her decision.  Section  117A(2)  compels  any  court  or
    Tribunal "in all cases" to consider Section 117B.  Mr Caskie,  for  the
    appellant, argued that Section 117B(6) was of relevance in the  instant
    case given that the appellant was not liable to deportation.   It  was,
    Mr Caskie submitted, in the nature of  a  "trump  card"  because  there
    would be no public interest in the appellant's removal  given  that  he
    had a "genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying
    child."  "Qualifying child" in this context means a person who is under
    the age of 18 and who is a British citizen or  who  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more  (Section
    117D(1)).  Mr McVeety, for the respondent, submitted that the appellant
    could not succeed by the application of  Section  117B(6)  because  (i)
    there had been no need for the judge to go beyond the application of HC
    395 in this instance  and  to  consider  Article  8  ECHR  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and; (ii) there was no evidence  that  the  appellant
    had a genuine or subsisting parental relationship with E.

 8. I do not agree with the first of the submissions of Mr McVeety.   Given
    that the appellant had sought to remain in the United Kingdom not under
    the Immigration Rules (which he  accepts  he  cannot  satisfy)  but  by
    reference to Article 8 ECHR and given also that  Section  117B  applies
    "in all cases" it would appear that the section is relevant  here.   As
    regards Mr McVeety's other submission, that there was no evidence of  a
    genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship,  I  return  again  to
    consider the problems raised by the judge's observations at [84].   The
    judge should have considered Section 117B(6) and, before applying  that
    section, she should have made clear  and  unequivocal  findings  as  to
    whether there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    between the appellant and E.  She did not make any such finding  either
    at [84] or elsewhere in her decision.  The judge has  cast  doubt  upon
    the genuineness of the relationship  and  has  commented  upon  whether
    continued or increased contact may be in E's best interests but she has
    not determined whether, at the date of the hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, a genuine and subsisting relationship actually  existed.   If
    it did and continues to exist, then Mr Caskie  may  well  be  right  in
    arguing that there is no  public  interest  requiring  the  appellant's
    removal.  However, it will be necessary for there to be  further  fact-
    finding before that question may be answered.  I find that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal erred in law such that  its  decision  falls  to  be  set
    aside.  The Tribunal failed to make clear  findings  of  fact  and  has
    failed to apply relevant  statutory  provisions.   A  new  fact-finding
    exercise is required  and  this  exercise  is  better  conducted  by  a
    differently-constituted First-tier Tribunal than by the Upper Tribunal.
    When it has made clear findings as regards the existence and nature  of
    any relationship between the appellant and the  child,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal will need to apply the relevant statutory provisions.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  9  March
2015 is set aside.  The appeal is returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  (not
Judge Debra Clapham) for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 1 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



