
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/47725/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 February 2016                    |   On 7 April 2016                   |
|Prepared 15 February 2016              |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                SANDEEP SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, Counsel, instructed by Maalik & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a  national  of  India,  date  of  birth  14  May  1989,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision made on  13  November  2014,
    incorrectly referred to in the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Woolf (the judge)  of  24  May  2014,  to  refuse  an  application  for
    variation of leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student under the PBS  system.



2.   The basis of the  Respondent's  refusal  was  that  the  Appellant,  as
    applicant, had submitted with an application, dated 24 May 2014, a  CAS
    registration number E4G4QG8B19FO09  which  had  been  assigned  by  the
    Newcastle Academy of Business and Technology on 23 May 2014.  There was
    unsurprisingly, a significant  delay  before  the  Secretary  of  State
    determined the application.  On the date of determination, 13  November
    2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  recorded  that  the  applicant's  CAS
    reference as above, had been withdrawn by the Sponsor and as  such  the
    Appellant failed to  meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph  117(b)  of
    Appendix A of the immigration rules (the Rules).  It followed therefore
    that he was not in possession of a valid CAS.  Further,  the  Secretary
    of State confirmed that on the same date, 13 November 2014, the college
    was no longer registered as an approved Tier 4 Sponsor.  That  was  due
    to the fact that the college had ceased to be on the Tier 4 sponsorship
    register at  some  date,  unstated:  Accordingly  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 116(e) of Appendix A could not stand.

3.   The grounds of appeal against that decision simply  asserted  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with Immigration Rules or in a court  of
    law and was incompatible with the European Convention on Human  Rights.
    Those grounds settled by UK Legal and Immigration  sought  to  have  an
    oral hearing of the appeal.  For reasons that are simply  not  provided
    the Appellant and representatives did not attend the hearing on 2  June
    2015 and there was no explanation for their  absence.   The  Respondent
    was not represented because it was a "float  case"  and  no  Presenting
    Officer had been  allocated.  The Respondent had  requested  a  hearing
    and it does not appear that in those circumstances  the  judge  was  in
    error in proceeding in the absence of the parties.

4.   It is clear from the case file that no documents were submitted to  the
    judge to support the claims that the Appellant had been unaware of  the
    withdrawal of the CAS letter and indeed no evidence advanced confirming
    that the Appellant had been unaware of  the  college's  status  on  the
    register being, at some unspecified date, removed.   It was  said  that
    with the Respondent's decision was the first  time  the  Appellant  had
    learned of what had happened to his application.
5.   The sole ground of appeal before me  was  essentially  that  there  has
    been unfairness and as the grounds stated in its  subsequent  form  the
    Sponsor withdrew  the  Appellant's  CAS  unlawfully  and  due  to  some
    irregularities the Sponsor's licence was  later  revoked  by  the  Home
    Office.   The  Appellant  claimed  to  be  victimised  by  the  Sponsor
    institution which is currently not on the Tier 4 Sponsor lists.

6.   The grounds went on to plead "the Respondent's act is also against  the
    common-law duty of fairness. The Appellant was never contacted  by  the
    Respondent before making the decision and never given an opportunity to
    vary the application".  There was then reference to the  familiar  case
    of Patel (Revocation of sponsor licence - fairness) India  [2011]  UKUT
    00210 (IAC).  There was also a reference to the case of Naved  (Student
    - fairness - notice of points) Pakistan [2012].

7.   The judge had, it would seem,  some  documents  provided  by  UK  Visas
    including the application but no evidence concerning the  CAS  and  the
    particulars of it: Save to say that the appeal summary sheet  provided,
    simply said the CAS has been marked as withdrawn and there was  nothing
    further by way of information provided.

8.   The judge looking at this matter concluded on  both  grounds  that  the
    refusal was justified:  First, because there was no CAS, it having been
    withdrawn at some earlier stage,; and Secondly, because the  college no
    longer existed.

9.   It seemed to me that if  the  CAS  had  not  been  withdrawn  then  the
    Appellant's position before the judge would have been stronger  because
    the case of  Patel  would  have  indicated  the  possibilities  of  the
    Appellant having the opportunity, within a limited period, to  find  an
    alternative college.  This, however, was not the case here.

10.  While it is not  on  all  fours  it  is,  it  seems  to  me,  a  proper
    reflection of the legal position, that as found  in  the  case  of   EK
    (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517, where the absence of  a  valid  CAS
    was fatal to the application being permitted by the Secretary of State.
    When the CAS was withdrawn is not known to the Appellant and why it was
    withdrawn is not known to the Appellant. It was submitted by  Mr  Tufan
    in these circumstances the  unfair  outcome  was  the  conduct  of  the
    college and not of the Secretary of State.  If,  as  I  say,  the  only
    basis of refusal had been the later withdrawal of registration  in  the
    Tier 4 Sponsors list then that could have been unfairness as recognised
    arguably in the case law: It was conduct of the college that  has  been
    the  basis of this Appellant's downfall.

11.  Accordingly I do not find  the  Original  Tribunal's  reasons,  however
    brief they may be, largely caused by the absence  of  bundles  and  the
    absence of any statement or explanation of the circumstances  in  which
    these matters came to be, left the judge with no option but to conclude
    that the appeal could not succeed.

12.  In the circumstances, whilst Mr Makol submitted that the issue  of  the
    withdrawal of the CAS letter was of no moment and the case  essentially
    turned on the lack of opportunity being given following the  revocation
    of the Tier 4 Sponsor's licence I do not accept that he is  right.   Mr
    Makol did not accept the case of EK was  rightly  decided  nor  that  I
    should follow it.  I think he recognised that I am on the  face  of  it
    entitled to have regard to what the court has  said  on  the  issue  of
    circumstances  where  there  was  no  demonstrable  unfairness  by  the
    Secretary of State.   I assume for the purposes of  his  argument  that
    the Appellant was an innocent victim of  others  and  that  he  had  no
    responsibility for the withdrawal of the  CAS letter  and  nor  did  he
    have responsibility for the Tier 4 Sponsor's licence being revoked  but
    I make no findings on these points.

13.  I cannot on the information before me wholly  exclude  the  Appellant's
    responsibility for the withdrawal of the CAS or circumstances that  may
    have borne on that  issue  simply   because  the  Appellant's  previous
    representatives in the full knowledge of the decision failed apparently
    to write to UKBA or the visa agency, to establish on what basis the CAS
    letter  had  been  withdrawn,  when  it  was  withdrawn  or  any  other
    explanation for its withdrawal.

14.  In  those  circumstances  it  seemed  to  me  the  Original  Tribunal's
    decision stands and the grounds do not disclose an error of law.
15.  For the avoidance of doubt it was confirmed to me that issues  relating
    to Article 8 and any claim being made hereunder were not being  pursued
    in this appeal for the very good reason that Mr Makol gave, namely that
    it has no substance because if the Appellant  failed  under  the  Rules
    there was nothing advanced before the judge to suggest that  there  was
    any basis to remain reliant on Article 8 ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


