
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47724/2013
                                                               IA/47726/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th July 2014                               |On 17th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                   MM & KS
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel instructed by Curtis Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is a citizen of Jamaica and is the  mother  of  the
    second appellant, who is a minor and a citizen  of  Jamaica.  As  these
    proceedings directly concern the interests and welfare of  a  child,  I
    consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellants against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge A S Simpson promulgated on 7th May 2014.  The judge
    dismissed the appeal of the appellants against  the  decisions  of  the
    respondent dated 2 October 2013 to remove each of them from the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. By decision of the 9th June 2014 First  -tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kimnell
    granted permission to appeal. In  granting  permission  to  appeal  the
    Judge Kimnell gave permission in the following terms:-

        2 It is arguable that the First Tier Tribunal Judge, though dealing
        with the issues of education, health,  and  societal  attitudes  in
        Jamaica, did not engage  with  the  report  from  a  Social  Worker
        regarding the impact of removal on the second appellant's emotional
        and behavioural well-being. The report  strongly  states  that  the
        interests of the second appellant, a child, are paramount. They are
        not.  As  the  Judge  correctly  recorded,  they  are   a   primary
        consideration. But there were passages in  the  report  concerning,
        for example, strong ties with a family network in the UK which have
        not been taken into account when assessing proportionality.

 4. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom in March 2000 on a visit
    visa with leave valid until September 2000. In  April  2000  the  first
    appellant claimed asylum. This claim was refused.  Her  appeal  against
    the consequent immigration decision was dismissed on 29 April 2002. The
    first appellant did not leave the United Kingdom.

 5. It appears that the first appellant for a period  of  time  was  living
    with her sister. It is to be noted however that the  appellant  appears
    to have a mother and sister in Jamaica and that she also has a brother,
    although she states that she is not in contact with that brother.

 6. Within the independent social worker's report there is reference to the
    fact that the appellant initially lived in London. It then  notes  that
    she had a period of imprisonment in 2001 for 12 months  for  possession
    of cocaine. That is her only criminal offence. It is suggested that  on
    release from prison the first appellant came  to  live  in  Manchester.
    There is then  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  came  to
    Manchester and began to live with her sister in 2010. The problem  with
    regard to that is that there appears to be a gap  from  about  2002  to
    2010 for which the circumstances of the  first  appellant  are  largely
    unexplained. There is no explanation as to who the appellant was living
    with during that period of time in Manchester.

 7. In 2006 the first appellant gave birth to  the  second  appellant.  The
    Independent Social Workers report states that the first  appellant  was
    in a relationship that lasted about a year but  which  ended  following
    the birth of the second appellant. It appears that the  father  of  the
    second appellant was already married.

 8. In the report there are specific date is given for the appellant coming
    to live in Manchester there is a specific year given for her commencing
    to live with her sister, 2010. In paragraph 1.8 of that report there is
    reference to the fact that the  first  and  second  appellant  are  now
    living in a quiet suburb of Manchester with  family  members  in  close
    proximity.

 9.  The  judge  has  specifically  considered  what  family  members   the
    appellants have in the United  Kingdom.  Within  paragraph  16  of  the
    determination it is noted that the family members include  the  sister,
    the sister's children and some cousins. The judge has also specifically
    considered the significance  of  those  family  relationships  and  the
    impact upon the appellants  of  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  in
    paragraph 18 of the determination.

10. In coming to a decision in this  case  the  judge  has  approached  the
    issues raised by the appellants dealing with each in  turn.  The  judge
    has specifically considered the prospects for the appellants  on  being
    returned  to  Jamaica.  The  judge  has  specifically  considered   the
    educational needs of the child and was satisfied in paragraph 29 of the
    determination that the second appellant's education could  continue  in
    Jamaica. The judge has gone on to consider in paragraph 30 the  medical
    condition of the child. In considering the medical condition the  judge
    has given valid reasons  for  concluding  that  there  was  no  medical
    treatment immediately needed in respect of the second appellant as  her
    umbilical hernia had been repaired and dealt  with.  No  other  medical
    problems had been identified.

11.  With  regard  to  family  relationships  the  judge  has  specifically
    considered in paragraph 30 that the  second  appellant  is  still  very
    young and whilst there is some family life in the  United  Kingdom  she
    notes that that is based on her relationship with the aunt and cousins.
    The primary relationship of the second appellant has  with  her  mother
    the first appellant. It is clear therefore that the judge has  in  fact
    taken into account the position of the relationship of  the  appellants
    in the United Kingdom with her aunt and  cousins  as  is  evident  from
    paragraph 30.

12. The judge has clearly gone on to consider otherwise  the  circumstances
    that would face the appellants were they to be returned to Jamaica.

13. The judge has probably considered the family ties. The judge  was  well
    aware of the same and has taken them into  account  in  coming  to  the
    conclusion that she did. The judge was entitled to conclude that as the
    first appellant was to be removed from the United Kingdom it was  clear
    that the best interests of the child were to be with her mother. As the
    mother had remained here illegally since 2001 despite having her appeal
    dismissed, the judge was satisfied  that,  as  the  mother  was  to  be
    removed from the United Kingdom, the best interests of the  child  were
    to go with the mother. The judge has probably  considered  all  of  the
    evidence and has taken account of the relationship that  the  appellant
    has in the United Kingdom with family members.

14. On the basis of the evidence presented the judge was entitled  to  come
    to the conclusion that she did.  There  is  no  error  of  law  in  the
    determination. The decision to  dismiss  this  appeal  on  all  grounds
    stands.

Signed                              Dated
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Direction regarding anonymity-
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings

Signed                                           Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure.
