

                                    [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/47393/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On August 3, 2016               |On August 10, 2016              |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                               MR JAVED WASIM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Alam, Counsel, instructed by 12 Bridge Solicitors
Respondent  Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, citizen of Pakistan, applied on  February  4,  2014  for
    leave to remain under the Immigration Rules and  article  8  ECHR.  The
    respondent refused  this  application  on  October  22,  2014  and  the
    appellant appealed on November 20, 2014  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 2. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morgan on  July
    15, 2015 and he allowed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  in  a
    decision  promulgated  on  August  4,  2015.  The   respondent   sought
    permission to appeal that decision on August 6, 2015 on the ground  the
    judge had erred by failing to address a  material  discrepancy  in  the
    evidence and by allowing the appeal based on two-year cohabitation when
    documentary evidence of this had  not  been  submitted.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Holmes  on
    November 6, 2015 and having heard submissions on  January  18,  2016  I
    found there had been an error in law because:

     a. There was  an  inconsistency  about  their  relationship  and  this
        affected when  they  began  their  relationship.  Their  statements
        suggested their relationship began in October 2011 although  during
        oral  evidence  the  Judge  noted   the   parties   claimed   their
        relationship began in April 2012. If this was the  case  the  judge
        was wrong to find they had lived together under the Rules  for  two
        years prior to the date of application.


     b. The Judge failed to address evidence that  the  appellant  was  not
        [A]'s father because if they began their relationship in April 2012
        then the appellant could not be the child's father in March 2012.

     c. In order to succeed under the Rules as the parent of a  child,  the
        appellant has to be the father and either have sole  responsibility
        for the child or have access rights. Their evidence was they  lived
        together as a couple and in those circumstances the appellant could
        not be granted leave as a parent.

 3. I set aside the Judge's decision and gave directions and although there
    have been delays  in  bringing  this  matter  to  a  final  conclusion,
    nevertheless the matter came before me  on  the  above  date  when  the
    appellant, the sponsor and a witness gave evidence.

 4. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 5. In order to meet Section EX.1 of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
    the appellant must show, on the balance of probabilities  that  he  and
    his partner the sponsor, [AH], had been living together for a period of
    two years prior to the date of application made on February 4, 2014. If
    the appellant shows this, then he can succeed under section EX.1(b)  of
    Appendix FM by showing  there  would  be  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life without her continuing outside the United Kingdom.

    EVIDENCE


 6. The appellant and his partner adopted  both  statements  made  for  the
    First-tier hearing and more recent statements that were handed to me at
    today's hearing.


 7. Both appellants stated  they  met  in  October  2011  and  began  their
    relationship at that time.  They  could  not  provide  any  documentary
    evidence of initially living together  because  they  stayed  with  the
    appellant's partner's friend who had earlier  provided  a  short  typed
    statement confirming this. However, they provided a  tenancy  agreement
    and evidence from Asif Ahmed who confirmed in his statement (and he was
    not required to give oral evidence) that the appellant  had  been  with
    his partner for four years and that they continued to live together.

 8. They both therefore maintained they were partners for the  purposes  of
    the Immigration Act and that there would be insurmountable obstacles to
    family life without the  appellant's  partner  continuing  outside  the
    United Kingdom.

 9. Following the error of law hearing in January both  the  appellant  and
    his partner explained in their second statements that it  was  possible
    that the appellant may not be [A]'s real father, despite being named on
    the birth certificate. They had chosen not to obtain a paternity  (DNA)
    test because the appellant believed he was [A]'s de  facto  father  and
    [A] treated him as her father and obtaining  a  DNA  report  would  not
    alter that relationship.

10. Under cross-examination, the appellant stated his partner  had  delayed
    registering [A]'s birth because the home  office  had  his  immigration
    documents whereas the appellant's partner stated she had not registered
    [A]'s birth because she was confused about whether to register  him  as
    the father in light of the one night stand she had around the time  she
    fell pregnant.

11. Both the appellant and his partner maintained  that  they  lived  as  a
    family and the appellant was also close to his partner's other daughter
    who lived with them.

12. The appellant's partner and children (two adult children and  [A])  are
    British citizens but they have always lived in the United Kingdom.  The
    appellant's partner  was  also  responsible  for  her  mother  who  had
    recently been ill with breast cancer and suffered with both angina  and
    from the after  effects  of  two  hip  replacements.  Her  sister  also
    suffered from ill-health and the appellant's partner provided support.

13. The appellant's partner stated in cross-examination she would be unable
    to leave the United Kingdom and join her partner  in  Pakistan  and  it
    would be unreasonable to expect them to move to Pakistan or to  require
    the appellant to return to Pakistan and  to  apply  for  a  visa  as  a
    partner because to do  so  would  split  the  family  and  prevent  the
    appellant providing support for her own family.


    SUBMISSIONS


14. Mr Bramble relied on the refusal letter and submitted the Tribunal  had
    to decide whether  the  appellant  and  his  partner  came  within  the
    Immigration Rules. He accepted that if the Tribunal accepted  they  had
    been living together as partners since February 2012 then the  Tribunal
    should consider his application under Section E.X1(b) of Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules. In making  that  decision  the  Tribunal  should
    consider both the documentary and oral evidence provided and ask itself
    whether the appellant has addressed the deficiencies.  If  however  the
    Tribunal is satisfied they have been together since February 2012  then
    the Tribunal must  be  satisfied  there  would  not  be  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life without his  partner  continuing  outside  the
    United Kingdom. Paragraph [21] of Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 40 states


         "The phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used in this paragraph of
         the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be  overcome  by  an
         applicant for  leave  to  remain  under  the  Rules.  The  test  is
         significantly more demanding than a mere test of whether  it  would
         be reasonable to expect a couple  to  continue  their  family  life
         outside the United Kingdom."

    Mr Bramble submitted her explanation for being unable to go to Pakistan
    had to be considered against this test and was a  high  test  to  meet.
    Likewise, he submitted the  test  under  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  HC  395
    required a similar high assessment. He submitted there were neither  no
    insurmountable nor very significant obstacles  and  he  invited  me  to
    dismiss his appeal under the Immigration Rules.


15. In order to consider the case outside of the Rules he submitted I would
    have to be satisfied there were exceptional circumstances that had  not
    already  been  considered  under  the  Rules.  The  appellant  had  one
    dependent child and there were no medical or education reasons why  she
    could not accompany them to Pakistan save she was  a  British  citizen.
    There were evidential issues relating to  the  appellant's  involvement
    with [A]. On the one hand he stated in his statement  he  was  not  the
    father whereas today he claimed he was unsure if  he  was  the  father.
    There was a discrepancy why the birth  certificate  was  registered  so
    late and Mr Bramble submitted that the appellant's name had been put on
    the birth certificate to support his claim. Even if he were a de  facto
    father the Tribunal would have to consider [A]'s best interests and set
    that off against the public interest requirements of section 117A and B
    of the 2002 Act. He had come here  as  a  student  and  his  leave  had
    therefore been precarious. The Tribunal should consider Rhuppia  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 803 and in particular paragraphs [52] to [54]. He  invited  me
    to find [A]'s best interests are with her mother and it  would  not  be
    disproportionate to require the appellant  to  leave  and  to  properly
    apply for entry clearance.


16. Mr Alam submitted that the appellant's claim was based on  Appendix  FM
    and/or family life under article 8  ECHR.  No  submissions  were  being
    advanced under either paragraph 276ADE HC 395 or private life article 8
    ECHR and whilst he did not formally concede the same he left  that  for
    the Tribunal to decide on.


17. Mr Alam submitted that both  main  witnesses  had  given  credible  and
    consistent evidence on  the  main  issues  namely  the  length  of  the
    relationship and who [A]'s father was. The third witness had  confirmed
    they were a couple. Whilst the test to be met under Section EX.1(b) was
    high, he submitted the evidence was clear that the appellant's  partner
    was not able to go and live in Pakistan. However, if the Tribunal found
    this test was not met he invited me to find exceptional and  compelling
    circumstances for considering his claim outside  of  the  Rules.  [A]'s
    best interests were a primary consideration and he submitted it was not
    in her best interests to  have  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  or  be
    separated from the very person who she treated as her father.  She  has
    elder half-siblings and all her family lived here and after considering
    section 117B factors and the guidance in  both  Treebhawon  and  others
    (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC) and MA (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 707 he submitted it would be unreasonable to expect  [A]  to  leave
    the United Kingdom and the public interest in the  appellant's  removal
    was outweighed by the decision to  keep  the  family  together  in  the
    United Kingdom.


18. Having heard their submissions, I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING ON ERROR IN LAW

19. The appellant entered this country as a student in June 2011. His leave
    to enter and remain was therefore always precarious  because  he  never
    had the right to remain  here  permanently.   Mr  Alam  did  not  argue
    against this approach and perhaps sensibly approached this appeal  from
    the position of family life.


20. Family life was an unusual feature of this appeal because when I  heard
    the respondent's submissions on the error  in  law  in  January  I  was
    satisfied  the  Judge  had  made  findings  about  the  status  of  the
    relationship due to inconsistencies in their evidence and the fact they
    failed to address who [A]'s father was. Following that hearing  I  gave
    directions  for  signed  witness  statements  to  be  filed  and  those
    statements eventually were handed to me today.


21. In order to make an application under Appendix FM they had to show they
    were partners as defined by Section GEN 1.2(iv) of  Appendix  FM.  They
    must show they have lived together in a relationship akin  to  marriage
    for at least two years prior to the date of the application.  In  other
    words, the appellant has to show that he and his  partner  were  living
    together since February 2012. A bundle of documents was lodged for  the
    FTT hearing. Section C (pages 74  to  104)  of  that  bundle  contained
    correspondence from both the appellant and his partner.


22. Some of the evidence adduced was not between the period  February  2012
    and February 2014 and cannot be taken  into  account  when  considering
    whether  they  were  together  as  claimed  but  there  were  Santander
    printouts for the appellant that recorded his address at 56  [  ]  Road
    (September 2013 to February 2014) and 20 [ ] Close  (February  2013  to
    August 2013). There was a prescription for [A] putting her  address  at
    56 [ ] Road on January 1, 2014.


23. The respondent's bundle contained a tenancy agreement for 56 [  ]  Road
    for both the appellant and his partner  from  November  4,  2013,  bank
    statements for the appellant's partner dated January and February  2014
    with her address at 56 [ ] Road although she provided  bank  statements
    for September and October 2013 at a different address namely 319b  [  ]
    Avenue, London whereas the appellant's bank statements for those  dates
    were at 56 [ ] Road. However, the appellant also  produced  one  letter
    for the period concerned placing him at 319b [ ] Avenue.


24. Their evidence was they stayed at 319b [ ] Avenue until they rented  56
    [ ] Road although the evidence adduced  does  not  necessarily  provide
    convincing support of this.


25. I have to consider their oral evidence and the fact  they  both  stated
    they had lived  together  since  October  2011  but  there  was  little
    documentary evidence of this save that set out above.


26. They gave differing accounts regarding the registration of [A]'s  birth
    with the appellant stating it was registered late because  he  did  not
    have his immigration papers whereas the appellant's  partner  said  the
    delay was because she was confused and not certain the appellant  would
    stay given the circumstances surrounding the conception of [A].


27. The burden of proof to satisfy  me  that  they  were  a  couple  living
    together in a relationship akin to marriage between February  2012  and
    February 2014 lies on the appellant. Having carefully assessed  all  of
    the available evidence I am not persuaded that was the case.  The  fact
    they are now together is not the period I have to have regard to and  I
    therefore find that at the date of application they did not satisfy the
    Rules. In reaching that decision I  have  had  regard  to  all  of  the
    evidence before me including the signed statements, documents and  oral
    evidence.


28. The appellant cannot meet Appendix FM as a  parent  because  they  live
    together as a couple and at the date of application that  remained  the
    position.


29. No submissions were advanced under paragraph  276ADE  HC  395.  As  the
    child is under the age of seven  she  cannot  succeed  under  paragraph
    276ADE(iv) HC 395. Bearing in mind his family still  live  in  Pakistan
    and he only came to the United Kingdom in 2011, I do not find there are
    very significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  into  Pakistan.  His
    appeals under the Rules therefore fail.


30. The appellant's partner has two other children aged nineteen and twenty-
    six years of age. The eldest child lives within his own family unit but
    her younger child continues to live at home and I am told is  expecting
    a child. Little evidence of dependence beyond mere  emotional  ties  by
    them on their mother was produced.


31. The appellant's partner also gave evidence on the day of the hearing of
    her mother's and sister's ailments. No medical evidence was adduced and
    it was information that was not adduced  in  evidence-in-chief  but  in
    cross-examination. Clear directions had been given for claims to be set
    out in statements and the failure by the appellant's partner to mention
    this in her statement or even in evidence-in-chief or  to  produce  any
    documents to support her evidence significantly reduces the  amount  of
    weight to attach to this aspect of her evidence. I do not  find  family
    life  exists,  for  the  purposes  of  article  8  ECHR,  between   the
    appellant's partner and her mother or sister.


32. I am invited to consider a family life claim outside of the  Rules  but
    to do so I must find exceptional and compelling circumstances.

33. I accept that at the date of hearing the appellant and his partner were
    living together and whilst there was reference to a  restraining  order
    against the appellant last year, the evidence  given  to  me  was  they
    lived together as a  family  with  [A]  and  it  also  seems  that  the
    appellant's partner's adult daughter also lives with them.


34. The evidence about [A] was  confusing.  Whilst  the  birth  certificate
    records the appellant as [A]'s father I am satisfied that the appellant
    is not her biological father despite attempts by him  to  raise  doubts
    about this. The statements make clear that the appellant's partner  had
    a brief relationship and in the absence of any DNA evidence I find  the
    appellant is not her father but I accept that he plays a  role  in  her
    life.  As  such,  I  find  there   are   exceptional   and   compelling
    circumstances that enable me to consider a family life article 8 claim.
    In doing so I must have regard to the approach set out in Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 00027, section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
    2009 and the best interests of the child.


35. The Courts, including the Upper  Tribunal,  have  provided  advice  and
    guidance on applications outside of the Rules  and  cases  I  have  had
    considered, in particular, include Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197, SS  (Congo)  and
    Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387, AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC),
    Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674  (IAC)  and  MA
    (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 707.


36. In  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 the Tribunal gave the following guidance:


     a. As a starting point it is in the best interests of children  to  be
        with both their parents and if both parents are being removed  from
        the United Kingdom then the starting point suggests that so  should
        dependent children who form part of their  household  unless  there
        are reasons to the contrary.

     b. It is generally in the interests of children to have both stability
        and continuity of social and educational provision and the  benefit
        of growing up in the cultural norms of the society  to  which  they
        belong.

     c. Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin  can
        lead to development of social cultural and educational ties that it
        would be inappropriate to disrupt, in  the  absence  of  compelling
        reason to the contrary. What amounts to lengthy  residence  is  not
        clear cut but past and present policies have identified seven years
        as a relevant period.

     d. Apart from the terms of published policies and rules, the  Tribunal
        notes that  seven  years  from  age  four  is  likely  to  be  more
        significant to a child that the first seven  years  of  life.  Very
        young children are focussed on  their  parents  rather  than  their
        peers and are adaptable.

     e. Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave or  the
        reasonable expectation of leave to enter or  remain,  while  claims
        are promptly considered, are unlikely to give rise to private  life
        deserving of respect in the absence of exceptional factors. In  any
        event, protection of  the  economic  well-being  of  society  amply
        justifies removal in such cases.

37. In SS (Congo) and Others [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  the  Court  of  Appeal
    stated:


         "51. the approach to Article  8  in  the  light  of  the  Rules  in
         Appendix FM-SE should be the same as in respect of the  substantive
         LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM. In other words, the same  general
         position applies, that compelling circumstances would have to apply
         to justify a grant of LTE or LTR where the evidence Rules  are  not
         complied with.


         52. This is for two principal reasons. First,  the  evidence  rules
         have the same general objective as the substantive rules, namely to
         limit the risk that someone is admitted into the United Kingdom and
         then becomes a burden on public resources,  and  the  Secretary  of
         State has the same primary function in relation to them, to  assess
         the risk and put in place measures which  are  judged  suitable  to
         contain it within acceptable bounds. Similar weight should be given
         to her assessment of what the  public  interest  requires  in  both
         contexts.


         53. Secondly,  enforcement  of  the  evidence  rules  ensures  that
         everyone applying for LTE or LTR is treated equally and  fairly  in
         relation to the evidential requirements they must satisfy. As  well
         as keeping the costs of administration  within  reasonable  bounds,
         application of standard rules is an important means  of  minimising
         the risk of arbitrary differences in  treatment  of  cases  arising
         across the wide range of  officials,  tribunals  and  courts  which
         administer the system of immigration controls. In this regard,  the
         evidence Rules (like the substantive Rules) serve as a safeguard in
         relation to rights of applicants and family members  under  Article
         14 to equal treatment within the scope of Article 8....


         54. ... the fact that an applicant may be able to  say  that  their
         case is a 'near miss' in relation to satisfying the requirements of
         the Rules will by no means show that compelling circumstances exist
         requiring the grant of LTE outside the Rules. A good deal more than
         this would  need  to  be  shown  to  make  out  such  a  case.  The
         respondents' argument fails to recognise the value to  be  attached
         to having a clear statement of the standards applicable to everyone
         and fails to give proper weight to the judgment of the Secretary of
         State, as expressed in the Rules, regarding what is needed to  meet
         the public interest which is in issue. The 'near miss' argument  of
         the  respondents  cannot  be  sustained  in  the  light  of   these
         considerations and the authority of Miah v Secretary of  State  for
         the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ 261, especially at [21]-[26]."

38. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) the Tribunal stated:


         "14. ... Upon  their  proper  construction  neither  s117B(2),  nor
         s117B(3), grants any form of immigration status  to  an  individual
         who does not otherwise qualify for that status, because  they  have
         failed to meet the requirements set out in  the  Immigration  Rules
         for the grant of that status. If it was the intention of Parliament
         that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  should  be  over-
         ridden, merely because an individual could establish that they were
         able to speak English, or were  financially  independent,  to  some
         degree, then we are satisfied that Parliament would have said so in
         the clearest terms. In addition, we consider that Parliament  would
         have considered it necessary to set out what degree of fluency, or,
         level of financial independence was required of the individual, and
         the immigration status that the individual  would  be  entitled  to
         once it had been demonstrated. Plainly these  statutory  provisions
         do no such thing. One must continue  to  look  to  the  Immigration
         Rules to discern what Parliament considers are the requirements  to
         be met by a claimant, and the length of the period of leave  to  be
         granted to them if those requirements are met.


         18.  The  mere  fact  that  the  evidence  in  a  particular   case
         establishes fluency or financial independence to some degree,  does
         not prevent the Respondent  from  relying  upon  these  matters  as
         public  interest  factors  weighing  against  the   claimant.   The
         Respondent would only be prevented from  doing  so  if  a  claimant
         could demonstrate fluency, or financial independence, to the  level
         of the requirements set out in the  Immigration  Rules.  There  was
         therefore no error of law in the Judge's approach to the issues  of
         fluency  and  financial  independence  in  the   context   of   her
         consideration of s117B. The  Appellant  could  obtain  no  positive
         right to a grant of leave to remain from either s117B (2)  or  (3),
         whatever the degree of his fluency in English, or the  strength  of
         his financial resources.


         23. ... We regard the immigration history of the  individual  whose
         Article 8 rights are under consideration as an integral part of the
         context in which any Article 8 decision is  made,  whether  by  the
         Respondent or the FtT.


         27. ... In our judgement all those who have  been  granted  by  the
         Respondent a defined period of leave to enter the UK, or, to remain
         in the UK (which includes both those with a period of limited leave
         to remain, and those  with  a  period  of  discretionary  leave  to
         remain), hold during the currency of  that  leave,  an  immigration
         status that is lawful, albeit "precarious". Even if the  individual
         genuinely holds a legitimate  expectation  that  their  leave  will
         ultimately be extended further by  the  Respondent,  they  have  no
         absolute right to insist that this will occur, whether or not  they
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of their
         application; HSMP Forum UK Limited [2008] EWHC 664. Still less will
         those who merely hold a genuine, and well founded belief, that they
         will at some future date be able to meet the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules and thus be able  to  obtain  an  extension;  E-A
         (Article 8 - best interests of a child) Nigeria [2011]  UKUT  00315
         (IAC).


         28. In all such cases, in order to obtain the variation  that  they
         seek (whether to gain a further grant of leave which is limited  in
         duration, or is indefinite) the individual will  need  to  meet  at
         some future date the requirements of the Immigration Rules that are
         then in force; Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2009] 1WLR 1230. The ability of the individual to  do  so  is  not
         capable of prediction in advance - even  if  at  any  given  moment
         during  the  currency  of  their  existing  leave  the   individual
         genuinely  believes  that  they  are   continuing   to   meet   the
         requirements attached to their existing grant. Indeed, the  ability
         of those who have not yet been granted indefinite leave to  remain,
         to obtain a variation of their leave in the future,  will  probably
         always depend in part upon matters that are outside their control -
         whether that be the actions of others, or the future prosperity  of
         themselves or others.


         32. To put the matter shortly, it appears to  us  that  a  person's
         immigration status is "precarious" if their continued  presence  in
         the UK will be dependent upon their obtaining a  further  grant  of
         leave. It is precisely because such  a  person  has  no  indefinite
         right to be in the country that the relationships they  form  ought
         to be considered in the light of the potential need  to  leave  the
         country should that grant of leave not be forthcoming."

39. In Treebhawon the Tribunal concluded-

           "Section 117B (6) is  a  reflection  of  the  distinction  which
           Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are,  and  who
           are not, liable to deportation. In any case where the conditions
           enshrined in section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and
           Asylum Act  2002  are  satisfied,  the  section  117B(6)  public
           interest  prevails  over  the  public  interests  identified  in
           section 117B (1)-(3)."

40. [A] is now 3 � years years  old.  Whilst  British  nationality  is  not
    necessarily a trump card I accept that she is a British  child  not  by
    accident but because her mother is also a British citizen.  Mr  Bramble
    does not argue strongly that [A] should have to go to Pakistan but  his
    submission is based on the approach that the appellant could return  to
    Pakistan and then make the appropriate application to return.  Mr  Alam
    counters this argument and points to case law (see above) that makes it
    clear a child's best interest as a starting point should  be  with  her
    parents.

41. The Court of Appeal recently  considered  Section  117B(6)  in  MA  and
    stated:

         "40. ... It will generally be in the child's best interests to live
         with his or her parents and siblings as part of a family.  That  is
         usually a given especially for younger  children,  absent  domestic
         abuse or some  other  reasons  for  believing  the  parents  to  be
         unsuitable."

42. However, the court has repeatedly  made  clear  that  being  with  both
    parents is only the starting point. Other factors have to be considered
    when considering the  child's  best  interests.  In  this  case,  those
    factors include:

     a. The child's age.

     b. The fact the appellant is neither her biological father  nor  legal
        guardian.

     c.  The  appellant  had  a  precarious  immigration  history  but  his
        relationship  with  [A]'s  mother  occurred  whilst  he  was   here
        lawfully.

     d. The child is British.

     e. The Immigration Rules were not met.

43. Following the decision of Razgar I find that there is family  life  and
    that the appellant's removal would interfere with the  family  life  he
    has with both his partner and her daughter. However, such removal would
    be in accordance with the law and for a  reason  set  in  article  8(2)
    ECHR.

44. The issue for me in this appeal is to consider whether his  removal  is
    proportionate.  The burden of proving  removal  is  proportionate  lies
    with  the  respondent  who  must  show  it  is  on   the   balance   of
    probabilities.

45. In assessing this issue, I must in addition to the above case-law  take
    into account Section 117B  of  the  2002  Act.  Compliance  with  these
    requirements does not automatically  mean  a  party  succeeds  (see  AM
    above) and it therefore follows that a party who does not  comply  does
    not automatically fail. In considering  proportionality,  I  must  have
    regard to the best interest of the child.


46. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act applies  in  this  appeal  despite  the
    appellant not being her biological father. The evidence before  me  was
    the appellant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with [A] and as
    a British child, [A] is a qualifying child. I have to consider  whether
    it would be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.
    I am satisfied it would not be reasonable but [A] is  not  required  to
    leave the United Kingdom as she is entitled  to  continue  living  here
    with her mother. The appellant may be a de-facto father but as I stated
    above he is neither her legal or biological father.


47. Section 117B(6) makes clear that a finding it would not  be  reasonable
    to expect [A] to leave the United Kingdom  is  a  factor  I  must  have
    regard to but I do not simply ignore all the other factors.

48. Applying Section 117B factors I find as follows:

     a. The maintenance of effective immigration control is in  the  public
        interest. The appellant came here as a student  and  as  his  leave
        came to an end he sought to extend that stay but  that  application
        was refused and his current application also failed.


     b. Whilst the appellant speaks English this does not give an automatic
        right to a grant of leave to remain.


     c. Their relationship commenced when he was here lawfully.


     d. There is no evidence  that  the  appellant  or  his  partner  would
        satisfy the financial requirements of the Rules.


49. Having regard to all of the evidence before me and taking into  account
    the best interests of the  child  I  have  concluded  for  the  reasons
    considered and expanded on above that it would not be  disproportionate
    to require the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.


50. I therefore dismiss his appeal under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


51. There was a material  error  and  I  set  aside  the  earlier  decision
    including the fee award made.


52. I have remade this decision and I dismiss the appellant's appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.


Signed                                       Dated

 [pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
