
[pic]
IAC-FH-aR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47883/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 June 2015                      |On 24 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           CARLOS ROBERTO STIEGLER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal by the respondent, the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal before
    Judge  Phull  ("the  Immigration  Judge")  who  decided  to  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal of the  Secretary  of  State  to
    grant  a  residence  permit  under  the  EEA  Regulations  ("the   2006
    Regulations"). I will refer to the appellant before  this  tribunal  as
    "the Secretary of State") and the respondent as  "the  Appellant",  his
    designation before the First-tier Tribunal ("FTT").

2.   The Secretary of State was given permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal (UT) by Judge of FTT Pooler on 30  March  2015  because  Judge
    Pooler considered there was inadequate evidence  that  the  appellant's
    wife was a "worker"  within  regulation  9  of  the  2006  Regulations.
    Furthermore, it was arguable that there was a failure to give  reasoned
    findings as to the dates that the appellant's wife was a  worker.  That
    was important because in order to retain treaty rights in  the  UK  and
    for the appellant's wife to be exercising those rights for the purposes
    of Regulation 9 of the EEA Regulations that situation had  to  continue
    up to the date of the divorce was made absolute.

Merits of the appeal

3.   The appellant did not attend the hearing  despite  notice  having  been
    sent out on 2nd June to the address held on file and to his solicitors.
    There was no explanation for that so I proceeded  with  the  appeal.  I
    have been helpfully taken to the Regulations by Mr  Duffy   who  points
    out that the relevant date for the purposes of determining the  finding
    under Regulation 10 and establishing  that  the  appellant's  wife  was
    exercising treaty rights was  the date the divorce was  made  absolute,
    which he told me was in May 2014.

4.   Unfortunately the Immigration Judge in her determination did  not  deal
    with that date.  She dealt instead when the parties' separated in 2013.
     Further, it is not clear that there was in fact  documentary  evidence
    to support the continued employment of the  appellant's  wife  even  at
    that date, but certainly there is insufficient evidence to support  her
    continued employment as at May 2014.  For that reason, if for no  other
    reason, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  an  error  of
    law.

5.   I proceed to consider whether the error is likely  to  be  material  to
    the outcome of the decision. It is considered material to  the  outcome
    of the appeal because the judge made a finding  (that  the  Appellant's
    wife was a worker in the UK for  the  relevant  period)  without  there
    being any or any adequate evidence to support that finding.  There  was
    therefore no proper basis upon which the Immigration Judge  could  have
    concluded that the Secretary of State's decision to refuse a  residence
    permit  was  in  accordance  with  the  EEA   Regulations.   In   those
    circumstances it seems that the correct course, in the absence  of  any
    representations from the appellant, who did not attend the hearing,  is
    to remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State is allowed.  The UT  finds  a  material
error of law in the decision of the FTT  and  substitutes  its  decision  as
follows:

The decision of this Tribunal is to dismiss the appeal against the  decision
of the Secretary of State to refuse to issue a residence card under the  EEA
Regulations.

The decision of the Secretary of State stands.

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.



Signed   Date 22nd July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
