

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration               and                Asylum                Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA/47121/2014


IA/47122/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard             at             Field             House,             London
     Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On                   28th                    January                    2016
              On 12th February 2016

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                             IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                          MR ANANTHABABU RANGARAJAN
                       MRS LAVANNIYA SOMMASUNDARA IYER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Claimants

Representation:

For the Immigration Officer:     Miss Willocks-Briscoe
For the Claimant's:                      Mr Jesman (Counsel)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Immigration Officer's appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated on  the  24th  July  2015  in
      which he allowed the Claimants' appeal  against  the  cancellation  of
      their Leave to Remain in the United  Kingdom,  under  the  Immigration
      Rules. The Claimants are husband and wife, and  Mrs  Iyer's  claim  is
      dependent upon that  of  her  husband.  As  this  is  the  Immigration
      Officer's appeal, for the purpose of clarity throughout this decision,
      the Immigration Officer  will  be  referred  to  as  "the  Immigration
      Officer"  and  the  Appellants  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Mr
      Rangarajan and Mrs Iyer will be referred to as "the Claimants".

Background

   2. On the 15th October 2012, Mr Rangarajan had submitted  an  application
      for Leave to Remain as a Tier 4 General Student. In  support  of  that
      application he submitted a TOEIC certificate in respect of an English-
      language test, which he is said to have taken at New  College  Finance
      on the 25th July 2012. Thereafter on the 10th  November  2014  he  was
      granted Leave as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant until  the  30th  November
      2017. On the 19th November 2014 the Claimants sought entry into the UK
      and Mr Rangarajan was interviewed about  his  TOEIC  certificate.  The
      Immigration Officer alleged  that  the  certificate  was  fraudulently
      obtained and as a result the  Claimants'  leave  was  cancelled.  Both
      Claimants appealed against that decision, which appeal  was  heard  by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence at Hatton Cross  on  the  3rd  July
      2015.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  allowed  the  Claimants'
      appeals for the reasons set out in full within his decision. This is a
      matter of record and is therefore not repeated in full  here,  but  in
      summary, First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence did not  accept  that  the
      Immigration  Officer  had  discharged   the   evidential   burden   of
      establishing a prima facie case that Mr Rangarajan  had  obtained  his
      English Language Test Certificate by fraud and that there was no prima
      facie case for the  Claimants  to  rebut.  He  therefore  allowed  the
      appeals of both Claimants.


   3. The Immigration Officer sought to appeal that  decision,  and  in  the
      Grounds of Appeal it  is  argued  that  the  Immigration  Officer  had
      provided witness statements from Mr Peter Millington  and  Ms  Rebecca
      Collings and an email document  from  ETS  Taskforce  dated  the  10th
      September 2014, together with a  witness  statement  from  Mr  Michael
      Sartorius. It was argued that  the  witness  statements  of  Mr  Peter
      Millington and Ms Rebecca Collings provided evidence in respect of the
      tests which were categorised as "invalid", where it is  said  ETS  was
      certain that there is evidence of a proxy test taker or  impersonation
      having been used,  and  that  ETS  had  concluded  that  in  any  test
      categorised as "cancelled" which later became known as "invalid",  the
      same voice had been used for multiple test takers. Mr  Millington  had
      described how following comprehensive investigations ETS had  provided
      the  Home  Office  with  lists  of  candidates  whose  results  showed
      "substantial evidence of invalidity"; that the Home  Office  had  been
      provided with the background to the process used by ETS to reach  that
      conclusion and that where a matter had been  identified  the  approach
      was to invalidate the test results and for  ETS  to  notify  the  Home
      Office that there was evidence of invalidity in  those  cases.  It  is
      argued that in order for the test to be categorised  as  "invalid"  on
      the spreadsheet the Home Office had gone through  a  computer  program
      analysing speech and then two  independent  voice  analysts  had  been
      involved, before tests would be categorised as invalid.


   4. It is argued  that  the  spreadsheet  from  ETS  identified  that  the
      Appellant's test taken on the 25th July  2012  was  invalid  and  that
      therefore the Judge materially erred in finding that  the  Immigration
      Officer had not discharged the  evidential  burden  and  that  nothing
      shifted to the Claimants to rebut. It is argued  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for his  finding
      to the contrary.


   5. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hollingworth on the 24th November 2015, in which he stated that:

"An arguable error of law has  occurred  in  relation  to  the  construction
placed upon the evidence made available to the Tribunal appertaining to  the
test certificate in question and the degree of  weight  to  be  attached  to
that evidence in applying the burden and standard of proof."

   6. Miss Willocks-Briscoe on behalf of the Immigration Officer,  submitted
      that the Immigration Officer  had  satisfied  the  initial  evidential
      burden of establishing a prima facie case that  the  test  result  had
      been obtained by fraud. In addition to the witness statements of Peter
      Millington  and  Rebecca  Collings,  she  argued   that   within   the
      Respondent's bundle there had also been the cancellation of  Leave  to
      Enter Report dated the 24th June 2015, which contained an  explanatory
      statement running to some 28 paragraphs, which she submitted had  been
      signed by  Chief  Immigration  Officer  Mr  Benson.  Although  it  was
      conceded that there was no formal Statement of Truth on that document,
      she argued that it was a formal document that set out the basis of the
      Immigration Officer's case and gave further clarification  as  to  why
      the Claimants' Leave to Enter had been cancelled. She argued that  the
      explanatory statement at paragraph 15 had given further details as  to
      the Home Office's Case Information  Database  and  as  to  the  checks
      undertaken to ensure whether or not the test had  been  identified  as
      being "invalid" or simply "questionable". She argued that at paragraph
      17, there had been within that explanatory statement, evidence  as  to
      how the printout from the  relevant  ETS  records  had  been  obtained
      together with witness evidence supporting the Home Office records from
      the Case Information Database and  that  at  [19]  there  was  further
      evidence of how the decision to cancel the  Claimants'  leave  in  the
      interview had taken place. She argued that the evidence submitted  had
      not therefore been submitted in a vacuum and that there was sufficient
      evidence to establish a prima  facie  case  and  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge, she argued was  not  simply  entitled  to  ignore  the
      Immigration Officer's position or the accompanying evidence.


   7. Mr Jesman on behalf of the Claimants' conceded that there was an error
      of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence  at  [10]
      when stating "The Respondent alleges the test  had  been  fraudulently
      obtained. The Respondent bears the evidential, as opposed to the legal
      burden of proof on those and the standard of proof is the higher  one.
      Once discharged the evidential burden shifts to the Appellant  and  he
      has to rebut it on the balance of probability basis. I  reiterate  the
      legal burden of proof does not lie with the Respondent at  any  stage.
      That lies with the Appellant from start to finish". Mr Jesman conceded
      that the standard of proof in respect of the evidential  burden  borne
      by the Claimant was not "a higher one" but  remained  the  balance  of
      probabilities, although the evidence necessary to  establish  a  prima
      facie case of fraud would need to be more cogent, the more serious the
      allegation.



   8. However, he argued that such  error  was  not  material  in  that  the
      Immigration Officer had only submitted two generic statements from  Mr
      Millington  and  Ms  Collings,  and  that  those  statements  and  the
      shortcomings of  those  statements  have  been  fully  considered  and
      criticised by the President of the Tribunal Mr  Justice  McCloskey  in
      the case of R (on the application of Gazi) v Secretary  of  State  for
      the Home Department (ETS-judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT  327  (IAC).
      He argued that the screen printout  did  not  establish  a  sufficient
      evidential trail and that the Immigration Officer had  not  discharged
      the evidential burden of establishing a prima facie  case.  He  argued
      that the Immigration Officer had not been represented by a Home Office
      Presenting Officer at the appeal before Judge Lawrence and  there  had
      been no audio recordings or further statement submitted  to  establish
      that the Claimant had utilised fraud.


   9. Mr Jesman further argued that even if it was a prima facie  case,  the
      evidence that the Claimant could speak  English  was  overwhelming  in
      that the Claimant had been able to complete a dissertation in English,
      and he had no need to cheat and had worked for a care home for 3 years
      and that if he did not speak English he would not have kept that  job.
      He argued that the explanatory statement did not amount to  a  witness
      statement and that the right of the statement had not been present  at
      court to be cross-examined.



  10. Both advocates agreed that if there was a material error  of  law  and
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence was set aside,  the
      case would need to be remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      remaking.

My Findings on Error of Law and Materiality

  11. As was  quite  properly  conceded  by  Mr  Jesman  on  behalf  of  the
      Claimants, it is clear that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  has
      erred in law at [10] of his decision when stating that in  respect  of
      the evidential burden, as opposed to the legal burden, in  respect  of
      the allegation that the test had been fraudulently obtained that  "the
      standard of proof is the higher one". As was stated by  the  House  of
      Lords in the case of the Re B (children) [2008] UKHL 35, there is only
      one civil standard of proof and that is proof that the fact  in  issue
      more probably occurred than  not.  Further,  as  was  stated  by  Lord
      Nicholls in the Re H (Minors)  (Sexual  Abuse)  :(Standard  of  Proof)
      [1996] AC 563 at 586, "When assessing the probabilities the Court will
      have in mind as a factor, to whatever  extent  is  applicable  in  the
      particular case, that the more serious the allegation the less  likely
      it is that the event occurred and hence the  stronger  should  be  the
      evidence before the Court concluded that the allegation is established
      on the balance of probability.  Fraud  is  usually  less  likely  than
      negligence... The more improbable the event, the stronger must be  the
      evidence that it did occur before, on the  balance  of  probabilities,
      its occurrence will be established". Therefore, although  the  cogency
      of the evidence may need to be greater, the evidential burden  on  the
      Immigration Officer was simply to establish a prima  facie  case  that
      the Claimants' test results had been achieved as a result of  the  use
      of fraud on the balance of probabilities. It was not,  in  respect  of
      the standard of proof, "the higher one",  as  asserted  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence. There is a clear error of law in this regard.


  12. I further bear in mind that in considering whether or not  such  error
      is material, as was established by the Court of Appeal in the case  of
      CA v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA  Civ  1165
      in the judgement of Lord Justice Lords in giving the lead judgement of
      the Court of Appeal at [14], "No doubt it must be a material error  of
      law. If it could truly be shown that the result before the Adjudicator
      must have been the same even if there had been no legal  error,  there
      would be scope for the IAT to dismiss the appeal despite  the  error".
      It is therefore only if the result must have been the  same,  even  if
      there had been no legal error that I am in a position to say that  the
      error of law is not material and to dismiss the appeal,  having  found
      that there has been an error of law."



  13. In this regard, although I have fully considered and borne in mind the
      criticisms made by Mr Justice McCloskey of the statements of Mr  Peter
      Millington  and  Ms  Rebecca  Collings  in  the  case  of  R  (on  the
      application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS-
      judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 327 (IAC) , I do bear in mind that in
      the present case, there was also an  explanatory  statement  submitted
      within the Cancellation of Leave to Enter Report from Mr Benton, which
      has been signed and dated by him on the 24th June  2015.  Although  in
      this regard First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence at [11] found that "the
      Cancellation of Leave to Enter Report sets out the  history  but  does
      not amount to evidence regarding the test certificate", I further find
      that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  reasoning  in  that  regard  is
      inadequate, in that he has  failed  to  explain  how  the  explanatory
      statement does not amount to evidence regarding the  test  certificate
      when further explanatory evidence is given by Mr Benson regarding  the
      concerns in respect of the Claimant's individual test  certificate  as
      set out at paragraphs 4 to 6 of the statement, and in  particular  how
      Border Force Officer Mundi had conducted an initial examination of the
      Claimant and noted that the Claimant was the subject  of  Home  Office
      records and how the English Language certificate which was used by the
      Claimant in support of his application for Leave to Enter was said  to
      have been fraudulently obtained and at paragraph 15, he  had  detailed
      the checks that Border Force Officers  would  do  to  check  the  Home
      Office Information Database regarding the results being deemed  to  be
      "invalid" or "questionable", and as to the use  of  the  ETS  Look  Up
      Tool. That statement further describes the test taken by the  Claimant
      at New College of Finance at paragraph 17 and  the  information  there
      within that  paragraph  evidencing  the  ETS  printout  and  the  case
      Information Database Records together with the  further  evidence  and
      information provided at paragraph 19 regarding the investigations made
      by Border Force Officer Sahodeb. The simple statement from  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence that the Cancellation of Leave to Enter Report
      "does not amount to  evidence  regarding  the  test  certificate",  is
      therefore inadequately reasoned. This again amounts  to  an  error  of
      law.


  14. Even bearing in  mind  the  generic  nature  of  the  evidence  of  Mr
      Millington and Ms Collings, given that their statements were not  even
      produced in respect of this particular  appeal,  the  evidence  of  Mr
      Benton was produced in respect of this  individual  Claimant's  appeal
      and in circumstances where the Judge has not fully explained why  that
      evidence is not relevant and has not been given weight, and linked  to
      circumstances where the Judge has erred in applying the wrong standard
      of proof in respect  of  the  evidential  burden  on  the  Immigration
      Officer to establish a prima facie case of fraud, I  do  not  consider
      that it could be said that the result must have been the same even  if
      there had been no legal  errors  in  these  regards.  I  therefore  do
      conclude that the errors do amount to material  errors  of  law,  such
      that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence should be  set
      aside.



  15. Given that the consideration of the evidence in  this  case  has  been
      tainted by the application of the wrong standard of proof  in  respect
      of the evidential burden, I concur with the submissions made on behalf
      of both parties that in the event of  the  Upper  Tribunal  finding  a
      material error of law, the case should be remitted back to the  First-
      tier Tribunal for reconsideration by any Judge other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Lawrence. I therefore do  set  aside  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence, the  same  containing  a  material
      error of law and I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal  for
      rehearing de novo, before any First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lawrence  containing  material
errors of law is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  of  the
appeal de novo, to be heard before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than
First-tier Tribunal Judge Lawrence.

No application for an anonymity order was made at  the  First-tier  Tribunal
and no such order was  sought  before  me.  I  therefore  do  not  make  any
anonymity order in this case.

Signed
Dated 28th January 2016
[pic]
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal McGinty
