
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47014/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 July 2014                                 |On 6 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                          ms Sweetline May Bennett
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow
For the Respondent:    Miss U Uwaezuoke


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. For convenience the parties are hereafter  referred  to  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal so that Ms Bennett is the appellant  and
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department is the respondent.

 2. The appellant was granted limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    from 12 October 2010 until 2 January 2013.  Her solicitors  applied  on
    27 December 2012 for further leave to remain but that  application  was
    refused.  The appellant appealed that decision and the appeal was heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot.  In a determination promulgated on
    12 May 2014 the judge allowed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision.  Her  grounds
    for doing so were that the judge concluded that as  the  appellant  had
    been granted discretionary leave prior to 9 July 2012 the provisions of
    Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE did not apply.  The respondent argued  that
    the judge did not consider the case of Haleemudeen v Secretary of State
    for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558  which  supported  the
    respondent's view that the judge had erred  in  law.   It  was  further
    submitted that the guidance in the case of Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new
    Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) applied in the  instant
    case.

 4. As argued by Mr Tarlow at the hearing before me  the  First-tier  judge
    had not shown compelling reasons why  the  appellant  should  have  the
    benefit of Article 8 and no proportionality assessment had been carried
    out.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted.  No Rule 24 reply was filed by or  on
    behalf of the appellant.

My Deliberations

 6. At paragraph 15 of the determination the judge agreed with a point made
    by the appellant's representative  that  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    276ADE and Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules did not  apply  to  the
    appellant because of the transitional provisions (IDI Chapter 8).   The
    appellant had been granted discretionary leave prior to 9 July 2012.

 7. The Immigration Directorate Instructions (IDIs)  of  April  2013  which
    makes reference to family members under Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules Chapter 8 state at 2.3:-

         "2.3 Individuals granted Discretionary Leave before 9 July 2012

              Applicants who were  granted  leave  under  the  discretionary
             leave policy before 9 July 2012 will continue to be considered
             under the discretionary leave  policy  through  to  settlement
             provided  they  continue  to  qualify  for  leave  and   their
             circumstances have not changed (normally  the  individual  can
             apply for settlement after accruing six years of discretionary
             leave, unless discretionary leave has been granted because the
             individual is excluded from a grant of asylum or  humanitarian
             protection,  in  which  case  ten  years  leave   is   usually
             required).

              Consideration must be given to the general grounds for refusal
             when considering  an  application  for  further  discretionary
             leave."

 8. The Reasons for Refusal Letter leaves the reader in no doubt  that  the
    respondent considered the appellant's private life under Article  8  in
    accordance with paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  Having decided that the
    appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of  Rule  276ADE(iii)  the
    respondent considered whether the particular circumstances set  out  in
    the appellant's application constituted exceptional circumstances  that
    might warrant consideration by the respondent of a grant  of  leave  to
    remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  outside  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The respondent decided that they do not because the
    appellant's son had not been granted any  leave  at  the  time  of  the
    appellant's application and therefore the appellant was  unable  to  be
    granted in line with him.

 9. As to the immigration status of the appellant's  son,  as  recorded  at
    paragraph 10 of the determination, he was  granted  refugee  status  in
    2007 because of his homosexual orientation until 2 January 2013 but has
    now been granted further leave to remain.  .

10. It was clear to the judge that the respondent failed to apply  her  own
    policy in such a situation.  It would have been open to  the  judge  to
    have made his findings and to have allowed the appeal on the basis that
    the respondent's decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    remitted the appeal to the  respondent  for  the  making  of  a  lawful
    decision.  However, what the judge did was embark upon  an  examination
    of the Article 8 ECHR position. This aspect had been considered by  the
    Respondent in the refusal letter and the refusal  on  that  ground  was
    challenged in the notice of appeal. Although the respondent takes issue
    with the judge's decision and reasons for coming to that  decision  the
    judge finds that there are compelling reasons to allow the  appeal.  He
    undertook the proportionality assessment and in paragraph 20  comes  to
    the firm conclusion  for  reasons  that  were  open  to  him  that  the
    compassionate circumstances outweigh the respondent's  legitimate  aims
    and that the appeal therefore succeeds under Article 8.

11. The only further point that I  would  make  is  that  the  decision  in
    Haleemudeen followed shortly after the decision in Edgehill and Bhoyroo
    [2014] EWCA Civ 402 which came to the opposite conclusion on the  issue
    to that decided in Haleemudeen.  However, it is not apparent  from  the
    later decision  that  the  earlier  case  had  been  cited  therein  or
    distinguished.  Furthermore  the  implementation  provisions  were  not
    referred  to  in  Haleemudeen  and  it  appears  unlikely  that   those
    provisions were drawn to the attention of the court.  Those  provisions
    make clear that the appellant is entitled to the benefit of them as set
    out in 2.3 of the IDIs referred to above.

Decision

12. The challenge to the judge's decision under Article 8 reveals no  error
    of law on his part.  It would have been open to the judge to allow  the
    appeal to the limited extent that the decision had  not  been  made  in
    accordance with the law and  for  the  matter  to  be  put  before  the
    respondent again for the making of a lawful  decision.   That  was  not
    done but there is no challenge to the fact that it was not.

13. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot therefore stands.

14. I do not make an anonymity direction.  None has  been  made  thus  far,
    there was no application for such an order and the circumstances do not
    appear to warrant a direction being made.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


