
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47733/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd September 2016                        |On 4th October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SUSANA [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Claire, Counsel for Farani Javid Taylor,
Solicitors, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Portugal born on 28th December 1978.  She
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  11th  November
    2014 to remove her from the United Kingdom in accordance  with  Section
    10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 (which applies by  virtue  of
    Regulations 19(3)(a)/19(3)(c) pursuant to Regulation 21B(2)  and  24(2)
    of the EEA Regulations).  Her appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  Cockrill  on  7th  March  2016  and  allowed  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 23rd March 2016.

 2. An application for permission to  appeal  was  lodged.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Holmes  on  20th
    August 2016.  This states that the  judge  accepted  that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience entered into between the Appellant and Mr Singh
    but concluded that this was only the case from the point of view of  Mr
    Singh.  When he reached his decision he accepted that  the  Appellant's
    evidence about whether Mr Singh was left or  right-handed  and  whether
    she, the appellant, had been using oral contraception was  inconsistent
    with the evidence Mr Singh had given.  The decision arguably offers  no
    explanation as to how the appellant would not know these things if  she
    genuinely believed she had  ever  been  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with Mr Singh.  The permission states  that  the  evidence
    points squarely to the  Appellant  not  having  been  a  party  to  any
    relationship with Mr Singh.  This was the fundamental issue of fact  in
    the appeal.  The permission states that it is arguable that  the  judge
    either misdirected himself as to the applicable burden and standard  of
    proof or failed to give adequate reasons for his decision and failed to
    resolve that issue adequately.

 3. There is no Rule 24 response.

The Hearing

 4. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is relying on the grounds  of
    application for permission and that there has been a lack of  reasoning
    throughout the decision.  I was asked to take into account the judgment
    in the case of Muse and others (by their litigation friend  Fadumo  Nur
    Ali) and Entry Clearance Officer C5/2011/0988.  At paragraph 33 of that
    judgment reference is made to the decision having  to  be  intelligible
    and adequate.

 6. I was referred to paragraph 12 of Judge Cockrill's decision in which he
    states that he has concerns about the discrepancies in the  Appellant's
    interview compared to Mr Singh's interview, in particular  relating  to
    core matters such as: "Was Mr Singh left or right-handed?" and "Did the
    Appellant use contraception?"  The Presenting  Officer  submitted  that
    the Appellant's evidence is that she was  in  a  relationship  with  Mr
    Singh but had she been in a relationship with him she would have  known
    these things.

 7. I was referred to paragraph 14 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states that the Appellant has been working legitimately in  the  United
    Kingdom and there is  no  reference  to  money  being  offered  to  the
    Appellant to marry Mr Singh.  The judge went on to  allow  the  appeal.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge states in paragraph  14
    that the Appellant was  not  a  party  to  some  proposed  marriage  of
    convenience but this is contrary to the evidence before him and  it  is
    not clear how he came to this decision.

 8. I was asked in particular to consider paragraphs 12, 13 and 14 and find
    that the Appellant was a party to a sham marriage although the marriage
    did not actually go ahead.  The Presenting Officer submitted  that  the
    judge's  reasoning  has  to  show  how  he  put  matters  together,  in
    particular the inconsistencies in the interviews and how  he  concluded
    that the Appellant was not a party to the sham marriage.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that this has not  been  done  so  the
    decision contains a material error of law due to lack of reasoning.

10. Counsel  for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  this  is  a  rationality
    challenge.  The Respondent would have to show that the judge could  not
    have come to the conclusions he did based on what was  before  him.  He
    submitted that she has not done so and this is purely a disagreement by
    the Respondent with the judge's decision.

11. Counsel submitted that the judge considered all the evidence before him
    and found that the Appellant was genuine and that her  intentions  were
    genuine.  He submitted that he carried out a proper balancing  exercise
    looking at the positive matters in this claim. It is clear that he knew
    that the Appellant was exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom
    and he was satisfied with  the  explanation  of  how  the  relationship
    developed.  He also considered the negatives, being that the  appellant
    did not know if Mr Singh was left or  right-  handed  and  she  gave  a
    different answer about contraception at interview to the  answer  given
    by Mr Singh.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  states  that  there  are
    difficulties with the negative issues but based on the evidence  before
    him the judge has come to a properly reasoned decision.

12. He submitted that the judge found that the Appellant was living with Mr
    Singh and wanted to marry him and it was Mr Singh  who  was  unreliable
    and dishonest and deserted the Appellant.  He submitted that the  judge
    found it was plausible that  the  Appellant  thought  the  relationship
    might work and he found that the Appellant was not abusing  her  treaty
    rights.

13. Counsel submitted that the judge considered everything.  There  was  no
    apparent financial motive.  He submitted that there is no error of  law
    in the judge's decision and the  judge  accepts  that  the  Appellant's
    child is probably Mr Singh's.

14. I put to Counsel that this does not explain how, if the  Appellant  was
    in a relationship with Mr Singh, she did not know if he was left-handed
    or right-handed and gave different answers to many of the questions  at
    interview from the answers given by Mr Singh.

15. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  Respondent  is  not  merely
    disagreeing  with  the  judge's  findings,  the  judge  has  given   no
    explanation for these findings and for coming to the  decision  he  did
    based on the inconsistencies in the interviews with the  Appellant  and
    Mr Singh.  She submitted that the judge makes the finding that Mr Singh
    is dishonest but it is not merely Mr Singh's evidence  which  is  being
    considered, the Appellant's evidence is also being considered and there
    is no way in the circumstances and based on the evidence provided, that
    the Appellant is an innocent party.  He submitted that the  judge  does
    not state that Mr Singh misled the Appellant.   He  and  the  Appellant
    both gave evidence and the judge's decision is  inconsistent  with  the
    evidence given.

Decision and Reasons

16. The Appellant did not actually enter into a marriage with Mr Singh  but
    she was on the point  of  doing  so.   She  is  a  Portuguese  national
    exercising treaty rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   If  she  intended
    entering into a sham marriage this would be an abuse of her rights  and
    if she was aware that it was a sham marriage it would be  proportionate
    to remove her from the United Kingdom under the EEA Regulations.

17. The Appellant did not attend the First-tier hearing  stating  that  she
    has a young child and could not come  to  hearing  centre.   The  judge
    refers to this at paragraph 11.  Her non-attendance could be  found  to
    be significant.

18. At paragraph 12 the judge states that the Appellant and Mr  Singh  gave
    different answers to a number of  questions  at  interview.   They  had
    separate interviews and some of the answers  which  were  inconsistent,
    were quite superficial but some went to the core of the case, eg:   Was
    Mr  Singh  left  or  right-handed  and  did  the  Appellant  use   oral
    contraception?  The Appellant's account was that she  had  been  living
    with Mr Singh and had thought  the  relationship  was  stable  and  she
    wanted to marry but if that had been the case she would have been  able
    to answer the questions at interview consistently with  Mr  Singh.   At
    paragraph 13 the judge states that he is going to  accept  the  account
    presented by the Appellant but he gives no reasons for this.

19. At paragraph 14 the judge states that the Appellant  has  been  working
    legitimately in the United Kingdom  and  there  has  been  no  specific
    reference to money being offered to the Appellant.  He states  that  he
    finds the  Appellant  was  not  aware  that  this  was  a  marriage  of
    convenience.

20. It is clear from the evidence before the judge that  this  was  a  sham
    marriage.  The judge noted at paragraph 12, major  discrepancies  which
    go to the core of the Appellant's account.  As stated by the Presenting
    Officer it was not only Mr Singh's evidence that was being  considered,
    the Appellant's evidence was also being considered and if the Appellant
    had ever been in a relationship with Mr  Singh  their  answers  to  the
    questions would mainly have been the  same,  particularly  relating  to
    matters that go to the core of the claim.

21. The judge states that he has looked at the matter on balance but he has
    not explained why he finds the Appellant to be an innocent party.  This
    finding goes against all the evidence in this claim.

22. I find that the Home Office has successfully shown that the judge could
    not have come to the conclusions he did based on what was before him.

Notice of Decision

There are clear material errors of law in the judge's decision and  it  must
be set aside.

Based on the evidence before the judge I find that the  Appellant  was  well
aware that she was entering into a sham marriage with  Mr  Singh  and  I  am
dismissing her appeal.

Anonymity has not been directed.


Signed   Date 4th October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

