
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/47408/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th September 2016               |On 28th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                 Maruthi [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Watson of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 14th October 2015.

 2. The Appellant is a male Indian citizen born 7th January 1984 making him
    32 years of age at the date of the Upper Tribunal hearing.

 3. The Appellant applied for indefinite leave to remain as a civil partner
    on 17th March 2014.

 4. The application was refused on 11th November  2014  and  the  Appellant
    appealed to the FtT, who heard his appeal on 1st October 2015.

 5. After hearing evidence from the Appellant and his witness Mr  [M],  the
    FtT dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

 6. The FtT noted that the Appellant's application had  been  made  on  the
    basis of his relationship with Mr [P], but that relationship had ended,
    and the Appellant had commenced a new relationship with  Mr  [M].   The
    FtT found that the Appellant could not satisfy the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules.  This was because the relationship with Mr  [P]  had
    ended, and the Appellant did not satisfy the requirements  of  Appendix
    FM on the basis of his new relationship, because Mr [M] is not a  civil
    partner, and the couple had not been living together for  a  period  of
    two years and therefore the definition of a partner in GEN1.2  was  not
    satisfied.  In addition the Appellant's application could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration  Rules  because  the  FtT  found  that  S-LTR.1.6
    applied in that the Appellant's presence in the UK is not conducive  to
    the public good because of a criminal conviction, that being an assault
    on his previous partner.

 7. The FtT found that the Appellant could not succeed  with  reference  to
    his private life under paragraph 276ADE(1) because he was  excluded  by
    reason of S-LTR.1.6, and in any event there were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to his reintegration into  India.   On  this  issue  the  FtT
    considered MD (same-sex oriented males:  risk)  India  CG  [2014]  UKUT
    00065 (IAC).

 8. The FtT considered Article 8 outside the  Immigration  Rules  accepting
    that the Appellant  has  a  family  life  with  Mr  [M]  and  that  the
    Respondent's decision will interfere with that family  life.   The  FtT
    went on to  find  that  the  Appellant's  removal  to  India  would  be
    proportionate, taking into account both the Appellant and Mr [M]  were
    aware of the precarious nature of the  Appellant's  immigration  status
    when they entered their relationship, as it was known that he only  had
    limited leave to remain.  The FtT also took  account  in  paragraph  19
    "that visa waiting times were not  unreasonable  in  India".   The  FtT
    placed  significant  weight  on  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective immigration control,  and  concluded  that  the  Respondent's
    decision was proportionate and did not breach Article 8.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 9. The Appellant requested permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He
    contended that he and his partner had been living together  for  almost
    two years and had established a private and family life.  He  explained
    that his partner, Mr [M], looks after his elderly mother who  needs  24
    hour care, and therefore it would  be  extremely  difficult  for  their
    relationship to continue if the Appellant had to return to India.

10. The Appellant contended that life for a gay man is extremely  difficult
    in India.  Previously he had been tortured and  blackmailed  for  being
    gay and he did not believe that the  FtT  had  given  consideration  to
    this.

11. The Appellant pointed out that a letter from the Probation Service  had
    been submitted but not considered.   This  letter  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant and Mr [M] planned to marry,  and  also  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant had complied with the community order which was imposed  upon
    him for an offence of common assault.

The Grant of Permission

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nicholson of the FtT  in  the
    following terms:

         "2.  The grounds of the application are essentially  a  restatement
             of the Appellant's case.  It is also contended, however,  that
             the judge failed to  give  consideration  to  the  Appellant's
             claim that he would be tortured and blackmailed for being  gay
             if returned to India.

           3. Although the Appellant originally applied for indefinite leave
             to remain as a spouse, the decision to refuse his  application
             included a section 120 notice and in response, in  his  appeal
             grounds, the Appellant did claim that he would be at  risk  in
             India.

           4. In those circumstances it  was  arguably  incumbent  upon  the
             judge  to  consider  the  Appellant's  appeal,  amongst  other
             things, under Article 3.

           5. In the event, the judge only considered the Appellant's appeal
             by reference to paragraphs 287 and 276ADE of the Rules and  by
             reference to Article 8.

           6. Although the judge considered the Appellant's claims about the
             difficulties of being gay in India in the context of obstacles
             to integration there under paragraph 276ADE, the judge did not
             consider the issue in the context of Article 3  on  the  lower
             standard of proof.

           7. In the circumstances, it is arguable that the judge  erred  in
             not specifically considering the appeal on Article  3  grounds
             and permission is granted on this  basis.   I  do  not  refuse
             permission on the other grounds  raised  in  the  application,
             because a positive  finding  under  Article  3  would  clearly
             affect the rest of the judge's decision."

The Respondent's Response

13. The Respondent submitted a response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  It was contended,  in  summary,
    that the FtT did not materially err in law.  Although specific findings
    in respect of Article 3 were not made, the  judge  had  considered  the
    country guidance case of MD India  and  concluded  that  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk.

14. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained a material error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

15. The Appellant attended the hearing without  legal  representation.   He
    confirmed that he did not require legal representation and was  content
    to proceed.  There was no need for  an  interpreter  as  the  Appellant
    speaks fluent English.

16. I explained to the  Appellant  the  purpose  of  the  hearing  and  the
    independence of my role.  The Appellant stated that  he  had  seen  the
    grant of permission to appeal,  and  the  rule  24  response  from  the
    Respondent.   Although  the  Appellant  had  seen  these  documents,  I
    provided him with a copy of the bundle that had been prepared  for  the
    Tribunal.

17. The Appellant made oral submissions, relying upon the grounds contained
    within his application for permission to appeal.  He explained that  he
    had mentioned being beaten up  and  blackmailed  in  a  letter  of  1st
    February 2015 which was before the FtT.

18. The Appellant also contended that the FtT had not  considered  his  new
    relationship.

19. I then heard submissions from Mr Mills who accepted that  the  FtT  had
    erred in law in not specifically  addressing  Article  3.   However  Mr
    Mills contended that the error was not material because of the guidance
    given in MD India which is a country guidance decision.   The  Tribunal
    found in MD India that although  gay  men  in  India  may  suffer  ill-
    treatment and discrimination, this did not  amount  to  persecution  or
    treatment that would breach Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

20. Mr Mills contended that there was no merit in any of the other  Grounds
    of Appeal, and pointed out that if the Appellant  made  an  application
    for entry clearance as a partner from India, all visa applications were
    dealt with within 60 days.

21. At the  conclusion  of  Mr  Mills'  submissions,  I  ensured  that  the
    Appellant understood what had been said and he confirmed this to be the
    case.  The Appellant stated that he did not  wish  to  reply,  but  was
    content to rely upon submissions that he had already made.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

23. I find that the Appellant did not specifically raise Article 3  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal that he submitted to the FtT, although he  did  state
    that he would not be able to live  safely  in  India  as  he  would  be
    bullied  because  of  his  sexuality,  and  would  be   vulnerable   to
    harassment.  He also stated that he feared that his family would disown
    him or attempt to force him to marry a woman.

24. It is however the case  that  the  Appellant  in  a  letter  dated  1st
    February 2015, which was before the FtT, recounted an incident in  2008
    when he was arrested in a public toilet by the police  in  Mumbai.   He
    was beaten up, and threatened that his family would be informed and his
    employer, and his mobile telephone and money was taken from him by  the
    police.  After that incident he was blackmailed a  "few  times  by  the
    same police officers".

25. As accepted by Mr Mills, it was therefore an error of law  by  the  FtT
    not to consider that  aspect  of  the  appeal,  as  the  Appellant  was
    alleging that he had in the past, been the  victim  of  treatment  that
    would breach Article 3, and he feared that he  would  be  subjected  to
    similar treatment if returned to India.

26. I do not, however, find that the  error  is  material.   I  reach  this
    conclusion because of the guidance given in MD India  CG  and  set  out
    below for ease of reference paragraphs c, e and f of the headnote;

         "c.  Some persons  who  are,  or  are  perceived  to  be,  same-sex
             oriented males suffer ill treatment, extortion, harassment and
             discrimination from  the  police  and  the  general  populace;
             however, the prevalence of such incidents is  not  such,  even
             when taken cumulatively, that there can be said in general  to
             be a real risk of an openly same-sex oriented  male  suffering
             treatment which is persecutory or which would otherwise  reach
             the  threshold  required  for  protection  under  the  Refugee
             Convention, Article 15(b) of the Qualification  Directive,  or
             Article 3 ECHR.


           e. It would not, in general, be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for
             an open same-sex oriented male (or a person who  is  perceived
             to be such), who is able to demonstrate a  real  risk  in  his
             home area because of his particular circumstances, to relocate
             internally to a major city within India.


           f. India has a large, robust and accessible  LGBTI  activist  and
             support network, mainly to be found in the large cities."


27. The FtT considered MD India CG when considering whether there were very
    significant obstacles to  the  Appellant's  reintegration  into  India.
    Although it is correct that the  standard  of  proof  when  considering
    Article 3 is a reasonable degree of likelihood, which is lower than the
    balance of probability,  which  is  the  standard  when  Article  8  is
    considered, I do not find the failure to specifically consider  Article
    3 amounts to a material error of law.

28.  MD  India  CG  accepts  there  may  be   extortion,   harassment   and
    discrimination  from  the  police  and  the  general  population.   The
    Appellant recounted one incident in 2008.  The FtT, had Article 3  been
    specifically considered, on the evidence presented  by  the  Appellant,
    could not, in the light of MD India CG, which  the  FtT  was  bound  to
    follow, have found that his return to India  would  breach  Article  3.
    The evidence simply did not support the assertion that there would be a
    breach of Article 3, taking into account the lower standard of proof.

29. The FtT did not err  in  law  by  failing  to  take  into  account  the
    Appellant's  new  relationship.   That  relationship  was  specifically
    considered by the FtT.  The FtT found  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    satisfy the Immigration Rules in relation  to  his  family  or  private
    life, and did not err in so doing.

30. The FtT went on to consider Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules,
    and considered all relevant factors.  The FtT did not err in  attaching
    weight to the public interest, and concluded that the weight that  must
    be attached  to  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control,
    outweighed the weight to be attached to the wishes of the Appellant  be
    allowed to remain in  the  United  Kingdom,  notwithstanding  that  the
    Immigration Rules could not be satisfied.

31. There is no material error of law in the conclusion of the FtT and  the
    Respondent's decision does not breach Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on a point of law such that the decision must be  set  aside.
I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity to the Upper Tribunal, and I see no  need  to  make  an  anonymity
direction.


Signed   Date 23rd September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 23rd September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
