
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48686/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated|
|On 28th October 2014                        |On 12th November 2014          |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          mr anthony dennis sunday
                 (NO anonymity ORDER WAS REQUESTED OR made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Olubisose, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herbert  OBE.  I
    have referred to the parties as they appear in the First-tier  Tribunal
    Determination.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 23rd September 1988.  The
    Appellant first entered the  United  Kingdom  on  18th  December  2009.
    Thereafter the Appellant appears to have entered on various dates under
    a student visa, which was valid until 31st August 2011.

 3. On 12th December 2012 the Appellant made application  for  a  residence
    card under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.
    By decision taken on 5th November 2013 that application was refused.

 4. The Appellant sought to  appeal  against  that  decision.   The  appeal
    appeared before Judge Herbert. By decision  promulgated  on  23rd  July
    2014 the judge found that the Appellant was  not  entitled  to  an  EEA
    residence card.  Judge Herbert went on to consider the  matter  on  the
    basis of the Immigration Rules and Article 8 and allowed the appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.

 5. The Secretary of State for the Home Department  appealed  against  that
    decision. By decision of 23rd September 2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Lever granted permission to appeal.  Thus the appeal appeared before me
    to determine in the first instance whether or not there was an arguable
    error of law in the original determination.

 6. The original application by the Appellant was for a residence  card  on
    the basis of his marriage to an  EEA  national  namely  Miss  Alexandra
    Jennifer  Emmanuellle   Devillechase.    As   is   evident   from   the
    determination at the time of the hearing the Appellant's situation  had
    wholly changed.  The Appellant was no longer in a relationship with  Ms
    Devillechase.

 7. A marriage certificate had been  submitted  which  disclosed  that  the
    Appellant and Ms Devillechase had married  on  16  November  2012.  The
    application for an EEA residence card by the Appellant was dated the  5
    December 2012.

 8. A marriage interview had  been  arranged  for  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor in January 2013 and the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  failed  to
    attend for the marriage interview.  It was claimed at that  stage  that
    they were both suffering from minor health problems.

 9. The Respondent considered the case on the basis  of  the  documentation
    presented and determined that the Appellant could not succeed under the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  The application
    was therefore refused.

10. The Respondent in the  refusal  letter  dated  5th  November  2013  had
    pointed out that attempts to verify that the EEA national was genuinely
    working had established that the company she was allegedly working  for
    had been dissolved by Companies House on 27th August  2013.   According
    to the evidence the company had  ceased  trading  in  April  2013.  The
    company was owned by a Dr James Akoro.

11. Dr Akoro has known the  Appellant  since  2003  in  Nigeria.  Dr  Akoro
    sponsored the Appellant through school  including  providing  him  with
    accommodation and maintenance. In May 2010 Dr Akoro had  sponsored  the
    Appellant coming to the United Kingdom on a student  visa.  However  in
    September 2010 Dr Akoro was diagnosed  with  prostate  cancer  and  his
    sponsorship of the Appellant ceased.

12. At the time of that the EEA national  had  ceased  to  be  a  qualified
    person,  April  2013  when  the  employer  had  ceased   trading,   the
    relationship between the Appellant and the EEA national, a marriage  of
    5 months,  also  ceased.  The  Appellant  commenced  to  live  with  Ms
    Clatworthy. It is the basis of the relationship of the Appellant to  Ms
    Clatworthy and her three children that now  forms  the  basis  for  the
    Article 8 family and private life.

13. In the refusal  letter  the  requirements  for  the  Immigration  Rules
    Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 of the ECHR were pointed
    out to the Appellant.  The Appellant at that stage  had  not  submitted
    any evidence to found  any  family  or  private  life  apart  from  his
    relationship to Miss Devillechase.

14. The refusal letter specifically states:-

         "If you wish the UK Border Agency to  consider  an  application  on
         this basis you must make a separate charged application  using  the
         appropriate specified application form FLR(M)  for  the  five  year
         partner route, or FLR(O) for the  five  year  parent  or  ten  year
         parent or parent route, or FLR(O) for the  ten  year  private  life
         route."

    Accordingly the letter of refusal specifically  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant should make application for further consideration of his case
    under the Immigration Rules Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE but  would
    have to make a charged application in order to do  so.  The  Notice  of
    Decision stated that if the appellant made  an  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules consideration will be given to that  application  and
    any decision to remove made would carry a right of appeal.

15. As is evident from the determination the basis upon which the Appellant
    pursued the appeal was that he was no longer in  a  relationship  based
    upon  his  marriage  to  an  EEA  national  but  was  in  a  subsisting
    relationship akin to marriage with a UK citizen,  a  relationship  that
    had lasted from April 2013 to July 2014. He had therefore  been  living
    with Miss Clatworthy as a civil partner at premises in Hampshire  since
    April 2013.  He had been living there  with  Miss  Clatworthy  and  her
    children.

16. Miss Clatworthy was a full-time employee and care assistant at Caremark
    where she had been working for  about  eight  months.   She  has  three
    children by a  previous  relationship.   The  parties  claim  that  the
    Appellant is now an  integral  part  of  the  household  and  that  the
    children regard him as their father.

17. In his determination Judge Herbert noted that  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner had not been in a  relationship  for  two  years  or  more  and
    therefore were not eligible under the  Immigration  Rules  specifically
    Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.  The judge thereafter  refers  to  the
    fact that there would be insurmountable obstacles to continuing  family
    life in Nigeria and that the effect upon the  three  children  and  the
    Appellant's partner would be extremely harsh.  The judge  does  not  at
    that stage specifically set out  what  constitutes  the  insurmountable
    obstacles or what would be the extremely harsh consequences.  The judge
    does not in detail set out the reasons for finding that the removal  of
    the Appellant would not  in  all  the  circumstances  be  in  the  best
    interests of the children.

18. I would note at that point that there is  no  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant.  The only decision taken at the moment is for the  Appellant
    to be refused an EEA residence card.  Whilst the judge  makes  findings
    with regard to the relationship of the Appellant to Miss Clatworthy and
    the children and the relationship of the Appellant to a Dr Akoro, those
    are not directly relevant to the issues of whether or not the Appellant
    is entitled to an EEA residence card.  The judge thereafter goes on  to
    consider Article 8.

19. During the  course  of  the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives.  The issue I was mainly concerned with was,  as  there
    were no removal directions, whether or not the issues  with  regard  to
    Article 8 were in fact engaged.

20. The application was based on the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  The Appellant is  no  longer  living  with  the  EEA
    national. There was no evidence that the EEA national was  working  and
    was therefore a qualified person. The Appellant and the EEA Sponsor had
    not attended for interview to check whether or not this was  a  genuine
    marriage.  The marriage had not subsisted for at least three years  and
    it was clear that the marriage was over.  The parties  were  separated.
    The Appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Regulations  with
    regard to Regulation 10 or Regulation 15. The Appellant therefore could
    not succeed under the EEA Regulations.

21. The right of appeal in respect of this matter arises  under  Regulation
    26.  Schedule 1 paragraph 1 of the Regulations  provides  that  certain
    provisions of the 2002 Act have effect in relation to an  appeal  under
    the Regulations as if it were an appeal against an immigration decision
    under Section 82(1) of that Act. The provisions include the grounds  of
    appeal under Section 84 (1), but excepting Section  84(1)(a)  and  (f).
    The consequence would be that  an  appellant  has  a  right  to  appeal
    against an EEA decision on the basis that " removal" in consequence  of
    only refusal to grant an EEA remedy would breach  either  rights  under
    the Immigration Rules or under the ECHR.

22. However in respect of this matter there is no decision  to  remove  and
    there is no Section 120 Notice, a notice under the 2002  Act  requiring
    the appellant to set out all and any reason why  removal  would  be  in
    breach of Immigration Rules or rights under the ECHR.

23. In that respect I would draw attention to the case of Lamichhane v SSHD
    2012 EWCA Civ 260 specifically paragraphs  39-41  wherein  it  is  made
    clear that in the absence of a section 120 notice the grounds of appeal
    are limited to those forming the foundation of the decision.

24.  As identified in the notice of decision and the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter the appellant had not made any other  basis  other  than  rights
    emanating from his marriage to an EEA qualified  person  for  appealing
    against the decision.

25. In any event even if such matters were properly engaged on the evidence
    as  presented  the  Appellant's  circumstances  could  not   meet   the
    substantive requirements of the Immigration Rules  as  acknowledged  by
    the judge.  The parties had not been living together for  a  period  of
    two years before the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant
    could therefore not meet the requirements of Appendix FM.

26. The issue thereafter is whether or not Article  8  is  engaged  on  the
    facts as presented.  There was no decision to remove.  Whilst given the
    provision of Schedule 1 paragraph  1  of  the  Regulations,  Article  8
    itself is not excluded in such a case from consideration as a matter of
    jurisdiction.  However there is force in the argument  as  put  by  the
    Presenting Officer that there is no  meaningful  interference  with  an
    Appellant's right under Article 8 where all the Appellant has to do  is
    submit an application open to him under the Immigration  Rules.   There
    can be no right under Article 8 of the ECHR to be excused  from  making
    an application.  The result may not be in the Appellant's favour and if
    so then the Appellant would have a right of appeal provided a  decision
    is made to remove the Appellant from the United Kingdom.

27. At the moment there is no decision to remove  the  Appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom.  The circumstances therefore  are  that  the  Appellant
    would have a right to make an  application  to  the  Respondent  to  be
    entitled to remain in the United Kingdom.  Once  that  application  has
    been made as pointed out in the letter of refusal a decision  would  be
    made upon the Immigration Rules and upon Article 8.  There  is  nothing
    that would entitle the Appellant to avoid making that  application  and
    it cannot be said that it is a breach of the Appellant's  rights  under
    Article 8 to be excused from making such an application.

28. Once that application has been assessed and decided upon  it  would  be
    for the Respondent to make a decision to remove  the  Appellant.   Once
    the Respondent has made such a decision  the  Appellant  would  have  a
    statutory right of appeal and all the issues  can  be  determined  with
    regard to the Article 8 rights not only of the  Appellant  but  of  his
    other family members.

29. There is no substance in the allegations by the Appellant that he would
    have to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  pending  such  a  decision.   The
    Appellant would be entitled to remain here until the Secretary of State
    has made a decision upon the application.  The  refusal  letter  itself
    specifically invites the  Appellant  to  make  an  application  without
    returning to Nigeria.

30. In all the circumstances the facts of this  case  do  not  justify  the
    grant of a residence card.  It is clear that the  Appellant  no  longer
    satisfies the requirements of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006.  Thereafter the Appellant can make an application, as
    invited in the letter of refusal, for further leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom on the basis of the Immigration Rules  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE as well as under Article 8 of the ECHR.  At that stage
    the Secretary of  State  can  make  a  decision  based  upon  a  proper
    assessment of those factors.

31. Accordingly the judge in  considering  this  matter  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8 has made an error of  law  as  it  would  require  a  further
    decision and a further  assessment  of  those  factors  and  a  removal
    decision before such an issue were before the Tribunal.

32. There being a material error of law I invited the parties to address me
    on what should be done with regard to the  case.   As  the  only  issue
    relates to factors under Article 8 and Article 8 is  not  yet  properly
    before the Tribunal I am satisfied that I can determine this appeal  on
    the basis of the evidence already before the Tribunal.

33. The Appellant is not entitled to relief under the EEA Regulations.  The
    Appellant can make an application to the Secretary of  State  and  upon
    that  application  would  receive  an  appropriate  decision.   If  the
    decision is adverse the Appellant would have a right of appeal  against
    any immigration decision made to the Tribunal and  at  that  stage  the
    Article 8 rights of the party  can  be  properly  determined.   However
    there is nothing that would excuse the Appellant from  having  to  make
    that application.  It would not be a breach of his Article 8 rights for
    the Appellant to have to make those applications.

34. Accordingly there is currently no breach of any Article 8 right of  the
    Appellant's or of any party.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
law and is therefore set aside.  I substitute the following decision

    The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 28th October 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


