

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal   Appeal Number: IA/48474/2013
                                                               IA/48484/2013
                                                               IA/48487/2013
                                                               IA/48471/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 16 October 2014                         |On 7 November 2014         |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                             MRS FARZANA YEASMIN
                            MR ABDUL ILHAM JALIL
                         MASTER MOHAMMD ABDUL JALIL
                             MISS FATIMAH JAILIL
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY Of STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation

For the appellant: Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr M.I. Hossain, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the  Secretary  of  State  and  the  respondents  are
      citizens of Bangladesh born on 30  July  1983,  15  October  1975,  18
      August 2006 and 16 February 2011 respectively. They are mother, father
      and their  son  and  daughter.  I  shall  however,  for  the  sake  of
      convenience, refer to the Secretary of State as the respondent and the
      four appellants as "the appellants" which are  the  designations  they
      had before the first-tier Tribunal.


   2. They appellants appealed against the decision of the respondent  dated
      6 November 2013 to refuse to vary their leave to remain in the  United
      Kingdom on the basis of private and family life pursuant to  paragraph
      276B of  the  Immigration  Rules.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore
      dismissed the appellant's appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules but
      allowed  the  appellants'  appeal  pursuant  to   Article   8   in   a
      determination promulgated on 28 April 2014.  Judge Saffer of the First-
      tier Tribunal gave the respondent permission to appeal and  said  that
      it is arguable that the Judge may have misapplied paragraph 276ADE  of
      the Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules HX395  as  indicated  in
      the grounds of appeal.


Findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge


   3.   The First-Tier Tribunal found the following.


      I. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 1 July 2006 as  a
         student with leave to enter, valid until 30 July 2007. Her husband,
         the second appellant joined her on 21 February 2007. On  18  August
         2006, the third appellant  was  born  six  weeks  after  the  first
         appellant entered the United Kingdom. The fourth appellant was born
         in the United Kingdom on 16 February 2011.


     II. They have continued to  live  in  this  country  and  were  granted
         further leave to remain on several occasions,  the  last  leave  to
         remain being valid until 12 October 2013.


    III. On 9 October 2013 an application was made which was  based  on  the
         third appellant having lived in the United Kingdom continuously for
         more than  seven  years  and  in  the  circumstances  has  met  the
         requirements of paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules. As
         a consequence the three other appellants  should  also  be  granted
         leave to remain in line with the third appellant's  leave  as  they
         have  demonstrated  that  they  have  a  genuine   and   subsisting
         relationship with the third appellant.


     IV. The case turns on the issue in relation to the third appellant  who
         was born on 18 August 2006 and is now approaching  eight  years  of
         age. The fourth appellant is just three years of age and has yet to
         start nursery school.


      V. The third appellant who has lived in this country for  seven  years
         and was born in the United Kingdom in August 2006 would  appear  to
         satisfy the requirements of leave for him to remain in  the  United
         Kingdom on the grounds of private life by  reference  to  paragraph
         276 ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules.


     VI. It is the best interests of the third appellant to remain with  his
         parents, wherever they may be. Indeed it was never the intention of
         the respondent in her decision for  anything  other  than  for  the
         family to return to Bangladesh as a family unit.


    VII. It is clear from  the  judgement  of  ZH  Tanzania  that  the  best
         interests of the child is an issue which has to be addressed  first
         and is a distinct stage of the  enquiry.  Consideration  should  be
         given to a variety of individual circumstances, such as the age  of
         the child, the level of maturity of  the  child,  the  presence  or
         absence  of  parents,  the  child's  environment  and  experiences,
         (guidelines on determining the best interests of  the  child  UNHCR
         May 2008) and the comments of Baroness Hale in ZH Tanzania.


   VIII. The appellant now appears to be doing particularly well  at  school
         having made a number of school friends and demonstrating  excellent
         progress and clearly removing him from this environment  would  not
         only disrupt such educational progress, it would  inevitably  cause
         the breakdown of relationships made at school and would  be  likely
         to substantially hinder educational progress and  future  prospects
         in terms of job or career. The third  appellant  clearly  satisfies
         the Immigration Rules under paragraph 276 ADE (iv).


     IX.  In   considering   particular   circumstances   which   constitute
         exceptional circumstances contained in Article 8 of the EEC HR, the
         third appellant's education will be disrupted and this  would  lead
         to long-term disruption to the third appellant's life. The evidence
         from his mother, the first appellant was that they no  longer  have
         any family in Bangladesh or any cultural  and  religious  links  to
         that country.


      X. There is a genuine and subsisting parental relationship between the
         third appellant and his parents and it  would  be  unreasonable  to
         expect the child to leave the United Kingdom. He has never  visited
         Bangladesh and there is no  evidence  of  any  existing  family  or
         social ties with that country. He  has  never  attended  school  in
         Bangladesh and whilst he can converse occasionally with his  father
         in Bengali, he does not read or write in that language.  The  third
         appellant would not be likely to integrate readily into Bangladesh.
         The guidance recognises that  after  seven  years,  children  start
         putting roots and integrate into life in  the  United  Kingdom  and
         requiring the  third  appellant  to  leave  the  country  would  be
         unreasonable.


     XI. All four appellant have lived in the United  Kingdom  lawfully  and
         there is no issue of criminal conduct or that  they  have  not  had
         recourse to public funds  in  order  to  maintain  and  accommodate
         themselves.


    XII. The respondent's decision is an interference with the  exercise  of
         the third appellant's right to respect for  his  private  life  and
         that interference is of  such  gravity  as  to  potentially  engage
         Article 8. It would also be disproportionate to the third appellant
         to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  in  order  that  the  respondent's
         legitimate aim and right to regulate and control immigration should
         be maintained.


   XIII. The parents of the third appellant also get the  benefit  from  the
         third appellant's right to private life.


The respondent's grounds of appeal


   4. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states the following  which  I
      summarise. Paragraphs 276 ADE (iv)  allows  an  applicant  to  succeed
      under the Rules if he, is under the age of  18  years  and  has  lived
      continuously  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  at  least   seven   years
      (discounting  any  period  of  imprisonment)  and  it  would  not   be
      reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the  United  Kingdom.  The
      Rule therefore has two limbs, the first is that the  child  must  have
      lived continuously in the United Kingdom for seven years and it cannot
      be reasonable for him to leave the United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  found
      that it is not disputed that the third  appellant  has  lived  in  the
      United Kingdom continuously for more than  seven  years,  having  been
      born in the United Kingdom in August 2006. In those circumstances, the
      third appellant would appear to satisfy the requirements of  leave  to
      remain in the United  Kingdom  on  the  grounds  of  private  life  by
      reference to paragraph 276 ADE (iv) of the Immigration Rules.

   5. The Judge however failed to properly to consider the second limb,  the
      reasonableness of the third  appellant  having  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom in light of his age. In Azimi-Moayed [2013]  UKUT,  the  Upper
      Tribunal held that the connection which are  established  by  a  child
      from birth to age 7 are less significant than those established in the
      seven year period later in a child's minority.

   6. The third appellant can be removed from the United  Kingdom  with  his
      parents and younger sibling. The Judge  found  that  contrary  to  his
      parent's evidence, the third appellant did understand  and  conversion
      Bengali with his parents. In  EA  (article  8-best  interests  of  the
      child) (Nigeria) [2011] UKUT (IAC) it was held by the  Upper  Tribunal
      at paragraph 46 stated that "equally we do not conclude that the  fact
      that the children had lived in the UK for most of their lives who  are
      being expected to move to a country they do  not  yet  know  does  not
      makes that disproportionate. There must  be  individual  consideration
      and assessment of best interests in each and every case.  By  contrast
      with ZH Tanzania, the move to Nigeria in that  case  from  the  United
      Kingdom does not involve separation from a carer  or  the  country  of
      nationality. These decisions to not interfere with  the  enjoyment  of
      family life on the part of any of the appellant's".

   7. The Judge failed to consider the effect of the third  appellant  being
      removed with this family unit upon his private as distinct from family
      life is a further factor tending towards  the  reasonableness  of  the
      third appellant's removal. The Judge also failed to consider the third
      appellant's parent's temporary student migrant status  when  assessing
      the  reasonableness  of  the  third  appellant's  removal.  In  EA  at
      paragraph 43 it is stated that it is important to recall that  all  of
      the appellants may all have been here lawfully but they  came  to  the
      United Kingdom for temporary purposes with  no  expectation  of  being
      able to remain in the UK. The third appellant happened to be  born  in
      the United Kingdom whilst  his  parents  were  here  for  a  temporary
      purpose. The expectation was that they would  all  return  to  Nigeria
      once the first appellant studies were completed. Those who have  their
      families with them during a period of study in the United Kingdom must
      do so in the light of that expectation of return."

   8. The Judge allowed the appellant's appeal under Article 8  rather  than
      paragraph 276ADE holding that the appeal in respect of all  appellants
      should also be allowed in line  with  the  third  appellant  on  human
      rights grounds. By allowing the third appellant's appeal under article
      8 rather than the Immigration Rules  the  Judge  materially  erred  by
      failing  to  identify  in  the  third  appellant's  case,   compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Immigration  Rules
      of the sort required to ground  an  arguable  case  for  consideration
      outside the Immigration Rules in accordance with the case of Rv  Ngare
      v SSHD [2013] (admin). The Judge also erred by failing to have  regard
      to the requirements of paragraph 276ADE is a relevant consideration in
      the proportionality evaluation. He also materially erred in failing to
      have regard to  the  public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control.
      Therefore if the decision  in  relation  to  the  third  appellant  is
      erroneous, the decision in respect of the other appellants  must  fall
      with it.


The hearing and the parties' submissions


   9. At the hearing, Miss Isherwood on behalf of the respondent stated that
      the appellant's family came to this country in a  temporary  capacity.
      They waited until the third  appellant  was  seven  years  old  before
      making an application for the entire family to live in  this  country.
      The Judge failed to consider why the child should not go back with his
      parents to Bangladesh. There are two elements to paragraph 276ADE. The
      judge stopped at the first one. There was  no  identification  of  the
      compelling circumstances in the appellant's case  for  why  he  cannot
      return with  his  family  as  a  family  unit.  The  only  exceptional
      circumstances identified by the Judge was  that  the  third  appellant
      does not speak Bengali and that he has never been to  Bangladesh.  The
      third appellant has been to school for four  years  and  as  such  his
      needs and social interests is based on his family  unit.  Even  though
      the education system may be better in the United  Kingdom,  the  third
      appellant is not a British  citizen  so  he  is  not  entitled  to  be
      educated in the United Kingdom. Family units of non-British  nationals
      has not been considered by the judge.


  10. The Judge states that the appellant should  remain  with  his  parents
      wherever they may be. Paragraph 29 of ZH Tanzania  referrers  and  the
      Judge  failed  to  engage  with  Article  8  as  to   the   compelling
      circumstances in this case. The appellants could have  no  expectation
      that they would be allowed to live in this country for ever. There are
      also no evidence of difficulties that the family  would  encounter  on
      their return to Bangladesh.


  11. Mr Hossain made the following submissions. Paragraph  26  states  that
      the third appellant has lived in the United  Kingdom  and  it  is  not
      reasonable for him to leave this country. The Judge  at  paragraph  30
      mentions exceptional circumstances and therefore  has  considered  the
      second limb of the immigration rule.


  12. Ms Isherwood in reply said  that  the  appellant's  representative  is
      indicating today that the third appellant's appeal should  be  allowed
      under the Immigration Rules which was not in the  appellant's  grounds
      of appeal. There was an error of law and the decision  should  be  set
      aside.




Did the determination of the First-tier Tribunal involve the  making  of  an
error of law?


  13. I have considered the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge,  the
      skeleton argument and the  submissions  made  by  the  parties  as  to
      whether there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the  determination.  Having
      considered  the  determination  as  a  whole,  I  find  Judge  Moore's
      consideration of the appellant's appeal in respect of the  Immigration
      Rules and Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  is
      materially flawed.


  14. I agree with the respondent that the Judge  did  not  give  sufficient
      reasons for why the third appellant who has just  passed  the  age  of
      seven should not return to Bangladesh with the rest of his family  who
      are in  this  country  on  a  temporary  basis  or  why  it  would  be
      unreasonable for him to do so. The agreed facts  are  that  the  first
      appellant, the mother, came to this country in 2006 on a student visa.
      The first appellant was born very soon after she came to this country.
      The fourth appellant was also born in this country but the  Judge  did
      not take into account they are all nationals  of  Bangladesh  and  not
      British  citizens  and  therefore  did  not  make  a   fact   specific
      evaluation.


  15. The Judge failed to recognise that the Immigration Rules are Article 8
      compliant and that it will only be in exceptional circumstances  where
      the appellant should succeed under Article 8 when  he  cannot  succeed
      under the Immigration Rules. The  Judge  found  that  the  exceptional
      circumstances in the appellant's case consist of the appellant not  to
      being able to speak Bangladeshi and the fact that he has never visited
      Bangladesh and that his education will  be  fatally  compromised.  The
      evidence that the Judge recognised  was  that  the  third  appellant's
      father and mother do not speak English or  very  limited  English  and
      converse with the third appellant in Bengali. The Judge failed to take
      into account that the appellant who has just passed the age  of  seven
      years and that his cultural and social identity is  derived  from  his
      parents and their community. He also failed to take  into  account  at
      eight years old, his ties to this country are less  relevant  at  this
      stage of his life.


  16. The Judge also took  into  account  irrelevant  factors  such  as  the
      appellant's education would  be  hindered  if  he  had  to  return  to
      Bangladesh and that this would ruin his future prospects. He failed to
      take into account  that  Bangladesh  has  educational  facilities  for
      children who live in Bangladesh. He also failed to take  into  account
      that a non-British  child  is  not  entitled  or  should  not  have  a
      reasonable expectation that he will be educated to British standards.


  17. Although the Judge cited all the relevant case law in respect  of  the
      interests of children in the United Kingdom, he failed  to  take  into
      consideration that he must conduct  an  individual  consideration  and
      assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's  particular
      circumstances. He failed to take into  account  that  the  appellant's
      exclusion from the United Kingdom and for him to return to  Bangladesh
      with his family does  not  involve  separation  from  his  parents  or
      siblings which has been held to be the starting point as to  the  best
      interests of the children that is to be with  both  parents  and  that
      dependent children will form part of their household will  be  removed
      unless there is some reason to the contrary. The judge failed to  give
      cogent reasons for why the third dependent child should not return  to
      Bangladesh with his family. The Judge failed to  consider  that  being
      removed with his family unit  is  a  factor  which  goes  towards  the
      reasonableness of the third appellant's removal with  all  his  family
      members.


  18. The Judge also failed to consider that  the  appellants  were  granted
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom on a temporary basis  and  could
      not have had any legitimate expectation that they could live  in  this
      country on a permanent bases unless they complied with the Immigration
      Rules for further leave to remain. The Judge failed to  consider  that
      non-nationals who come to this country to study  with  their  families
      must know that they will have to return to  their  home  country  with
      their children after the completion of their studies.


  19. Finally, the Judge did not allow  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
      Rules but pursuant to Article 8. The grounds of appeal do not seek  to
      challenge his finding that the appellants do not meet the requirements
      of the Immigration Rules.


  20. I find there is a material error of law in the determination and I set
      it aside in its entirety. The  appeal  to  be  reheard  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.

Rehearing of the appeal on 16 October 2014 at the Upper Tribunal

  21. At the rehearing, there was no oral evidence and I  heard  submissions
      from both parties.


  22. Mr Yeo on behalf of the  appellant  relied  on  his  amended  skeleton
      argument and made the following submissions which I summarise. He  has
      provided extra documents in the appellant's bundle at pages 21-22.  He
      also asked me to consider the appellant's brother's  letter  which  he
      provided at the hearing.


  23. Mr Tarlow said that the facts of the case are by and large agreed  and
      he would not seek to cross-examine the witnesses.


  24. Mr Yeo in his submissions stated the following which I summarise.  The
      context of this case is different because  the  appellants  have  been
      living in the United Kingdom  lawfully  and  their  child,  the  third
      appellant, was born in this country. It is  accepted  that  the  first
      second and fourth appellants  cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration
      Rules. The appellants was a normal variation application. He relies on
      the statutory conditions which are freestanding in Ex1. Paragraph 117A
      of the amended Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  where  a
      Court or Tribunal to is required to determine whether a decision  made
      under the Immigration Acts, (a) breaches a person's right  to  respect
      for private and family life under article 8 and (b) as a result  would
      be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998.  He  argued
      that the Tribunal must have  regard  to  these  provisions  as  it  is
      mandatory as it came effect on 28 July 2014. The provisions  apply  in
      any case in which a Court or Tribunal must decide on an Article 8 case
      and failure to do so would amount to an error of law. He relied on the
      case of YM Uganda v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2014]
      EWCA Civ 1292.


  25. Mr Yeo referred to the respondents explanatory notes at paragraph  7.6
      introduced on 9 July 2012 which state that regard must be had  to  the
      seven-year period of residence for children. He referred to  paragraph
      7.6 "the key test for a  non-British  citizen  child  remaining  on  a
      permanent bases is the length of residence in the  UK  of  the  child-
      which the rules set out as at least the last seven years,  subject  to
      contraveling factors. He referred to the document entitled "grounds of
      compatibility with Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
      Rights" which is a statement by the Home Office  dated  13  June  2012
      which went into further detail.  Paragraph 27 states that  "the  rules
      deal clearly with how to treat a British citizen and other children in
      cases where we would otherwise intend to remove their parents and  how
      countervailing factors should weigh in the decision.  There  are  some
      circumstances where children may be allowed to remain on  a  permanent
      basis is around the length of continuous residence of a child  in  the
      UK-which we  have  set  at  seven  years,  subject  to  countervailing
      factors. We consider that a period of 7 continuous years spent in  the
      UK  as  a  child  will  generally  establish  a  sufficient  level  of
      integration for family and private life to  exist  such  that  removal
      would not normally be in the best interests of the child. A period  of
      seven years also echoes a previous policy known  as  (DP  5/96)  under
      which a child who had accumulated seven years continuous residence  in
      the UK is still referenced by the courts on occasion in policy  terms.
      The respondent did not propose a period of less than  seven  years  as
      this would enable  migrants  who  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  a
      temporary route (for example a route limited to 5  years  the  UK)  to
      qualify for settlement if they had brought  children  with  them.  The
      changes are designed to bring consistency and transparency to decision
      making.


  26. Mr Yeo reminded the Court that children born  in  the  United  Kingdom
      will qualify for registration as British citizens after  10  years  of
      residence, whether it is lawful or not pursuant to section  1  (4)  of
      the British Nationality Act 1981.  He  said  that  children  can  also
      qualify for settlement after seven years of residence, whether  lawful
      or unlawful under paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv) and the children of  such
      a child can qualify for an extension  of  leave  of  30  months  under
      appendix FM.


  27. He argued that this makes  sense  that  children  should  qualify  for
      indefinite leave to  remain  before  adults,  particularly  given  the
      children would qualify for full citizenship after 10 years if born  in
      the United Kingdom. He stated that  public  interest  reasons  are  in
      their favour in this respect because British taxpayer's resources have
      been used for the child's education which would otherwise be wasted if
      the child leaves the UK. He argued that the key test as to whether the
      removal of child is disproportionate is seven years.


  28. He argued that the additional reasonableness test  whether  the  child
      can return to his home country need not be a particularly high  hurdle
      in the circumstances and given this background. He said that there was
      no  exceptionality  threshold  or  similar  to  be  applied  as   this
      application is made under the Immigration Rules.


  29. The legitimate aim of the state or public interest does not need to be
      weighed as reasonable and that it is a  simple  test  subject  to  the
      normal rules of statutory  interpretation  comparable  to  many  other
      discretionary  tests  in  the  Immigration   Rules   such   as   "full
      responsibility" "exclusion undesirable and "adequate".


  30. It is that the best interests of the third appellant to remain in  his
      current stable environment where he is receiving a good education  and
      is happy. He has been described as distraught and  devastated  at  the
      prospect of going to Bangladesh permanently. His wishes  and  feelings
      have to be considered. Furthermore the child does not speak  or  write
      Bengali and would be disadvantaged in the event  of  removal  to  that
      country. The child has been in this country lawfully  since  birth  as
      have been his parents and sister.


  31. The immigration history of the family does not  suggest  a  deliberate
      evasion of immigration control in order eventually to use the child as
      an anchor  to  attach  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The  family's  prior
      residence was lawful and the parents made a perfectly  reasonable  and
      lawful variation application. Both the  child  and  the  rest  of  his
      family will  be  impacted  and  their  circumstances  should  also  be
      considered. The parents have been in  the  United  Kingdom  for  eight
      years.


  32. The appellant's speak English  and  are  financially  independent  and
      their status was not precarious in the sense of "dangerously likely to
      fall or collapse". The appeal should be allowed under the  Immigration
      Rules, or, failing that, under Article 8 of the European Convention of
      Human Rights after applying the statutory considerations  of  Part  5A
      NIAA 2002.


  33. Mr Tarlow in his submissions stated that compelling circumstances must
      be demonstrated as per the case of Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -
      correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). The appellants came  to  this
      country as students and they had no expectation that they  could  live
      here forever. The word precarious includes no expectation to remain in
      this country permanently. The test remains whether  it  is  reasonable
      for the child to leave the country with his parents. The Secretary  of
      State is responsible for immigration control and  even  if  the  child
      faced difficulties it would still be reasonable for him to return with
      his entire family to Bangladesh. It is accepted that the family  speak
      English and that they are earning money.  Nevertheless  their  private
      life has always been precarious  as  they  came  to  this  country  as
      student and student dependents. It is reasonable  for  the  family  to
      return to Bangladesh as a unit.


  34. In reply Mr Yeo emphasised that  the  appellants  have  been  in  this
      country lawfully and that I must consider the statutory considerations
      and paragraph 117B goes in the appellant's favour.


Findings

  35. It is been accepted by Mr Yeo  that  the  first,  second,  and  fourth
      appellants do not satisfy the Immigration Rules for further  leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom. It is argued that  the  third  appellant
      does meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE. There are two legs to
      paragraph 276 ADE the first being that the third appellant  who  about
      eight years old and under the age of  18,  has  lived  in  the  United
      Kingdom for more than seven years and the second being that  it  would
      not be reasonable to require him to leave the United Kingdom.


  36. The accepted facts are that the first appellant, the third appellant's
      mother came to this country on a student visa in 2006 and  the  second
      and  fourth  appellants  joined  her  as  her  dependents.  The  third
      appellant was born in this country and is about eight years of age. It
      was also accepted that the family  has  been  in  the  United  Kingdom
      lawfully for  about  eight  years.  The  appellants  are  not  British
      citizens but citizens of Bangladesh although it was argued  on  behalf
      of the third appellant (minor) that he would be  entitled  to  British
      citizenship after 10 years. That may be the  case  but  he  is  not  a
      British citizen currently all the way will take this into  account  in
      considering proportionality. I have considered all  the  factors  that
      were brought to my attention for why it  would  unreasonable  for  the
      appellant to return to Bangladesh with his family as a family unit.  I
      also  take  into  account  all  the  submissions  made  on  the  third
      appellant's behalf in this regard.


  37. I accept that the appellant has lived in the United Kingdom  for  more
      than seven years and therefore satisfies the first limb  of  paragraph
      276 ADE. I find that there are no cogent reasons  for  why  he  cannot
      return to Bangladesh with his family who are all Bangladesh  citizens.
      I take into account his studies in this country and the fact  that  he
      must have made friends here. I take into account that he has lived  in
      this country all his life. I find that both his education and  friends
      can  be  replicated  in  Bangladesh.  There  is  no  suggestion   that
      Bangladesh does not have an education system. The appellant will  have
      a distinct advantage because of the English  language  skills  he  has
      acquired in this country. The evidence is  that  the  third  appellant
      speaks Bengali to his parents and  therefore  he  would  not  find  it
      difficult to integrate into Bangladeshi society with the assistance of
      his parents who continue to have ties to Bangladesh and  there  is  no
      suggestion otherwise. I therefore find that the third  appellant  does
      not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for  further  leave
      to remain as I find it reasonable for him to accompany his parents  to
      Bangladesh.


  38. I now consider all the  appellants  rights  under  Article  8  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights which by definition shows that the
      appellants have failed to succeed under the Immigration Rules but  may
      succeed under the law on Article 8 grounds despite the  provisions  of
      the Immigration Rules. A failure to comply with the rules thus remains
      the starting point of the Article 8 inquiry and not its conclusion.


  39. I have also considered the case of Gulshan  which  states  that  after
      applying the requirements of the Immigration Rules, only if there  may
      be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is
      it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there
      are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under  them.
      I take this to mean that  it  will  only  be  in  exceptional  and  or
      compelling circumstances that a  claimant  will  succeed  pursuant  to
      Article 8 when he  or  she  cannot  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the
      Immigration Rules. I will now make an assessment of Article 8 applying
      the criteria established by law. I consider in this regard  the  Upper
      Tribunal's observation in MF  (Article  8-new  rules)  Nigeria  [2012]
      00393 (IAC) to the same effect is endorsed. Izuazu (Article  8  -  new
      rules [2013] UKUT 45.


40. In determining whether the appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom
    would constitute a disproportionate  interference  with  her  right  to
    respect for private and family life under Article 8, I have  considered
    each of the following issues, as laid  down  at  paragraph  17  of  the
    speech of Lord Bingham of Cornhill in R v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department, ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27:

      1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
         with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his
         private or family life?


      2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
         potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


      3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


      4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic society in
         the interests of national security, public safety or the economic
         well-being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime,
         for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of
         the rights and freedoms of others?


      5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
         end sought to be achieved?

41. The question to be decided is whether the refusal of leave  to  remain,
    'in circumstances where the life of the  family  cannot  reasonably  be
    expected  to  be  enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking  full  account   of   all
    considerations weighing in favour of the refusal, prejudices the family
    life of the applicant in a manner sufficiently serious to amount  to  a
    breach of the fundamental  right  protected  by  article  8'  (Huang  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007]  UKHL  11  ('Huang'),
    para. 20).  In considering this question, I must take into account  all
    factors that that weigh in favour of the refusal  of  leave,  including
    the desirability of applying a workable,  predictable,  consistent  and
    fair system of immigration control (Huang, para. 16).  Against this,  I
    must take into account the effect that refusal of leave would  have  on
    the enjoyment of the appellant's private and family life in  her  case,
    bearing in  mind  the  core  value  that  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention seeks to protect, and the  fact  that  '[t]heir  family,  or
    extended family, is the group on which many people most heavily depend,
    socially, emotionally and often financially' (Huang, para. 18).

42. I have taken into account that from 28 July  2014  section  19  of  the
    Immigration  Act  2014  is  brought  into  force:  article  3  of   the
    Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No  1,  Transitory  and   Saving
    Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/1820).  This  amends  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 by introducing  a  new  Part  5A  which
    contains sections 117A, 117B, 117D and 117D. Part 5A only applies where
    the Tribunal considers article 8(2) ECHR directly



43. Paragraph 135  of R(MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 states:

         135.  Where the relevant group of  IRs  [immigration  rules],  upon
         their proper construction provide a  "complete  code"  for  dealing
         with a person's Convention rights in the context of a particular IR
         or statutory provision, such as in the case of "foreign criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with  that  code,  although  reference  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality exercise.  But if the relevant group of IRs is  not
         such a "complete code" then the proportionality test will  be  more
         at large, albeit guided by the Huang tests and  UK  and  Strasbourg
         case law."



44. I answer the first four questions in Razgar  in  the  affirmative.  The
    only issue in the appeal therefore for me to decide is proportionality.
    I guide myself that I must make a  fact  sensitive  assessment  of  the
    appellants'   circumstances   and   make   my   own    assessment    of
    proportionality. When considering whether a decision is  in  accordance
    with the law, it has been authoritatively  established  by  the  higher
    courts that the test to be applied is not exceptional circumstances  or
    insurmountable obstacles. It is obvious that respect for  a  claimant's
    family and private life under Article 8 (1) is subject to proportionate
    and justified interferences  in  pursuit  of  a  legitimate  aim  under
    Article 8(2). (Izuazu)

45. The issue in this  appeal  to  be  decided  in  respect  of  the  third
    appellant who is a minor is the proportionality of his removal from the
    United Kingdom with his parents taking his best interests into account.
    I have also taken into account that in considering an application under
    European Convention on Human Rights Article 8, the decision maker  must
    take into account the best interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
    consideration. It  is  however  a  primary"  and  not  "the  paramount"
    consideration.

46. It was argued  that  it  is  not  proportionate  to  remove  the  third
    appellant, the first and second appellants should be allowed to  remain
    as the third appellant's carers and the  fourth  appellant  aged  three
    should also be allowed to remain with the family. It  was  also  argued
    that the first and second and  fourth  respondent's  removal  would  be
    disproportionate in itself and a breach of their private life  as  they
    have been in the United Kingdom for eight years lawfully.

47. It is submitted that that the third appellant has real and  significant
    ties to the community in this country as he has lived  here  for  about
    eight years continuously and that I should take this into account in my
    proportionality exercise. I was also asked to take  into  account  that
    the third appellant is now eight years  of  age  and  is  receiving  an
    education in this country and is happy. I take into  account  that  the
    third appellant does not wish to return  to  Bangladesh  and  wants  to
    continue with his education here.

48. It is argued that taking the  third  appellant's  best  interests  into
    account, it entitles him to live in this country and it  also  entitles
    his parents and sibling to remain with him to enjoy their  family  life
    in the United Kingdom together. It is trite law that foreign  nationals
    cannot choose to conduct their family life in the United Kingdom.

49. The reasons given for why the third appellant should not  be  asked  to
    leave the United Kingdom are that after seven  years  child  puts  down
    roots in this country and therefore  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
    require him to leave the United Kingdom and go to a  country  where  he
    has never been. It is a further been argued that it  is  difficult  for
    him to readjust to  Bangladesh  because  he  does  not  understand  the
    culture or the language in that country.

50. This is not exactly accurate because it  is  accepted  that  the  third
    appellant speaks in Bengali to his parents. This demonstrates  that  he
    understands the language which will go a long way in ensuring  his  and
    his three-year-old sibling will  integration  into  Bangladesh.  It  is
    clear that the first and second appellant have ties to  Bangladesh  and
    understand the culture of that country and  they  have  not  sought  to
    argue otherwise. The third appellant is about eight years  of  age  and
    the fourth appellant is about three years of  age.  Both  of  them  can
    adapt to life in Bangladesh with the help and advice of their parents.

51. The appellants argued that they have been lawfully resident and working
    in the United Kingdom and are not in breach of immigration law. While I
    accept that they have not breached  immigration  rules  which  goes  to
    their credit, the immigration status of  the  family  has  always  been
    precarious because they have been resident in this country  on  student
    visas. They could not have had an expectation that they could  continue
    to live in this country permanently unless they were able to fulfil the
    requirements for further leave to remain pursuant  to  the  Immigration
    Rules which they have not been able to do.

52. I have considered all these factors in reaching my  conclusion.  Taking
    into account  all  the  evidence  in  this  appeal  and  the  arguments
    submitted by the parties including case law I find that the  appellants
    can be returned to Bangladesh as a family unit. The best  interests  of
    the third appellants lies in living with his parents in Bangladesh as a
    family unit. I find that the fourth appellant is about three  years  of
    age and taking his best interests into account, he can also return with
    his parents to Bangladesh.

53. I find that there are no compelling compassionate or other reasons  why
    the public interest in maintenance of firm and fair immigration control
    should not prevail.

54. I therefore dismiss the third appellant's appeal pursuant to  paragraph
    297 ADE. It is been accepted that the first second and fourth appellant
    do not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. I  also  dismiss
    all the appellants' appeals pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.


Decision


    Appeals Dismissed for all four appellants



Signed by


Mrs S Chana

A Deputy Judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal            Dated  this  5th  day  of
    November 2014
