
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48678/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th January 2016                  |On 26th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Raja Hasan Raza Khan
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:   Written representations received.  No appearance at
hearing.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  against  her
    refusal to issue him an extended family member residence  card  to  the
    claimant under Regulation 17(4) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 (as amended).

 2. The claimant is a Pakistani citizen and  his  partner  is  a  Slovakian
    citizen, working here for various mobile telephone companies.

Background

 3. The claimant did not apply to enter the United Kingdom as the unmarried
    partner of an EEA  citizen  exercising  her  Treaty  rights  here.   He
    entered the United Kingdom as a student on 15 October 2007.  He has not
    had any lawful status in the United Kingdom  since  his  student  leave
    expired in 2007 or  2008.   He  was  served  with  form  IS151A  as  an
    overstayer on 12 July 2012 but did not embark.  He made a human  rights
    application which was refused on 21 May 2013 and refusal maintained  on
    4 June 2014.  The claimant did not embark for Pakistan, his country  of
    origin.

 4. On 4 June 2014, the claimant made an application for  an  EEA  extended
    family member  residence  card  based  on  his  relationship  with  his
    Slovakian partner. The Secretary of State refused: she considered  that
    the appellant's claimed relationship with an unmarried partner, an  EEA
    citizen said to be exercising Treaty rights in the United Kingdom,  was
    not genuine and was one of convenience.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the  relationship  between  the
    claimant and his partner was genuine and  durable.   The  Secretary  of
    State does not dispute that finding and it is no longer in  issue  that
    the appellant is an extended family member  as  defined  in  Regulation
    8(5) of the EEA Regulations.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal then went on to allow the appeal outright under
    the Immigration Rules, not the EEA Regulations.  That takes no  account
    of the Secretary  of  State's  discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)  in
    respect of extended family members who can meet the Regulation 8 test:

         "(4) The Secretary of State  may  issue  a  residence  card  to  an
         extended family member not falling within regulation  7(3)  who  is
         not an EEA national on application if-

             (a)  the relevant EEA national in  relation  to  the  extended
             family member is a qualified person or an EEA national with  a
             permanent right of residence under regulation 15; and

             (b)  in all the circumstances it appears to the  Secretary  of
             State appropriate to issue the residence card."

Permission to appeal

 7. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in failing to approach this appeal  as  set  out  in
    Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 340 (IAC):

         "i)  Article 3(2) of Directive  2004/38/EC  ("Citizens  Directive")
         treats other family members ("OFMs") as a residual category and, in
         contrast to close family members ("CFMs")  within  the  meaning  of
         Article 2(2), does not limit it to particular  types  of  relatives
         (plus  spouses  or  civil  partners).  There  is  nothing  in   the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 akin  to  the
         Immigration Appeals (Family Visitor) Regulations 2003 which in  our
         domestic  immigration  law  seeks  to  specify   exhaustively   the
         categories of family relationship that can qualify a  person.  Only
         relatives are covered, albeit with focus on  those  relatives  with
         whom the Union citizen has significant factual ties.

         ii)  An important  consideration in the context of an  OFM/extended
         family member case is that if a claimant had come to the UK without
         applying for a family permit from abroad (for  which  provision  is
         made  in  reg  12  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
         Regulations 2006), this will mean that the UK authorities have been
         prevented  from  conducting  the  extensive  examination   of   the
         individual's personal circumstances envisaged by reg 12(3)  and  in
         the  course  of  such  an  examination  check   the   documentation
         submitted. If an applicant chooses not to apply from abroad  for  a
         family permit under reg 12 of the 2006 Regulations, thereby denying
         the UK authorities an opportunity to  check  documentation  in  the
         country concerned, he cannot expect any relaxation in the burden of
         proof that applies to him when seeking to establish an EEA right.

         iii) Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family  member  a  matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."

Discussion

 8. The claimant's solicitors do not now dispute the error of  law  on  the
    basis of which permission to appeal was  granted.  His  solicitors,  St
    John Legal, did not attend the hearing or arrange representation.  They
    wrote to the Upper Tribunal on 18 November 2015 in the following terms:

         "...We confirm that we concede to the point raised by the Secretary
         of State and agree for the matter to be looked at again by the Home
         Office.  We  would  however  request  that  the  matter  is  kindly
         considered on an urgent basis in light of the time that our  client
         has already spent awaiting a determination of his application. ..."

 9. I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law,  both  by
    determining this  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  not  the  EEA
    Regulations, and in allowing  it  outright,  rather  than  leaving  the
    discretion in Regulation 17(4) to be  exercised  by  the  Secretary  of
    State,  as  Ihemedu  requires.   Such  error  is  material,  since  the
    Secretary of  State  has  not  had  any  opportunity  to  exercise  her
    discretion  or  to  consider  all  the  circumstances,  including   the
    claimant's poor immigration history.

10. I allow the Secretary of State's appeal and set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  The claimant's appeal is allowed  to  that  limited
    extent and it remains for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  exercise  her
    discretion under Regulation 17(4).

Conclusions

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it to the extent  that  the
appellant's application remains before the Secretary of State for  a  lawful
decision under Regulation 17(4) of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
Regulations 2006 (as amended).


Signed:  Judith AJC Gleeson    Date: 25 January 2016
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
