
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48898/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 3 September 2015                  |On 9 September 2015                  |
|Prepared on 3 September 2015         |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                 HUANG SONG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Carrington, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kingham, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, born 17 December 1992, is a  citizen  of  China.  He
         first came to the UK to study with a valid grant of entry clearance
         as a Tier 4 student in June 2013, and on 4 August 2014  he  applied
         for leave to remain in the same capacity. On 5 September  2014  the
         Appellant  was  interviewed  by  the  Respondent.  That   interview
         prompted a decision on 20 November 2014 that he was  not  genuinely
         able to undertake the course he had applied to follow, and was  not
         genuinely able to communicate in English at  the  standard  he  had
         claimed  to  have  in  his  application,  taken  by  reference   to
         paragraphs 245ZX(da) and 245ZX(o) of the Immigration Rules.   As  a
         result the application was  refused  on  24  November  2014  and  a
         removal decision was also made on that date pursuant to s47 of  the
         2006 Act.

      2. The Appellant duly appealed against  those  immigration  decisions.
         His appeal was heard on 10 March 2015 and it  was  dismissed  under
         the Immigration Rules and  on  Article  8  grounds  in  a  Decision
         promulgated on 1 April 2015 by First Tier Tribunal Judge Fisher.

      3.  The  Appellant's  application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
         permission to appeal was granted by Judge Cheales on 9  June  2015.
         Thus the matter comes before me.

    The decision under appeal

      4. The Appellant produced in support of his application a CAS that had
         been issued to him by the University of Sunderland  which  declared
         that his fluency in English had been assessed as equivalent to CEFR
         B2 by reference to the 2:2 degree that had been awarded to  him  by
         that University in June 2014.

      5.  On  5  September  2014  the  Appellant  was  interviewed  by   the
         Respondent, by reference to paragraph 245ZX(da);

             (da)       The  applicant  must,  if  required  to  do  so  on
                  examination or interview, be able to  demonstrate  without
                  the  assistance  of  an   interpreter   English   language
                  proficiency  of  a  standard  to  be  expected   from   an
                  individual who has reached the  standard  specified  in  a
                  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies   assigned   in
                  accordance with  Appendix  A  paragraph  118(b)  (for  the
                  avoidance of doubt, the applicant will not be subject to a
                  test at the standard set  out  in  Appendix  A,  paragraph
                  118(b)). (01.10.2013 HC 628)

      6. The Appellant's performance  at  that  interview  resulted  in  the
         decision on 20 November 2014 that he  was  not  genuinely  able  to
         undertake the course he had applied to follow, and that he was  not
         genuinely able to communicate in English at  the  standard  he  had
         claimed to have in his  application,  by  reference  to  paragraphs
         245ZX(da) and 245ZX(o);

             (o)  the  Secretary  of  State  must  be  satisfied  that  the
                  applicant is a genuine student.

      7. The application was then refused on 24 November 2014 and a  removal
         decision was also made by reference to s47.

    Error of Law?

      8. At the hearing the Appellant was the subject of a cross-examination
         that  the  Judge  was  satisfied  established  that  he  could  not
         understand many of the questions  posed  to  him  [10].  The  Judge
         recorded  in  his  decision  the  questions  and  answers  that  he
         considered most significant, and it is plain that there was a sound
         evidential basis for this finding  [5].  Mr  Carrington  (who  also
         appeared for the Appellant before  the  Judge)  accepted  that  the
         Appellant had been in difficulties at the hearing, and he  accepted
         that he raised no challenge to the accuracy of the  Judge's  record
         of the evidence.

      9. I note that  Mr  Carrington  undertook  no  re-examination  of  the
         Appellant to seek to repair any of the  damage  inflicted  by  that
         cross-examination, and that the Judge was best placed to assess for
         himself whether the questions had been put fairly and clearly,  and
         whether the Appellant was struggling to answer them because of  his
         fluency or because of some other reason.

     10. I also note that Mr Carrington raised before me no challenge to the
         accuracy of  the  record  of  the  Appellant's  interview,  and  no
         complaint about the way in which it had been conducted. He accepted
         that this too showed that the Appellant had been  in  difficulties.
         The Judge made two key findings about  this  interview  which  were
         therefore unchallenged; (i) that the Appellant's criticisms of  his
         interview were unfounded, and, (ii)  that  he  was  not  unable  to
         answer the questions asked because he was  anxious  or  tired,  but
         because of his extremely limited ability in English [10].

     11. Against this background the Appellant argues two grounds,  which  I
         shall take in turn.

     12. The first ground commences by asserting that the  Judge  failed  to
         apply the correct burden and standard of proof. There is  no  merit
         in that assertion. It was for the Appellant to  establish  that  he
         met the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(da) and paragraph 245ZX(o),
         on the balance of probabilities and that is the direction the Judge
         gave himself. There is nothing in the decision to suggest  that  he
         applied a different burden and standard of proof, and Mr Carrington
         accepted that he was unable to identify anything that did so.

     13. The first ground goes on to  argue  that  the  Respondent  and  the
         Tribunal  have  gone  behind  the  evidence  relied  upon  by   the
         University to assess  the  Appellant's  language  fluency,  without
         having sufficient evidence to rebut that assessment, so  that  they
         have both usurped the function and powers of the University.  There
         is no  merit  in  that  argument  either  because  it  ignores  the
         existence of paragraph 245ZX(da), and  it  also  assumes,  wrongly,
         that the fluency  assessment  undertaken  by  the  University  when
         issuing a student's  CAS  is  somehow  to  be  taken  by  both  the
         Respondent  and  the  Tribunal  under  the  Immigration  Rules   as
         conclusive of the  level  of  fluency  attained  by  an  individual
         student.

     14. The second ground asserts that  the  Judge  has  "gone  behind  the
         findings in the documents that were provided" and that "there is an
         evidential burden on the Respondent to show that the documents were
         not genuine". Mr Carrington argued that the award of  a  degree  to
         the Appellant by the University of Sunderland in  June  2014  spoke
         for itself as to his language fluency. Since the CEFR B2 assessment
         of fluency was based on the award of that degree it  was  therefore
         not open to the Respondent  or  the  Judge  to  reach  a  different
         conclusion in relation to the assessment of the Appellant's fluency
         without the Respondent having established either that no degree had
         in fact been awarded to him, or, that the degree awarded  had  been
         obtained by deception.

     15. The answer to this argument is to be found in the Judge's decision.
         Having looked at all of the evidence which he was permitted to look
         at by virtue of s85A, and  indeed  in  addition  at  the  documents
         produced at the hearing which s85A precluded him from admitting  in
         evidence, the Judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
         demonstrated the requirements of paragraph 245ZX(da) [11]. Although
         the paragraph number is not given, it is plain  from  the  language
         used by the Judge that this is what he was referring to. There  was
         an assessment by the Judge of the weight  that  could  properly  be
         given to the different elements of the  evidence  that  was  before
         him. In the light of the Appellant's performance at  interview  and
         under cross-examination, there was an obvious  disparity  with  the
         award of the degree in June 2014 and the documents produced by  the
         Appellant  at  the  hearing  which   were   said   to   demonstrate
         satisfactory progress in his study  for  his  Masters  degree.  The
         Judge noted that disparity and he noted the subject of  the  course
         of study that the Appellant said he was pursuing, since Mathematics
         for example might require less fluency, and he recognised that  his
         conclusion cast doubt on  the  reliability  of  the  documents  the
         Appellant had produced at the hearing. There was in my judgement no
         error of law disclosed as a result of his doing any of this.

     16. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on the application of R) v Cardiff
         County Council [2011] EWHC 23, the importance of  the  approach  in
         Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318. Evidence, whether  oral  or
         documentary, does not carry with it a presumption of  authenticity,
         which specific evidence must disprove, failing  which  its  content
         must be accepted. What is required is its appraisal in the light of
         the evidence about its nature, provenance,  timing  and  background
         evidence and in the light of all the other evidence  in  the  case,
         especially that given  by  the  claimant.  That  is  precisely  the
         exercise the Judge undertook. What the criticisms of  the  decision
         fail to engage with is the extremely  damaging  evidence  that  was
         before the Judge. The Judge was entitled to find that the interview
         record and the performance under cross-examination were  compelling
         evidence which indicated  the  Appellant's  true  fluency.  He  was
         entitled to find, after looking at the evidence in the round, as he
         plainly did, that the Appellant had failed to meet the requirements
         set out in paragraph 245ZX(da) and thus  245ZX  (o).  The  decision
         discloses no error of law.

     17. No Article 8 appeal was pursued before the First Tier Tribunal, and
         no  criticism  is  raised  by  the   Appellant   of   the   Judge's
         consideration of the guidance to be found in Nasim [2014] UKUT  25,
         and his decision in consequence  that  the  Appellant's  desire  to
         pursue an education in the UK in these circumstances did not engage
         his Article 8 rights. It is clear that the arguments available  did
         not rely upon the core concepts of moral and physical integrity. In
         my judgement the Judge was correct to conclude  that  the  evidence
         relied upon did  not  establish  that  there  were  any  compelling
         compassionate circumstances that meant the decision to  remove  the
         Appellant to China, lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.

    DECISION

    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 1
    April 2015 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  in  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade. The decision to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
    confirmed.

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008

    The Appellant did not seek anonymity before the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
    and no request for anonymity is made to me.  There  appears  to  be  no
    proper basis for the Upper Tribunal to make such a direction of its own
    motion.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes
Dated  3 September 2015
