
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/48173/2013
                                                               IA/48174/2013
                                                               IA/48175/2013
                                                               IA/48176/2013
                                                               IA/48177/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 9 December 2014                        |On 6 January 2015                |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                              mr kamran haider
                               mrs Tayyaba naz
                             master haris kamran
                             miss maryum batool
                           master hussain rafique
                       (Anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms L Kenny (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharma (Counsel)
                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants' appeals against  decisions  to  refuse  to  vary  their
    leave and to remove them from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions
    under section 47 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2006
    were allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid  ("the  judge")  in  a
    determination promulgated on 23 October 2014.  The  judge  allowed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules ("the rules") and also under Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention.  An  application  for  permission  to
    appeal was made by the Secretary of State but it will be convenient  to
    refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  so
    that the Secretary of State is the respondent in what  follows  and  Mr
    Kamran Haider and his family members are the appellants.

2.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    judge's findings were wholly inadequate.  It  was  not  clear  why  the
    appeals were allowed  in  relation  to  the  rules.   In  refusing  the
    applications for further leave, the Secretary of State  found  that  Mr
    Kamran Haider was not entitled to the points claimed as the evidence he
    provided regarding his  earnings  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Appendix A of the rules.  The business bank statements  were  deficient
    and he was not entitled to  the  points  claimed  in  relation  to  his
    previous earnings.  The Secretary of State also found that he  had  not
    shown that he was entitled to points in relation  to  "UK  experience",
    under Appendix A.

3.   It was also contended that that the judge erred in relation to  Article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention.  He failed to have regard to  section
    117 of the 2002 Act, introduced with effect from 28 July  2014  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.   The  judge's  findings  regarding  private  and
    family life were inadequate and there  was  nothing  to  show  why  the
    appellants' circumstances were compelling or  exceptional.   Mr  Kamran
    Haider's children were young enough  to  adapt  to  life  in  Pakistan,
    following removal of the entire family and it was reasonable to  expect
    them to do so as they would have the support of their parents there and
    other family members.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 10 November 2014 and in  directions
    made by the Principal Resident Judge, the parties were advised that  if
    the decision were  set  aside,  any  further  evidence  that  might  be
    required if the Upper Tribunal decided to remake the decision could  be
    considered, at the hearing.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Kenny said that the judge had not made  clear  why  he  allowed  the
    appeal.  He had not engaged with the 2014  Act  and  the  determination
    contained nothing at all in relation to section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act, even though the hearing took place in October 2014.  There were no
    findings regarding the reasonableness of  return  to  Pakistan  of  the
    children, with their parents.

6.   Mr Sharma said that the appellants accepted that the determination  was
    not well-written.  However, at paragraph 3 the judge made clear that he
    had borne in mind the rules, as they applied in a case of more than ten
    years' lawful residence here.  Mr Kamran Haider could show just such  a
    period of residence and that he met the requirements of paragraph 276B.
     Although he could not formally show that the knowledge of life in  the
    UK aspect of the rule was met,  the  judge  ought  to  have  given  the
    Secretary of State an opportunity to  deal  with  long  residence.   No
    material error of law would have been present if the judge had  decided
    to allow the  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law, as the requirements of the long residence rule
    were met.   In  Mr  Kamran  Haider's  witness  statement,  he  provided
    sufficient detail to show more than ten years'  lawful  residence.   As
    was clear from MU [2010] UKUT 442, such a period might accrue while  an
    appeal is pending and the  Tribunal  might  then  be  asked  to  decide
    whether an appellant qualifies for leave on this basis.  An application
    cannot be made under the long residence rule for  only  limited  leave,
    but two years' leave may be granted under paragraphs 276A(1) to (4), to
    applicants for indefinite leave who are ineligible solely because their
    knowledge of English or life in the UK is not good enough.   Mr  Kamran
    Haider had submitted a certificate  showing  his  Masters  Degree.   Mr
    Sharma accepted that the discretionary requirements of  paragraph  276B
    would have to be met but this was a matter for the Secretary of  State.



7.   Ms Kenny responded by saying  that   there  was  insufficient  evidence
    before the Tribunal to show that Mr Kamran Haider could  succeed  under
    paragraph 276B of the rules.  The judge's error of  law  was  certainly
    material as he had failed to engage with the Secretary of State's case.
     The letter containing the reasons for the adverse  decisions  included
    consideration of section 55 of the 2009 Act.  It  was  clear  that  the
    judge ought not to have proceeded to  allow  the  appeal  substantively
    under paragraph 276B although, at its highest, the  appeal  might  have
    been allowed on a limited basis with further findings being required in
    relation to any appropriate grant of leave.

Decision on Error of Law

8.   Both sides accept that the determination is not well-written.   In  the
    "dispositive reasons and  deliberations"  part,  much  of  the  judge's
    reasoning is merely a summary of some of the leading cases.  The  judge
    drew attention to the period of years Mr Kamran  Haider  has  spent  in
    this country lawfully, and to  the  birth  of  his  children  here,  at
    paragraph 15.  He  emphasised,  at  paragraph  25,  "powerful  factors"
    identified earlier in the  determination  at  paragraph  10.   He  gave
    weight to particular aspects of  Mr  Kamran  Haider's  case,  including
    knowledge of the English language, the absence of any  benefits  claim,
    save for child benefit,  and  the  claim  that  the  family  are  fully
    integrated in  British  society.   Those  factors  were  sufficient  to
    persuade the judge that "depriving these appellants of  the  protection
    of Article 8 will be 'disproportionate'".

9.   The fundamental difficulty is that the determination does not show  any
    real engagement with the Secretary of State's  case  and,  taking  into
    account the hearing in October 2014, there is nothing to show that  the
    judge has taken into account and applied section 117A of the 2002  Act,
    brought into effect by the 2014  Act.   As  Ms  Kenny  submitted,  even
    though the time spent in the  United  Kingdom  by  the  oldest  of  the
    children might have weight as a factor falling on the appellants' side,
    section 117B(6) puts in issue the reasonableness  of  return.   At  the
    very least, the judge was  required  to  make  an  assessment  in  this
    context.

10.  The absence of a full engagement with the  Secretary  of  State's  case
    and the apparent failure to take into account and  apply  section  117A
    amount to material errors of law and the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside and remade.

Remaking the Decision

11.  The Secretary of State having succeeded in showing a material error  of
    law, such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal fell to  be  set
    aside, the Upper Tribunal embarked on remaking  the  decision,  in  the
    light of the directions given by the Principal Resident Judge.  Neither
    side wished to call any evidence,  Mr  Sharma  being  content  to  make
    submissions on the appellants' behalves.

12.  Taking into account leave available to Mr Kamran Haider  under  section
    3C of the 1971 Act, he could show more than ten years' lawful residence
    in the United Kingdom.  Mr Sharma said that guidance given by the Upper
    Tribunal in MU showed that Mr Haider could seek to  rely  on  paragraph
    276B of the rules.  His appeal ought to succeed on the basis  that  the
    adverse decisions were not in accordance with the law as the  Secretary
    of State had not taken into account paragraph 276B and she should  have
    an opportunity to do so, with a possible outcome being two years  leave
    in accordance with  the  rules,  once  she  had  considered  Mr  Kamran
    Haider's knowledge of English and of life in the United Kingdom.

13.  Ms Kenny said that the respondent accepted the case put  on  behalf  of
    Mr Kamran Haider.

14.  In the light of the apparent agreement between  the  parties  that  the
    Secretary of State ought to take into account  paragraph  276B  of  the
    rules, and the indication that she would wish to do so, and taking into
    account the absence of any express consideration  of  the  years  spent
    lawfully in the United Kingdom by  Mr  Kamran  Haider  and  his  family
    members, the appeal is allowed on the basis that the adverse  decisions
    are not in accordance with the law.   The  appellants  await  a  lawful
    decision from the Secretary of State, once paragraph 276B of the rules,
    and section 117A to D of the 2002 Act have been taken into account  and
    applied.



NOTICE OF DECISION

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set  aside,  it  is
    remade as follows: the appeals are allowed as the adverse decisions are
    not in accordance with the law.

ANONYMITY

16.  There has been no application for anonymity in these proceedings and  I
    make no order on this occasion.




Signed                                  Date 05/01/2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeals have been allowed, in part because of the passage  of  time  and
the impact of leave under section 3C  of  the  1971  Act.   The  notices  of
appeal are dated 13 November 2013, at a time when the impact of  that  leave
was relatively modest.   On  the  other  hand,  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
attention was drawn to the period of time lawfully spent here by  the  first
appellant.  In all the circumstances, I make a fee award  of  half  the  fee
payable in these proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 05/01/2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




