
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48743/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30th June 2014                             |On 4th August 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                       Miss Flordeliza Maimban Gabriel
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Ward James & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on 10th October 1984
    who  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds.   Her
    application was refused 13th November 2013 under Appendix  FM,  as  the
    partner of Alan Andrew  West,  and  under  paragraph  276  ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The appeal was refused by First Tier Tribunal Judge Rose on 26th  March
    2014, who  recorded  that  neither  the  solicitor  nor  the  appellant
    attended.

 3. An application for permission  to  appeal  was  filed  by  James  &  Co
    Solicitors on behalf of the appellant, with a witness statement from Mr
    Paul Ward, the solicitor with conduct of the  appeal.  In  his  witness
    statement of 4th April 2014  he  confirmed  that  neither  he  nor  the
    appellant were aware of the date and time of the  hearing.   Permission
    was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth.

The Hearing

 4. Mr Ward of the Solicitors James & Co, attended and  confirmed  that  he
    had completed the notice of appeal and that the firm did not receive  a
    notice of hearing.  There were issues of  gravity  within  the  appeal.
    The appellant was living with a British citizen and together they  have
    a child who was now I year old.  It was curious that  both  notices  of
    appeal had gone astray and the one supposedly sent to the wrong address
    had not been returned.  This suggested that neither had been sent.   Mr
    Kandola submitted that the issue was whether the  correct  address  had
    been given for service.

Conclusions

 5. The notice of hearing was sent to both the appellant  and  James  &  Co
    Solicitors on 18th March 2013 by the Tribunal.    Although  Rule  48(9)
    of the Tribunal Procedure Rules states that  a  notice  served  on  the
    solicitors should be deemed as properly served unless the  Tribunal  is
    notified that the representatives have ceased to act and the  appellant
    has a duty to keep in contact with the solicitors,  it  seems,  on  the
    basis of the sworn witness statement and  appearance  of  Mr  James  at
    before the Upper Tribunal that  the  solicitors  did  not  receive  the
    notice of  hearing.   I  accept  this  to  be  the  case.  In  all  the
    circumstances,  I am satisfied that further  to  Rule  55(5)  that  the
    notice of hearing should not be deemed to have been properly served.

 6. In addition, although the appellant was represented, the appellant  was
    unable to alert the solicitor of the hearing as  the  notice  was  also
    sent by the Tribunal to  the  wrong  address  of  the  appellant.   The
    address for the solicitors was the  correct  address  but  the  address
    listed on the notice for the appellant was incorrect. The number  given
    on the notice was 10 not 18 which was the  correct  number.  The  first
    notice of appeal  was  lodged  by  the  solicitors  and  contained  the
    appellant's wrong house number.  A duplicate notice was also served  by
    the appellant's solicitors with the same  date  but  with  the  correct
    house number. This was easy to check  as  much  of  the  correspondence
    between the Home Office and the appellant was to the correct address of
    18.  Contrary to the judge's finding,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
    Tribunal had not been notified of the correct address of the  appellant
    further to Rules 56(2) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal Procedure
    Rules 2005.

 7. The judge could not have known of the procedural  error  regarding  the
    notice to the solicitors and  this  would  no  doubt  account  for  the
    failure, by the appellant or her solicitors as identified by the  judge
    [7], to serve any further evidence, in compliance  with  the  direction
    contained in the notice of hearing.

 8. In all the circumstances, there  has  been  a  procedural  irregularity
    which in effect denied the appellant the opportunity to  give  evidence
    and be represented at the  hearing,  which  is  an  error  of  law.   I
    therefore set aside the determination of Judge Rose albeit I make clear
    that the judge was not at fault for the error of law contained in  that
    determination.  The  matter  should  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing. The solicitors should advise  whether  an
    interpreter is required.

Signed                                             Date  25th July 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington








