
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/48145/2013
     IA/48148/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st October 2014                         |On 5th January 2015           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               mrs margret odunayo omozejele (first appellant)
         ms christiana modupe omoyemen omozejele (second appellant)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Corben, Counsel instructed by Legacy Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The first Appellant is a Nigerian citizen, and  the  second  her  adult
    daughter, also a Nigerian citizen. They appeal the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands, promulgated on 21st August 2014, in which
    he dismissed their appeals against the Respondent's  refusal  to  issue
    them with residence cards as confirmation of a right  of  residence  as
    the spouse and family member of a Slovakian national.

 2. The Appellants assert they arrived in the United Kingdom  from  Nigeria
    in 2009, on visit visas, at a time when the First Appellant was married
    to a Nigerian citizen in Nigeria.  They claimed asylum on the basis  of
    an asserted fear of forced circumcision of the Second  Appellant.   The
    application was refused but the Appellants did  not  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. On 13th May 2013 the Appellants sought  to  regularise  their  position
    here on the basis of the First Appellant's marriage of 25th April 2013,
    in the United Kingdom, to the sponsoring EEA Slovakian  national.   The
    application was refused on the basis that the First Appellant is not  a
    spouse of an EEA  national  with  reference  to  Regulation  2  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  which  states
    that, "spouse" does not include a party to a marriage  of  convenience.
    The Respondent also found that  the  Appellants  did  not  come  within
    Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  the
    context of their family and private life to the point that the decision
    did not breach Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The Appellants appealed through representatives  on  grounds  that  the
    marriage was genuine so that the Appellants were  entitled to residence
    cards,  and,  as  the  refusals  were  not  in  accordance   with   the
    regulations, they breached  Article  8,.  Further  that  the  emotional
    trauma and frustration caused by the refusal  of  the  application  and
    requiring the Appellant's to return to  Nigeria  amounted  inhuman  and
    degrading treatment contrary to Article 3.

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  reveals  that  the  judge
    identified the core issue as whether or not the first Appellant is in a
    durable subsisting  relationship  and  that  the  marriage  is  genuine
    (paragraph 19 refers).  The judge concluded, having heard the evidence,
    that he was not satisfied that the couple are a genuine married  couple
    who are in a durable subsisting marriage.

 6. The Grounds of Appeal assert that the judge  fell  into  error  of  law
    because the appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules, when  the
    proper framework was the EEA Regulations.   I  find  no  merit  in  the
    submission on this point.  The judge correctly identifies at  paragraph
    1 that the decision under appeal was a refusal  to  issue  a  residence
    card as confirmation  of  a  right  of  residence  under  the  European
    Community law as a spouse, correctly identifies at  paragraph  17  that
    the appeal is brought under the EEA Regulations.  The  judge  concludes
    his final paragraph by reference to a residence card, and  reading  the
    decision as a whole he has addressed issues relevant to Regulation 2 of
    the  EEA  Regulations.   In  the  context  of  the  whole  the  judge's
    references to  the  Immigration  Rules  amounts  to  little  more  than
    infelicitous wording.

 7. The grounds suggest that the judge fell into error in  suggesting  that
    the couple should not have been allowed to marry or were  not  in  fact
    married in the United Kingdom.  The assertion that the judge found that
    the Appellant should not have been allowed to marry is not made out  on
    a reading of the determination.  The judge expresses surprise that  the
    registrar was satisfied that the Sponsor "understood a single  word  of
    what was going on".  The Appellant's case was that she and her husband,
    contrary to the Respondent's view, were able to communicate in English.
     The matter of communication between the  couple  was  a  live  dispute
    before the judge about which evidence was led and  upon  which  he  was
    entitled to reach a conclusion.  The comments made are in that context,
    and were open to the judge on the  evidence.  A  full  reading  of  the
    decision also shows that the judge clearly understood that  the  couple
    had married in the United Kingdom and so the challenge to the  decision
    on the basis that the judge  mistakenly  thought  the  couple  had  not
    married are simply wrong.  It is completely  apparent  that  the  judge
    understood that he was assessing the character and quality  of  the  UK
    marriage.

 8. The grounds assert that  the  judge  had  no  evidence  upon  which  to
    conclude that the Respondent's  interview  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    partner was not rushed.  In this context the grounds again misread  the
    judge's decision.  The judge based his conclusions on what the  parties
    to the marriage told him at the oral hearing. At paragraph 21 the judge
    states,

         "Whatever the Appellant may argue about the bullish nature  of  the
         interview it was perfectly clear that the Appellant and her Sponsor
         were not rushed or hassled in any way when giving  evidence  before
         me."

 9. Finally the grounds assert that in failing to make a separate  decision
    in respect of the Ground of Appeal referencing Article 8, the judge has
    fallen into error.  I have set out above the basis of  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal in respect of Article 8 and it is self-evident that  in  finding
    that the family relationship relied upon was  not  subsisting,  and  no
    other issues being raised in the  grounds,  the  Article  8  Ground  of
    Appeal could have no possibility of success.  In  reality  this  was  a
    case where the Grounds of Appeal stood or fell as one.

10. Before me Mr Corben improved upon the grounds by reliance on  the  fact
    that the judge failed to expressly make a finding that the marriage was
    a marriage of convenience or to set out a  reasoning  which  referenced
    the case of Papajorgi (EEA spouse -  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 38 (IAC) to the point that the head note of that case  sets
    out,

    (i)  There is no burden at the outset of an application on  a  claimant
         to demonstrate that a marriage to an EEA national  is  not  one  of
         convenience.

    (ii) IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT  31  establishes
         only that there is an evidential burden on the claimant to  address
         evidence justifying  reasonable  suspicion  that  the  marriage  is
         entered into for the  predominant  purpose  of  securing  residence
         rights.

    (iii)    The guidance of the EU Commission is noted and appended.

11. Whilst  I  agree  that  the  judge  may  well  have  benefited  from  a
    consideration of the case of Papajorgi, and it is  plain  that  neither
    representative brought that case to his attention, the reality is  that
    the criticisms levelled amount to no more than the legalistic  forensic
    dissection of a decision which, whilst poorly worded in places, clearly
    engaged with the evidence of  the  issue  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    marriage was one of convenience.  The grounds fail to  appreciate  that
    credibility was at the heart of this appeal.  The Appellant had a  poor
    immigration history, the judge plainly found that  her  claims  of  the
    couple having a relationship which had endured since 2011, and who  had
    undergone a proxy marriage because of commitment to each other  in  the
    face of an inability to marry in the  United  Kingdom  because  of  the
    Appellant's immigration problems, was not made out.  The  judge  states
    at paragraph 22,

         "One thing which was abundantly clear from the  evidence  given  by
         the husband was that he had  no  comprehension  whatsoever  of  the
         nature [of] their proxy marriage which  he  actually  described  as
         "her" marriage.  He gave conflicting evidence as to what they  were
         doing when the marriage was taking place and I believe the truth is
         that he just simply had no idea that it was taking  place  at  all,
         let alone that her family were representing them in Nigeria.  I  am
         not satisfied that the proxy marriage was properly conducted in any
         kind of way in Nigeria which leads  me  to  conclude  that  he  had
         nothing to do with it and she has simply arranged this marriage and
         documentation in order to try and  prove  that  she  was  initially
         married to her husband for the purposes of her stay in  the  United
         Kingdom.

12. This was not a case where the judge can be said to have fallen foul  of
    the case of Papajorgi by expecting the  Appellant  to  prove  from  the
    offset that this was not a marriage of convenience.  It is quite  clear
    that the judge found that the reasons put forward by the Respondent for
    asserting that the First Appellant was not the "spouse" were sufficient
    to meet the burden on the Respondent so that the issue was properly put
    in issue before him.

13. In Papajorgi Mr Justice Blake concludes at paragraph 39 that where  the
    issue is raised in an appeal the question for the judge will be,

         "In the light  of  the  totality  of  the  information  before  me,
         including  the  assessment  of  the  claimant's  answers  and   any
         information provided, am I satisfied that it is more probable  than
         not this is a marriage of convenience?"

14. In the instant appeal the judge concludes at paragraph 23,

         "They gave conflicting answers in interview on  subjects  like  the
         rent that he was paying in Bolton and other matters and also at the
         hearing they gave conflicting evidence about what had  happened  on
         the Sunday before in particular about when he had left to  go  back
         to Bolton.  On the basis of the evidence that  was  given  and  the
         interviews that have taken place I am not  at  all  satisfied  that
         these two are a  genuine  married  couple  who  are  in  a  durable
         subsisting marriage."

15. In contrast with the case of Papajorgi where  Mr  Justice  Blake  noted
    that, "from first to last" the relationship never  had  any  appearance
    remotely suggesting that the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience,  the
    background to this case was entirely different.  In short, whilst it is
    arguable that the  judge's  conclusions  may  have  been  more  clearly
    expressed as a positive conclusion to the  point  that  on  balance  he
    found  it  more  probable  than  not  that  the  marriage  was  one  of
    convenience, it is clear that the expression in the  negative,  to  the
    point that he was not satisfied "that these two are a  genuine  married
    couple who are in a durable subsisting marriage" is  no  more  than  an
    alternative expression of the same point.  The Appellant can be  in  no
    doubt from reading this determination that the  judge's  conclusion  is
    that her UK marriage is a sham organised by her in order to  obtain  an
    immigration benefit, and that the judge has concluded that  to  be  the
    position to the standard of the balance of probabilities.

16. In the round, all of the criticisms of the determination amount  to  no
    more than criticisms of form rather than substance.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal reveals no  material  error  of
    law requiring it to be  set  aside  and  the  decision  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal stands.

18. No anonymity direction is made; none having been  made  previously  and
    none begin requested before me.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

