
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48787/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 May 2015                       |On 12 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                              janviere ingabire
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Price instructed by Rotherham & Co Ltd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Rwanda who was born  on  24  March  1980.
    She came to the UK in January 2010 as a student.  On 31  October  2011,
    the appellant was granted further leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant until 18 October 2013.

 2. On 17 October 2013, the appellant applied for further leave to  remain.
    The basis of her application was that she was the carer of Mrs  Stanway
    with whom she lived.  On 11  November  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the appellant further leave to remain and made  a  decision  to
    remove her by way of directions under s.47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 17 September 2014, Judge Warren L  Grant  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 18 February 2015 the Upper Tribunal  (DUTJ  Bruce)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  In essence, on the basis that:

         "... it is certainly  arguable  that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  its
         approach to Art 8,  it is further arguable that  the  Tribunal  did
         not  give  adequate  consideration  to  the  respondent's   'Carers
         Policy'".

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me.

Discussion

 6. Mr Price first relied upon the respondent's  "Carers  Policy"  in  IDI,
    chapter 17, s.2-Carers (at pages 76-87 of the  appellant's  bundle  for
    the FTT).  He submitted that the appellant fell within para 17.3 of the
    policy and he relied upon two letters, one from Dr SRM Brooke dated  17
    March 2014 (at page 35 of the  appellant's  bundle)  and  one  from  Dr
    Miller dated 6 September 2013 (at page 37 of the bundle).  He submitted
    that, contrary  to  the  judge's  finding  in  para  8,  these  reports
    identified a "need" for Mrs Stanway to be cared for by the appellant as
    a result of her health, in particular a painful muscular condition from
    which she suffered known as Polymyalgia Rheumatica.

 7. Mr Richards, on behalf of the Secretary of  State  submitted  that  the
    appellant could not succeed under the Carers Policy  as  it  was  clear
    from para 17.9, which applied to the appellant, that  applications  for
    leave to care for a sick or disabled friend would normally  be  refused
    unless, for example, there was an  emergency.   Mr  Richards  submitted
    that the judge's findings in para 8 of his determination were  properly
    open to the judge.  There was, he submitted, no need for the  appellant
    to provide the care to Mrs Stanway as claimed.

 8. Paragraphs 17.3 and 17.3.1 of the Carers Policy deal with  applications
    for "leave to remain" and the grant of "an initial period of  leave  to
    remain" as follows:

         "17.3 Leave to Remain

         Whilst each case must be looked at on its individual  merits,  when
         considering whether a period of leave to remain should be  granted,
         the following points are amongst those that should be borne in mind
         by caseworkers:

           . the type of illness/condition (this should be supported  by  a
             Consultant's letter); and

           . the type of care required; and

           . care which is available (e.g.  from  the  Social  Services  or
             other relatives/friends); and

           . the long-term prognosis.

         Caseworkers should be aware that while most applications will  come
         from carers who are in the UK as visitors this will not  always  be
         the case.

         17.3.1.  Granting an initial period of leave to remain

         Where the application is to care for a sick or disabled relative it
         will normally be appropriate to grant leave to remain for 3  months
         on Code 3 (no recourse to employment or public funds)  outside  the
         Rules.

         The applicant must be informed that leave has been granted  on  the
         strict understanding that during this period arrangements  will  be
         made for the future care of the patient by  a  person  who  is  not
         subject to the Immigration Rules.

         The following wording must be added to the grant letter:

         'I must advise you/your client that this  leave  has  been  granted
         exceptionally outside the normal requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules to enable you/your client to make permanent arrangements  for
         the future care of your/his/her relative, by a person  who  is  not
         subject to immigration control.  It is unlikely  that  any  further
         leave will be granted on this basis'."

 9. Paragraphs 17.4 and 17.4.1 deal with  an  application  for  a  "further
    period of leave to continue" (my emphasis) to care for a sick  relative
    or friend and the period of leave  which  will  be  granted.  In  other
    words, they deal with situations where an individual seeks an extension
    of existing leave as a carer granted under the policy.

         "17.4 Requests for further leave to remain

         Where an application is received requesting  a  further  period  of
         leave to continue to care for a sick  relative  or  friend  further
         detailed enquiries must be made to establish the full facts of  the
         case.  The applicant must produce the following:

           . a letter from a registered medical practitioner who  holds  an
             NHS consultant post with full details of the condition/illness
             and long term prognosis; and

           . a letter from the local Social Services Department, where they
             are  known  to  be  involved,  advising  of  their  level   of
             involvement, the perceived benefits of the  presence  here  of
             the  applicant,  and  an  explanation  as  to   why   suitable
             alternative care arrangements are not available.

           . Any further evidence that  alternative  arrangements  for  the
             care  of  the  patient  have  been,  or  are  being,  actively
             explored.  For example, whether contact  has  been  made  with
             voluntary services/charities to see  if  they  can  assist  or
             whether the possibility of private care has  been  costed  and
             assessed.  (a previous grant of a  3  month  extension  should
             have  been  accompanied  by  a  letter  explaining  that   the
             extension was granted to enable such arrangements to be  made,
             described in paragraph 4 above); and

           . full details of the patient's family in  the  United  Kingdom,
             the degree of relationship, and, if applicable, details of how
             the  patient  was  previously  cared   for   and   why   these
             arrangements are no longer considered suitable and/or  are  no
             longer available; and

           . details of the applicant's circumstances in his home  country,
             such as whether he has a spouse  and  children,  the  type  of
             employment and  other  relevant  family  circumstances  (as  a
             general rule a person seeking to remain in the United  Kingdom
             on a long term basis as a carer should normally  be  unmarried
             and have no dependants); and

           . evidence that there are sufficient funds available to maintain
             and accommodate himself/herself without working or recourse to
             public funds.

         Caseworkers should  be  aware  that  the  fact  that  we  may  have
         previously granted an applicant leave to remain as a carer does not
         give rise to a legitimate expectation that we should grant again.

         The enquiry letter in Annex  B  can  be  used  in  cases  where  an
         applicant is applying for leave/further  leave  to  remain  on  the
         basis  that  they  are  caring  for  a  sick  relative  or  friend.
         Caseworkers should note however, that the  letter's  questions  are
         not  exhaustive  and  should  be  amended  to  fit  the  particular
         circumstances of the case.

         17.4.1. Granting a further period of leave to remain

         In cases  where  there  are  sufficient  exceptional  compassionate
         circumstances to continue the  exercise  of  discretion,  leave  to
         remain may be granted for up to 12 months at a time, on Code 3  (no
         recourse to employment or public  funds).   In  wholly  exceptional
         circumstances Code  1A  (access  to  employment  and  public  funds
         allowed) may be appropriate but such a decision must not  be  taken
         without the agreement of a Senior Caseworker.

         In all cases it must be made clear to the carer that we are  acting
         exceptionally  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  wording  in
         section paragraph 3.1 can be added to the grant letter."

10. Mr Price submitted that para 17.3 applied  to  the  appellant.   In  my
    judgment, it does not.  As para  17.3.1  makes  plain,  what  is  being
    considered in 17.3 is a grant of leave to care for a "sick or  disabled
    relative".  Mrs Stanway is not a relative of the appellant.   I  accept
    that para 17.4, dealing with the grant of a "further period  of  leave"
    applies both to an individual seeking leave to care for a sick relative
    or friend but that also has no application here as this is the  initial
    (and not a further) application by the appellant for leave.

11. I accept Mr Richards' submission that it is para 17.9 which deals  with
    applications by, and the grant of leave to, carers of sick or  disabled
    friends.  That provides as follows:

         "17.9 Leave to Remain - Carers for friends of a  sick  or  disabled
         person

         Applications for leave to remain in order to care  for  a  sick  or
         disabled  friend  should  normally  be  refused.   However,  in  an
         emergency (e.g. where the patient has suddenly fallen ill and there
         is insufficient time to arrange permanent care or  where  there  is
         nobody else in the United Kingdom to whom the patient can turn)  it
         may be appropriate to grant leave.

         Caseworkers should request written confirmation  from  the  sponsor
         that the applicant is his/her friend.  The  sponsor  will  need  to
         indicate how long he has known  the  applicant  and  will  need  to
         confirm that s/he agrees that the  applicant  can  act  as  his/her
         carer.  If this is not possible, caseworkers will need  to  request
         such confirmation from the sponsor's relatives.

         Where appropriate, leave to remain may be granted for a period of 3
         months on Code 3  (no  recourse  to  employment  or  public  funds)
         outside the immigration  rules.   An  extension  of  further  leave
         should  not  be  given  unless   there   are   wholly   exceptional
         circumstances.  Such circumstances could include where the  sponsor
         is terminally ill and has no  Social  Services  or  family  support
         available."

12. Clearly, that is the applicable provision for  an  initial  application
    for leave as a carer of a friend and  any  further  applications  after
    that are dealt with by paras 17.4 and  17.4.1  which  I  have  set  out
    above.

13. Paragraph 17.9 makes plain that application for leave to  remain  as  a
    carer of a sick or disabled friend "should normally  be  refused".   An
    emergency situation is given as a possible context in which it might be
    appropriate to grant leave.

14. With those provisions in mind, I turn to how the judge dealt  with  the
    evidence and the need for the appellant to  care  for  Mrs  Stanway  at
    paras 7 and 8 of his determination as follows:

         "7.  I note from the evidence of Dr James Miller which  appears  at
             page 37 of the bundle that Mrs Stanway, who is nearly 81 years
             old, has made a full recovery from open  heart  surgery  which
             she underwent in 2008.  I  note  that  she  was  diagnosed  in
             February 2014 with Polymyalgia  Rheumatica  and  that  the  GP
             states that by the date of his letter she had  recovered.   He
             states that  she  recovered  largely  with  the  help  of  the
             appellant.  He makes no mention of any treatment or medication
             and there is no evidence that Mrs Stanway whose appearance and
             demeanour belies her age requires care let alone 24 hour care.
              His letter notes that the appellant 'lives with her and cares
             for her ... while holding down  a  full-time  job.'   In  this
             context I refer to the payslips and bank statements which show
             that she works in a care home for St John Care Trust.

         8.   I find that the appellant has been  living  with  Mrs  Stanway
             since January 2010 as she claims  and  I  have  no  reason  to
             believe that she is not a model tenant who takes care  of  Mrs
             Stanway's needs when she is at home.  However she cannot be at
             Mrs Stanway's home to provide care at all  times  because  her
             payslips show that she works nights and weekends and  although
             my copies are not easy to read I find that she works  over  60
             hours per month at night and over  60  hours  at  weekends  in
             order to earn as much money  as  possible  from  a  profession
             which is not well paid.  I do  not  find  that  the  appellant
             works nights every week or that she works  every  weekend  but
             the evidence shows that she works so often during what I might
             describe as unsociable hours that she is not available to  Mrs
             Stanway even if there was a need for her services which I find
             on the basis of the evidence there is not.  The appellant  may
             consider that theirs is a mother/daughter relationship but  at
             the same time I  am  asked  by  the  appellant  to  take  into
             consideration  the  respondent's  policy   regarding   carers.
             Although children do care for elderly parents I find that  the
             two categories namely parent/child and  patient/carer  are  in
             this case mutually exclusive.  There is  no  evidence  of  any
             need for the latter and no evidence of  a  relationship  which
             would even begin to constitute family life.  The points raised
             by  Miss  Riaz  in  her  submissions  were  I  regret  to  say
             disingenuous."

15. Mr Price submitted that the judge had wrongly concluded in para 8  that
    there was no "need" for the appellant to provide care to Mrs Stanway.

16. What, then, did the two letters from Dr Miller in September 2013 and Dr
    Brooke in March 2014 say about Mrs Stanway's health?  In his letter  of
    6th September 2013, Dr Miller said this:

         "Miss Stanway joined  this  Practice  in  1997  when  she  came  to
         Cirencester, a strong energetic woman, with a  healthy  regard  for
         life.

         In 2008, however, she had major heart surgery -  a  triple  by-pass
         and also a replacement Aortic Valve.  She made a swift and  healthy
         recovery.  However in February this year  she  was  diagnosed  with
         Polymyalgia Rheumatica (PMR) which severely affected her  but  from
         which she has recovered largely with  the  help  of  Miss  Janviere
         Ingabire, who  lives  with  her  and  cared  for  her  during  this
         difficult time whilst also holding down her own job.

         Miss Stanway is recovering well and generally enjoying life  again,
         but PMR is exhausting by nature, attacking the  muscles  with  pain
         and weakness.  Obviously this curtails activity demanding immediate
         rest.

         It is imperative that Miss Stanway has the required  help  on  hand
         and Miss Ingabire is clearly able to  supply  what  is  needed.   I
         therefore recommend that consideration is given to  extending  Miss
         Ingabire's Visa."

17. Dr Brooke's letter of 17 March 2014 was  in  much  the  same  terms  as
    follows:

         "I have known Ms Stanway for about 23 years; initially  I  was  her
         NHS GP and then for  the  last  few  years  she  has  consulted  me
         privately over various health issues.

         Ms  Stanway  suffers  from  a  painful  muscle   condition   called
         Polymyalgi Rheumatica and  an  irregular  heartbeat  called  Atrial
         Fibrilation and as a result she suffers from intermittent pains  in
         her back and legs and at times feels  very  fatigued  and  requires
         help with carrying things.  She takes  medication  to  control  the
         heart beat and enhance the free flow of her blood.

         I have been asked to assess the likely impact  on  Dot  Stanway  if
         Janviere Ingabire were no longer living with her.  Ms Stanway tells
         me that this would be like losing a daughter  and  that  she  would
         miss her terribly.  Janviere usually cooks the meals, helps to wash
         the dishes, keeps the  house  clean,  changes  the  bed  linen  and
         sometimes assists Ms Stanway with the shopping.

         Ms Stanway tells me that if Janviere were to leave then  she  would
         immediately lose a great deal of practical help at  home  but  that
         primarily she would suffer an overwhelming sense of loss as  though
         she had lost a close member of the family.  Ms Stanway  would  find
         life harder from both a practical and an emotional perspective.   A
         secondary consequence would be that Ms Stanway would be  likely  to
         need help from the social services sooner and to a greater degree."

18. It is not entirely  clear  to  me  why  Judge  Grant  interpreted  this
    evidence as not identifying any "need" for support for Mrs Stanway  and
    her every day care.  These letters, together with the evidence  of  the
    appellant (see pages 18-19) and Mrs Stanway recognise that she requires
    support, for example, in her every day domestic needs such  as  cooking
    meals, washing dishes and keeping the house in which she lived with the
    appellant running.  That need is derived from the consequences  of  Mrs
    Stanway's medical condition which leaves  her  with  intermittent  back
    pain and at times being "very fatigued".

19. It may be, however, that what Judge Grant meant in para 8 is  not  that
    Mrs Stanway does not have a need for domestic support but  rather  that
    it is not established that that need must be met by the  appellant.   I
    confess, however, that I find para 8 of  Judge  Warren's  determination
    unclear.  To the extent that he finds that Mrs Stanway  has  no  "need"
    for support, that finding 'flies in the face' of  the  evidence.   More
    likely,  he  was  concluding  that,  despite  that  need,  it  was  not
    established that it had to be met by the appellant.  That was a finding
    that was properly open to him on the evidence.

20. I acknowledge that Mrs Stanway considered that the appellant  was  like
    "a daughter" to her (see her witness  statement,  pages  22-24  of  the
    appellant's bundle at para 5-6).  That did not, however, establish that
    the appellant was the indispensible provider of care  to  Mrs  Stanway.
    The relationship between Mrs Stanway and the appellant  developed  over
    the period of time following the appellant moving in  as  a  tenant  in
    January 2010 when she was a student.  It is  clear  from  the  evidence
    that Mrs Stanway came to rely upon her and formed a  relationship  with
    her.  They clearly got on.  However, Mrs  Stanway  was  in  receipt  of
    attendance allowance in order to provide support and, it  appears  from
    Dr Brooke's letter, her finances allowed her to consult  him  privately
    over her health.  Just as Mrs  Stanway  found  the  appellant,  as  her
    residential tenant, was someone whom it was appropriate to provide  her
    with domiciliary support and care so Mrs Stanway could  in  the  future
    obtain similar support from another tenant or person whom she  paid  to
    provide that support.   There  is  no  solid  basis  for  reaching  any
    contrary conclusion on the evidence.  Indeed, as a long  stop,  if  Mrs
    Stanway's need become sufficiently  acute,  given  her  age,  there  is
    always the possibility of social services' involvement and support.  It
    is not suggested  that  Mrs  Stanway's  situation  is  such  that  that
    position has yet been reached.

21.  In  my  judgment,  even  accepting  Mrs  Stanway's  "need"  for   some
    domiciliary support, the appellant had no prospect of succeeding  under
    para 17.9 of the Carers Policy.  The circumstances were not  such  that
    there was any  basis  for  departing  from  the  "normal"  result  that
    applications for leave to remain  in  order  to  care  for  a  sick  or
    disabled friend should be refused.  This was not an emergency and there
    was nothing exceptional about the circumstances to require an  exercise
    of discretion in favour of the appellant.

22. For these reasons, therefore, I reject Mr Price's submission  that  the
    judge materially erred in law by failing to apply the Carers Policy  in
    the appellant's favour.

23. In relation to Art 8, Mr Price made two principal submissions.   First,
    he submitted that the judge had failed properly to  apply  Art  8.   In
    particular, he submitted that the judge should have  found  that  there
    was "family life"  between  the  appellant  and  Mrs  Stanway  and  the
    appellant and  Mrs  Stanway's  family  members.   He  relied  upon  Mrs
    Stanway's evidence that the appellant was like  a  daughter.   He  also
    relied upon the evidence of Mrs Stanway's brother,  Roger  Stanway  and
    his letter dated 16 February  2014  (at  page  32  of  the  appellant's
    bundle) that the appellant  was  "one  of  our  extended  family".   He
    submitted that the judge was wrong to find in para 8 that there was "no
    evidence of a relationship which would even begin to constitute  family
    life".

24. In order to establish "family life" under Art  8,  the  appellant  must
    establish that there are "close ties" of sufficient strength to  amount
    to "family life".  Approaching  that  issue,  regard  must  be  had  to
    emotional, financial or other dependency between the individuals.

25. Here, there is no doubt that Mrs Stanway enjoyed a  close  relationship
    with the appellant.  There is also  no  doubt  that,  on  a  day-to-day
    basis, she relies upon the appellant for support.  That  support  began
    when the appellant  rented  a  room  from  Mrs  Stanway.   Despite  the
    friendship which has clearly developed, the nature of the  relationship
    between Mrs Stanway and the appellant cannot, in my judgment,  properly
    be described as "family life".  No doubt given their  respective  ages,
    and the close friendship that  has  developed,  Mrs  Stanway  sees  the
    appellant as being like a  daughter.   However,  she  is  in  fact  not
    related to Mrs Stanway and  is  her  tenant  who  provides  domiciliary
    support because of Mrs Stanway's health.  Mr Price informed me  in  the
    course of the hearing that the appellant no longer pays rent.  No doubt
    that is a quid pro quo for the support and care the appellant provides.
     That relationship, undoubtedly, amounts to private life but it is  not
    of the quality or nature to have developed into family life.   Further,
    despite the appellant's acceptance within Mrs Stanway's family,  it  is
    simply unarguable that she has established family life with other adult
    members of Mrs Stanway's family based upon her friendship  and  support
    for Mrs Stanway herself.

26. For these reasons, I reject Mr Price's submission that the judge  erred
    in law by failing to treat the relationship between the  appellant  and
    Mrs Stanway and her family as amounting to "family life" under Art 8.

27. Turning now to Mr Price's other submission in relation  to  Art  8,  he
    submitted that it was unreasonable not to allow the appeal under Art  8
    given that the appellant could establish that she would be no  cost  to
    public funds and all the circumstances of the case.

28.  The judge dealt in some detail with the law and Art 8 at paras 9-20 of
    his determination, applying the five stage approach  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27 and setting out in full ss.117A and 117B of the NIA Act 2002.

29. At paras 21-23, Judge Grant made the following findings:

         "21. The appellant entered the UK 12 January  2010  with  leave  to
             enter as a student which was valid until 30 September 2011 and
             which was then extended into the category of post-study worker
             until 18 October 2013.  She has been working as a carer  in  a
             care home.  She knew that her presence in the  UK  was  for  a
             limited time  only  and  that  there  was  no  possibility  of
             extending or varying her leave to enter under the Rules.   She
             cannot be said to have been ignorant of  the  requirements  of
             immigration control given that she  had  applied  successfully
             for entry clearance and  for  a  variation  of  her  leave  to
             remain.  She has acquired education certificates, work  skills
             and fluent English which she can utilise on return.

         22.   In  the  event  that  the  proposed  removal  would   be   an
             interference of such gravity that it would engage  the  United
             Kingdom's  obligations  under  Article  8  of   the   European
             Convention to respect the appellant's private and family  life
             in the United Kingdom I  find,  taking  full  account  of  the
             relevant provisions of section 19 of the  2014  Act  that  the
             interference would be in accordance with the law and  for  the
             legitimate public end necessary in a democratic society of the
             maintenance  of  proper  immigration  control   (see   Shahzad
             (Article 8 legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC)).

         23.  For the avoidance of any doubt I find that the  appellant  has
             parents and siblings who  still  live  in  Rwanda.   She  gave
             evidence in fluent English but I find that  she  still  speaks
             the language used in Rwanda.  I refer to Ogundimu (Article 8 -
             new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC).  I find  that  her
             social and cultural ties are to Rwanda and not to the UK."

30. Given that the appellant could not succeed under the Immigration  Rules
    nor under the Carers Policy, the appellant had to establish that  there
    were "exceptional" or "compelling" circumstances such that the  refusal
    of leave would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  (see  R
    (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) and SSHD v SS (Congo) and Others
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387).  The judge clearly had in mind that the appellant
    spoke English and, as he had previously set out in  his  determination,
    that she was financially independent.  Both of those matters were  ones
    which the judge was required to have regard to by virtue  of  s.117A(2)
    read with s.117B(2) and (3).   However  neither  conferred  a  positive
    right to the grant of leave (see AM (s.117B) [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)).
    The judge correctly directed himself as regards the applicable law and,
    in my judgment, cannot be said  that  his  finding  was  irrational  or
    otherwise unsustainable in law given his  findings  of  fact  including
    that the appellant had no expectation of remaining  in  the  UK  having
    only temporary leave initially as a student and subsequently under Tier
    1 and retained ties with her own country, Rwanda.  The "needs"  of  Mrs
    Stanway, but not necessarily the requiring the appellant to meet  those
    needs, were not, in my judgment, "compelling" circumstances  so  as  to
    justify the grant of leave outside the Rules.



Decision

31. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal did not  materially  err
    in  law  such  that  its  decision  cannot  stand  in  dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

32. No anonymity direction was requested by either party.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
