
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48556/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 29 April 2014                          |On 23 May 2014              |
|                                          |............................|
|                                          |...........                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR MOHAMMAD RASEDUL HOQUE
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr G Saunders a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Mr M Hashim of counsel instructed by ICS
Legal

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department. I will
    refer to her as the Secretary of State. The respondent is a citizen  of
    Bangladesh who was born on 1 January 1987. I will refer to him  as  the
    claimant. The Secretary of State has been given  permission  to  appeal
    the determination of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Oliver ("the FTTJ")  who
    allowed the claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision
    of 1 November 2013 to refuse him further leave to remain in the  UK  on
    human rights grounds.


 2. The claimant arrived in the UK with entry clearance on 7 November  2005
    as a Tier 4 student with a visa valid  from  12  December  2005  to  31
    December 2008. If these dates are correct  it  is  not  clear  why  the
    claimant was allowed entry to the UK before  the  period  of  his  visa
    commenced but the point does  not  appear  to  have  been  queried  and
    nothing appears to turns on it. He was granted further leave as a  Tier
    4 student on 8 December 2011 for a period expiring on 30 October  2012.
    He applied for further leave on 13 October 2012 for reasons set out  in
    a letter from his solicitors dated 30 October 2012.  The  Secretary  of
    State refuse the application on 1 November 2013 on  Article  8  private
    life  grounds  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  276ADE   of   the
    Immigration Rules.


 3. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard his appeal on 30 January 2014.
    Both parties were  represented  and  the  claimant  gave  evidence.  It
    appears that the FTTJ accepted this evidence, finding that the claimant
    had failed to make good progress  with  his  studies  and  examinations
    because of a number of difficulties including the death of  his  father
    in March 2009, the serious ill-health of  his  mother  who  had  had  a
    stroke, family arguments and the claimant's own stress and anxiety  and
    physical ill-health.

 4. In paragraph 7 of the determination the FTTJ said; "the refusal  letter
    goes on, however, to pay what I can  only  regard  as  lip  service  to
    exceptional circumstances, simply citing the May 2013  end  to  studies
    without any consideration of why the target date was  not  met.  It  is
    therefore clear that the appellant did not exercise a  discretion  open
    to her which, if she  had  given  proper  consideration  to  the  facts
    outlined in the solicitors letter, could only have  been  exercised  in
    the appellant's favour."

 5. In his final conclusion the FTTJ said; "the appeal in  respect  of  the
    Immigration Rules is  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  because  the
    respondent has failed  properly  to  exercise  her  discretion  clearly
    signalled which could only  have  been  exercised  in  the  appellant's
    favour. I direct that leave to remain is granted to allow the appellant
    to complete his studies."

 6. The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  arguing
    that the FTTJ erred in law. It is submitted that the Secretary of State
    had considered  exceptional  circumstances.  The  FTTJ  had  not  given
    adequate reasons for the conclusion that  discretion  could  only  have
    been exercised in the appellant's favour. The question of the  exercise
    of discretion was one for the Secretary of State. It was  open  to  the
    claimant to return to Bangladesh to pursue his studies there or, if  he
    wished to continue his studies in the UK, to make  an  application  for
    entry clearance from Bangladesh.

 7. The claimant's  representatives  had  submitted  a  substantial  bundle
    which, I am told, contains all that was in the claimant's bundle before
    the FTTJ, subsequent Tribunal documentation common to both parties  and
    two new documents, a revised chronology and "Additional  legal  grounds
    following permission granted" which equates to a Rule 24 response  from
    the claimant to the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.

 8. Mr Saunders relied on the grounds of appeal and argued that the  FTTJ's
    decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law.  Paragraph  5  of  the
    determination referred to a solicitors'  letter  of  26  October  2012.
    However, it  was  clear  that  the  claimant's  solicitors'  letter  in
    question was that dated 30 October 2012. The claimant's application was
    made on Article 8 private life human rights grounds only. The Secretary
    of State properly these and in particular the question  of  exceptional
    circumstances in the refusal letter. He could not detect any  basis  on
    which it was open to the FTTJ to conclude that the Secretary of State's
    decision was not in accordance with the law or that the  only  possible
    decision could be in the claimant's favour. I was asked  to  set  aside
    the decision and remake it, dismissing the claimant's appeal.

 9. Mr Hashim submitted that there was no error of law and that the  FTTJ's
    decision should stand. There was  no  lack  of  reasoning.  The  FTTJ's
    reasons for his conclusions could be found in paragraphs 1  to  6.  The
    refusal letter made no mention  of  the  five-year  cap  on  the  total
    duration of the claimant's studies. In reply to my question, Mr  Hashim
    accepted that no point in relation to the five-year cap had been raised
    in the solicitors' letter of application on  behalf  of  the  claimant.
    However, he submitted that the Secretary  of  State  should  have  been
    aware of and considered this. There was a risk that the five-year  rule
    would be used against the claimant if he made a further application. He
    also accepted that the letter was dated 30 October 2012 not 26  October
    2012. I was asked to find that there was no error of law and to  uphold
    the decision.

10. I reserved my determination.

11. The Secretary of State refused the application which was to  remain  in
    the UK on private life human rights grounds under the provisions of the
    Immigration Rules in part because  the  claimant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE. It is not now disputed that  he  does
    not meet these requirements. The only one which he  might  have  argued
    that he satisfied was 276ADE(vi) namely that he was aged  18  years  or
    above, had lived  continuously  in  the  UK  for  less  than  20  years
    (discounting any period of imprisonment) but  had  no  ties  (including
    social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would have  to
    go if required to leave the UK.

12. Having properly concluded that the claimant  could  not  bring  himself
    within the Article 8 human  rights  provisions  under  the  Immigration
    Rules the Secretary of State went on to consider whether the  appellant
    could succeed on Article 8 human rights grounds outside the Immigration
    Rules in relation to his private and family life in the UK. I note that
    it has never been suggested that the claimant has a family life in this
    here.

13. What the FTTJ should have done was, firstly, to consider the claimant's
    application and the Secretary of State's refusal on Article  8  private
    life human rights grounds under rule 276ADE. Secondly, to consider  the
    claimant's application and the Secretary of State's refusal on  Article
    8 private life human rights grounds outside the Immigration  Rules  and
    to decide whether the claimant was entitled to succeed on  this  basis.
    What he had to consider was nothing  to  do  with  any  exercise  of  a
    discretion by the Secretary of State. It was an error of  law  to  find
    that the appeal turned on the exercise of such a discretion. That being
    so it was also an error of law to conclude that  any  discretion  could
    only have been exercised in favour the claimant.

14. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law I set aside his decision  which
    I now remake. Both sides were informed that it  was  likely  that  this
    would be done. No further  evidence  has  been  submitted  beyond  that
    contained in the claimant's new bundle to which I have already referred
    and there has been no request that I should receive or hear  any  other
    evidence. There has been no attack  on  the  FTTJ's  findings  of  fact
    contained in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the determination which I adopt.

15. Although it has not been argued  otherwise  I  find,  as  a  matter  of
    record, that the claimant has not established that he can bring himself
    within any of the private life requirements under rule 276ADE.

16. Whilst CDS (PBS: "available": Article 8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC)
    was decided before the Article 8 provisions of the current  Immigration
    Rules came into force I  find  that  it  provides  useful  guidance  in
    circumstances similar to those in this case. In paragraphs 17 to 24  it
    is said;


         "17. It is apparent from these principles that Article 8  does  not
         provide  a  general  discretion  in  the  IJ   to   dispense   with
         requirements of the Immigration Rules merely because the  way  that
         they impact in an individual case may appear to  be  unduly  harsh.
         The present context is not respect for  family  life  that  can  in
         certain circumstances require admission to  or  extension  of  stay
         within the United Kingdom of those who do  not  comply  with the
         general[pic] Immigration Rules. It is difficult to imagine how the
         private  life  of  someone  with  no  prior  nexus  to  the United
         Kingdom would require admission outside the rules for the  purpose
         of study. There is no human right to come to the United Kingdom for
         education or other purposes of truly voluntary migration.


         18. However, the appellant has been admitted  to  the UK for  the
         purpose  of  higher  education  and  has  made  progress   enabling
         extension of stay in that capacity since her admission in 2007.  We
         acknowledge that that gives no right or expectation of extension of
         stay irrespective of the provisions of the Immigration Rules at the
         time of the relevant decision on extension.

         19. Nevertheless people who have been admitted on a course of study
         at a recognised UK institution for higher education, are likely to
         build up a relevant connection with the course, the institution, an
         educational sequence for the  ultimate  professional  qualification
         sought, as  well  as  social  ties  during  the  period  of  study.
         Cumulatively this may amount to private life that deserves  respect
         because the person has been admitted for this purpose, the  purpose
         remains   unfilled,   and    discretionary    factors    such    as
         misrepresentation or criminal conduct have not provided grounds for
         refusal of extension or curtailment of stay.

         20. In the present case a change in the  sponsorship  rules  during
         the course of a period of study has had a  serious  effect  on  the
         ability of the appellant to conclude  her  course  of  study.  Some
         requirements of the Immigration Rules or applicable  public  policy
         scheme may be of such importance that a miss is as good as a  mile,
         but this is not always the case.

         21. The points-based system aims to provide objective criteria  for
         what funds[pic]are needed to be demonstrated before an extension of
         stay is granted. If we are wrong on our first conclusion, we  shall
         here assume that it may also set strict criteria as to how such the
         availability of such funds is  to  be  demonstrated  and  in  whose
         accounts the funds may be. But where the appellant  establishes  by
         evidence that she has funds available to support her if needed, the
         strength of the public interest in refusing her an extension  based
         on  somewhat  arbitrary  provisions  of  guidance  attached  to  an
         appendix to the rules, is in our judgment somewhat  less  than  the
         failure to meet a central requirement of the Rules.

         22. But even central requirements  are  not  determinative  if  the
         countervailing claim is of sufficient weight[pic]. Mrs Huang could
         not meet the dependant relative rules because she had  not  reached
         the  minimum  age  required,  but   nevertheless   the   particular
         circumstances of her history required the strength  of  her  family
         life to be taken into account. Sedley LJ  in Pankina contemplated
         that   some   points-based   claimants    may    not    meet    the
         minimum funding[pic] requirements  for  a  short  period  due  to
         unforeseen circumstances.

         23. Here the same sponsors  who  ensured  that  the  appellant  had
         sufficient funds at the beginning of her course were available with
         ample financial support to ensure  that  she  met  the  substantive
         requirements of Appendix C in order to continue with  her  studies.
         If minds had been applied to the problem the necessary funds  could
         have been transferred to her account so both  the  letter  and  the
         purpose of the Policy Guidance was met.

         24. In our judgment, the  application  to  this  appellant  of  the
         Policy Guidance that prevented her from obtaining the extension  at
         the  time  and  in  the  circumstances  set  out   above,   was   a
         disproportionate  interference  with  private  life  that  deserved
         respect as long as she continued to meet the other requirements  of
         the Rules and make appropriate progress in her  course  of  studies
         here."


17. Whilst there are differences there are also similarities in  the  facts
    of this case. The claimant has paid the fees to enable  him  to  finish
    his course. During the course of his studies the Immigration Rules have
    changed so that he is now caught by  a  five-year  maximum  period  for
    degree level studies. He has suffered considerable  misfortune  in  the
    shape of personal ill-health, the death of his father, the  illness  of
    his mother and family disputes. The death of his father  and  the  need
    for family funds to be used to support his mother means that the  funds
    are not available to pay for him to start an entirely new course rather
    than finishing the existing one. He has completed 300  credits  out  of
    the required 364 for his existing degree level course.  The  University
    has indicated a willingness to permit him to finish his studies were it
    not  for  the  new  five-year  maximum  period  requirements   in   the
    Immigration Rules.


18. Applying the tests set out in Razgar, R  (on  the  Application  of)  v.
    Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27  I  find  that  the  removal  of  the
    claimant from the UK would be an interference  by  a  public  authority
    with the exercise[pic] of his right to respect for his private  life.
    The interference would have consequences of such gravity as potentially
    to engage the operation of Article 8.  The  interference  would  be  in
    accordance with the law and necessary in a democratic  society  in  the
    interests of national security, public safety  or  the  economic  well-
    being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for  the
    protection of health[pic] or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
    rights and freedoms of others. The appeal turns on the final  question;
    whether such interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end
    sought to be achieved.


19. It has not been suggested that the appellant has been here in breach of
    immigration control, that he has any criminal convictions  or  that  he
    has behaved badly. On the other hand at no stage could he have had  any
    reasonable expectation of a prolonged or indefinite  stay  in  the  UK.
    However under the Rules in force at the time he started his studies  he
    could have had a reasonable expectation of being able to finish them if
    he made reasonable progress. I also take into account the factors which
    I have set out in paragraph 17. Weighing this with all the evidence  in
    the round, including the findings of fact made by the FTTJ, I  conclude
    that it would be a disproportionate interference  with  the  claimant's
    right to respect for his Article 8 private life to remove him from  the
    UK and not to permit him to attempt to complete  his  studies.  Such  a
    decision would be unreasonable and his circumstances are exceptional.


20. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ I remake it by  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal on Article 8 human rights grounds.












.............................................
Signed                                                Date 30 April 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
