
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48600/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 January 2017                         |On 2 February 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MOHAMED IBRAHIM ELDESOUKY RAKHA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Clemes)  allowing  the  respondent's  appeal
    against a decision taken on 17 November 2014 to refuse his  application
    for a permanent residence card under reg 18(2) of the Immigration (EEA)
    Regulations  2006  (SI  2006/1003  as  amended)  (hereafter  "the   EEA
    Regulations").

 2. Judge  Clemes  found  that  the  respondent  had  been  in  a  "durable
    relationship" with an EEA national,  Ms  Aleksandra  Dobron,  a  Polish
    citizen exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK  for  a  period  of  five
    continuous years between April 2008 and May 2013.   As  a  result,  the
    respondent had established a permanent right  of  residence  under  reg
    15(1)(b) of the EEA Regulations as a "family member" of an EEA national
    who has resided in the UK with an EEA national in accordance  with  the
    EEA Regulations for a continuous period of five years.

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on  essentially  two
    grounds.  First, the respondent was not a "family member" by virtue  of
    his "durable relationship" with Ms Dobron but, rather, was an "extended
    family member" under reg 8(5) of the EEA Regulations.  Consequently, he
    could not acquire a permanent right of residence as a  'family  member'
    under reg 15(1)(b).  Secondly, in any event  the  respondent  had  only
    cohabited with Ms Dobron from July 2008 until May 2013 and so  had  not
    been in a "durable relationship" for at least five years.

 4. On 18 August 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Garro) granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 5. Thus, the appeal came before us.

 6. Mr Diwnycz, who represented the Secretary of State, accepted  that  the
    respondent had a right of appeal under the EEA  Regulations  against  a
    refusal of a permanent residence card under  reg  18(2).   He  accepted
    that the Tribunal's reasoning in Sala (EFMs: Right  of  Appeal)  [2016]
    UKUT 416 (IAC) did not apply as the respondent had  an  entitlement  to
    that residence card if he established his permanent right of  residence
    under reg 15(1)(b).  However, Mr  Diwnycz  submitted,  relying  on  the
    grounds, that reg 15(1)(b) did not apply to the respondent.  He was not
    a "family member" until he was issued  with  a  residence  card  as  an
    "extended family member" on the basis  of  his  "durable  relationship"
    with Ms Dobron and he had not been issued with a residence card.

 7. We accept the Secretary of State's submissions.  The right of permanent
    residence in reg 15(1)(b) applies to a

             "family member of an EEA national who is not  himself  an  EEA
             national but who has resided in the United  Kingdom  with  the
             EEA national  in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  for  a
             continuous period of five years."

 8. That right may only  be  acquired  by  a  "family  member"  of  an  EEA
    national.  The respondent  does  not  fall  within  the  definition  of
    "family member" under reg 7.  In particular, he was not married  to  Ms
    Dobron and is not a civil partner.  Instead,  on  the  judge's  factual
    findings, the respondent was a "extended family member"  by  virtue  of
    reg 8(5) as he had established a "durable relationship" with Ms Dobron.
     He would only become (more  accurately  "be  treated  as")  a  "family
    member" by virtue of reg 7(3) if he was issued with a residence card on
    that basis.  Regulation 7(3,) so far as relevant, provides as  follows:



         "... a person who is an extended family member and has been  issued
         with ... a residence card shall be treated as the family member  of
         the relevant EEA national for as long as he  continues  to  satisfy
         the conditions  in  regulation  [8(5)]  in  relation  to  that  EEA
         national and the ... card has  not  ceased  to  be  valid  or  been
         revoked." (our emphasis)

 9. The respondent has never applied for, and has never been issued with, a
    residence card as an extended family  member  based  upon  his  durable
    relationship with Ms Dobron.  Whilst, therefore,  the  judge's  finding
    that the respondent had a "durable relationship" with Ms Dobron between
    April 2008 and May 2013 was a finding that the  respondent  was  during
    that time a "extended family member", as he had not been issued with  a
    residence card on that basis he was not treated as a "family member" by
    virtue of reg 7(3).  He could not, therefore, acquire a permanent right
    of  residence  as  a  "family  member"  under  reg  15(1)(b)  and  was,
    accordingly, not entitled to be issued with a permanent residence  card
    recognising that right under reg 18(2).

10. For these reasons, therefore, the judge erred in law  in  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal against the refusal to issue him with  a  permanent
    residence card under  reg  18(2).   We  set  aside  that  decision  and
    substitute a  decision  dismissing  the  respondent's  appeal  on  that
    ground.

11. Before  us  the  respondent,  who  was  unrepresented,  raised  Art  8.
    However, in the absence of a s.120 notice inviting  the  respondent  to
    raise additional grounds (which was not contained within  the  decision
    letter), the judge had no jurisdiction to consider Art 8 (see  TY  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ  1233).   The  judge  was  confined  to
    determining the subject matter of the original decision, namely whether
    the respondent was entitled to a permanent residence  card  which,  for
    the reasons we have given, he was not.

Decision

12. Accordingly, for the reasons we have given, the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

13. We set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the
    respondent's appeal under the  EEA  Regulations  and  we  substitute  a
    decision dismissing the respondent's appeal under those Regulations.

                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date



