
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48923/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 December 2015                  |On 13 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Aradhana Aradhana
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Rainbow Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. After discussing the Secretary of State's appeal with  the  parties,  I
    decided that the decision and reasons statement of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Tindal promulgated on 30 March 2015 contains an error on a  point
    of law requiring it to be set aside and  the  appeal  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.  I announced  my  decision  at
    the end of the hearing but reserved my reasons which I now give.



Reasons

 2. The reasons for my decision  relate  to  what  Judge  Tindal  found  at
    paragraphs 3 and 8 of his decision.  It  is  clear  that  Judge  Tindal
    assessed a material issue  at  the  lower  standard  of  proof  on  the
    assumption that any protection  issue  should  be  considered  at  that
    standard.  In law he had no power to do so.

 3. The appellant never made an asylum or protection  claim  and  therefore
    there was no jurisdiction  for  the  judge  to  make  findings  on  the
    evidence on the lower standard.  He should have approached the evidence
    as it was presented, which was as part of  the  appellant's  case  that
    there were very significant difficulties to her continuing family  life
    in India because of her conversion  from  Hinduism  to  Islam  and  her
    family's objection to her husband.

 4. It was open to the judge to make findings on that part of her case  but
    he could only do so by assessing  the  evidence  at  the  normal  civil
    standard.

 5. The confusion is  compounded  because  in  the  absence  of  any  self-
    direction regarding the proper standard of proof (which was the  normal
    civil standard) it leaves the parties unclear as to  what  standard  of
    proof was applied in relation to the other material issues.

 6. In addition, it would appear that Judge Tindal took  into  account  his
    findings made at the lower standard  of  proof  when  deciding  whether
    there were insurmountable obstacles  to  the  appellant's  family  life
    continuing if she were removed.  Because he took this approach,  I  can
    only conclude that his overall findings are unsound.  The fact that  we
    cannot  rely  on  his  findings  regarding   insurmountable   obstacles
    undermines the whole decision.

 7. I am aware that the Secretary of State also argues  that  Judge  Tindal
    erred in law at paragraph 10 (iii) where he found  that  the  financial
    requirements were met.  In so doing it is argued  that  he  disregarded
    the provisions and requirements of appendix  FM-SE  which  he  was  not
    entitled to do as per the guidance in SSHD v SS (Congo)  &  Ors  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387.

 8. Mr Mills maintained this argument.  Mr Iqbal  did  not  argue  directly
    against it but suggested that Judge Tindal had  made  his  findings  by
    application of  Article  8  direct,  as  was  evident  by  the  judge's
    reference to the  public  interest  considerations  in  s.117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

 9. I find that the Secretary of State's argument to be undermined  by  the
    fact that it is clear that Judge  Tindal  applied  the  classic  Razgar
    approach in paragraphs 11 to 14 of his decision and in so doing clearly
    had regard to the possibility of the  appellant  failing  to  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  However, because  it  is  clear
    from those same paragraphs that the  judge's  conclusions  relating  to
    Article 8 draw on the  same  finding  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing were the  appellant  expelled  from
    the UK, those conclusions cannot be regarded as  sound.  They  too  are
    based on the wrong standard of proof being applied.

10. For this reason the Article 8 assessment is  also  to  be  regarded  as
    legally flawed and cannot be sustained.

11. Mr Iqbal accepted that if I found that Judge Tindal had  erred  in  law
    then I should remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
    decision but suggested that the finding  that  the  appellant  met  the
    "relationship requirements" of appendix FM could be maintained  because
    they were undisputed.  Because  the  issues  arising  in  the  original
    appeal were whether the appellant should benefit from paragraph EX.1 of
    appendix FM to the immigration rules, this is a relevant finding  which
    can be preserved as long as no evidence to the contrary is presented at
    the remitted appeal.

12. Because I have found there to be an error on a point of law, it follows
    that the parties agree to remittal and  I  do  so  with  the  following
    directions.

Directions for remitted hearing

13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

14. The hearing can be before any judge other than Judge Tindal.

15. The issues to be determined are whether the appellant can benefit  from
    paragraph EX.1  or  in  the  alternative  Article  8  directly  if  the
    immigration rules are not a complete code.

16. As the First-tier Tribunal will have to consider the  situation  as  at
    the date of hearing, the parties are at liberty to rely  on  additional
    evidence as long as it is filed and served at least  14  calendar  days
    before the next hearing.

17. The finding that the relationship requirements of appendix FM  are  met
    is preserved subject to there being no fresh evidence to the contrary.

Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  allowed  because
the decision of Judge Tindal contains legal error and is set aside.

I remit the appeal to be decided afresh in the First-tier  Tribunal  subject
to the directions I have set out.




                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
