
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/48327/2014
                                                               IA/48353/2014
                                                               IA/48375/2014
                                                               IA/48381/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decisions & Reasons promulgated      |
|On August 25, 2016                   |On August 26, 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                    A A A
                                    J K S
                                    W T M
                                    J A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timpson, Counsel, instructed by AGI Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellants are citizens of  Ghana.  On  October  15,  2014  the
         appellants applied for  leave  to  remain  on  family/private  life
         grounds. The respondent refused their claims on November  11,  2014
         under the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

      2. The appellants appealed those decisions under section 82(1) of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on December 1, 2014.

      3. The appeal came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Crawford
         (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on May 18,  2015  and  in  a
         decision promulgated on May 22, 2015 he refused  their  appeals  on
         all grounds.

      4. The appellants lodged grounds of appeal on June 5, 2015  submitting
         the Judge had erred.

      5. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Gillespie on August 6, 2015 and the matter came before  me
         on  June  13,  2016.  After  hearing  submissions  from   the   two
         representatives I found there had been an error in law  in  respect
         of both the  first  and  second-named  appellants  under  Paragraph
         276ADE HC 395 and in respect of all four appellants under article 8
         ECHR. My reasons for those conclusions are set out  in  my  earlier
         decision.

      6. A fresh bundle  was  served  which  included  documents  previously
         served along with more recent medical evidence in relation  to  the
         second-named appellant. Both representatives  agreed  that  as  the
         second-named appellant had been here for more than seven years then
         the correct test to apply when considering paragraph 276ADE HC  395
         would be whether it would be reasonable to  expect  him  to  go  to
         Ghana. It was also agreed that a similar  test  would  apply  under
         when considering his article 8 claim and  Section  117B(6)  of  the
         2002. If his appeal succeeded then the remaining  appellants  would
         all succeed under article 8 ECHR.

      7. Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellants continue to be granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these
         proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify any  of  them  or
         any member of their family.  This direction  applies  both  to  the
         Appellants and to the Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

         SUBMISSIONS

      8.  Mr  McVeety  submitted  that   when   assessing   the   issue   of
         reasonableness I had to have regard to all of the factors and  that
         included, he submitted, the totality of the medical  evidence,  the
         country evidence about availability of medical treatment in  Ghana,
         what the parties have done in the United Kingdom, the  second-named
         appellant's parents' immigration history, the costs to the NHS, the
         fact the children had been educated at public expense and the  fact
         they spoke English a language spoken in Ghana. He argued these were
         all significant factors that should be  properly  weighed  up  when
         considering whether it was reasonable to  expect  the  second-named
         appellant to have to  leave  the  country.   The  arguments  to  be
         advanced for section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act were the same and  the
         test was the same. He submitted  it  was  not  disproportionate  to
         require the appellant to leave and to be joined by  his  family  in
         Ghana.

      9. Mr Timpson submitted the correct approach in such cases was set out
         in PD and Others (Article 8 : conjoined family  claims)  Sri  Lanka
         [2016] UKUT 00108 (IAC) and that in considering conjoined Article 8
         ECHR claims of  multiple  family  members,  decision-makers  should
         first apply the Immigration Rules to each individual applicant and,
         if appropriate, then consider Article 8  outside  the  Rules.  This
         exercise will typically entail the consideration and  determination
         of all claims jointly, so as to ensure that all material facts  and
         considerations are  taken  into  account  in  each  case.  He  then
         submitted that as the second-named appellant  had  been  there  for
         more than seven years there had  to  be  strong  reasons  and  very
         significant factors for not allowing the  appeal  under  article  8
         bearing in mind Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. He  submitted  the
         fact the parents had poor immigration histories and the father  had
         served a prison sentence should not be  held  against  the  second-
         named appellant when considering reasonableness. He referred me  to
         MA (Pakistan) EWCA Civ 707 which states-

             "46.      Even on the approach of the Secretary of State,  the
             fact that a child has been here for seven years must be  given
             significant  weight  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality
             exercise. Indeed, the Secretary of State published guidance in
             August  2015  in   the   form   of   Immigration   Directorate
             Instructions entitled "Family Life (as a  partner  or  parent)
             and Private Life: 10 Year Routes" in  which  it  is  expressly
             stated that once the seven  years'  residence  requirement  is
             satisfied, there need to  be  "strong  reasons"  for  refusing
             leave (para. 11.2.4). These instructions  were  not  in  force
             when the cases now subject to appeal were determined,  but  in
             my view they merely confirm what is  implicit  in  adopting  a
             policy of this nature. After such a period of time  the  child
             will have put down roots and developed  social,  cultural  and
             educational links in the UK such  that  it  is  likely  to  be
             highly disruptive if the child is required to  leave  the  UK.
             That may be less so when the children are very  young  because
             the focus of their lives will be on their  families,  but  the
             disruption becomes more serious as they get  older.  Moreover,
             in these cases there must be a very  strong  expectation  that
             the child's best interests will be to remain in  the  UK  with
             his parents as part of a family unit, and that must rank as  a
             primary consideration in the proportionality assessment.

             49. Although this was not in fact a seven year  case,  on  the
             wider construction of section  117B(6),  the  same  principles
             would apply in such a case. However, the fact that  the  child
             has been in the UK for seven years  would  need  to  be  given
             significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two
             related  reasons:  first,  because   of   its   relevance   to
             determining the  nature  and  strength  of  the  child's  best
             interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
             point that leave should be granted unless there  are  powerful
             reasons to the contrary."

     10. Mr Timpson submitted the medical evidence was a  strong  factor  as
         was the fact there was a lack of facilities available in Ghana  for
         the appellant. Taking all of the  evidence  together  he  submitted
         there were no "very significant" factors that counted  against  the
         second-named appellant and not only should his  appeal  be  allowed
         under paragraph 276ADE HC 395 but the remaining  appellants  should
         succeed under article 8 ECHR.

         DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

     11. When this matter was heard in the FTT the Judge had before him many
         of the documents  that  were  before  me  today.  There  were  some
         additional  documents  provided  by  both   Birmingham   Children's
         hospital and Great  Ormond  Street  Hospital.  However,  it  seemed
         common ground that the medical prognosis was similar to that  faced
         by the FTT. Professor Burch indicated in his  letter  dated  August
         12, 2016 that heart transplants were not available  in  Africa  but
         this claim remains unsupported by any country  evidence.  In  fact,
         the FTT concluded on  evidence  presented  to  it  that  specialist
         cardiac care was available and whilst payment  was  required  there
         were facilities to enable such operations to  be  carried  out,  if
         required.

     12.  The  latest  medical  evidence  stresses  that  the   second-named
         appellant has improved slowly and steadily and  manages  to  go  to
         school and a school  report  at  page  106  of  the  latest  bundle
         suggests  that  in  most  areas  the  second-named  appellant   was
         progressing as expected for a child his age. A heart transplant may
         be required before  the  second-named  appellant  is  16  but  this
         prognosis remains unaltered from  the  medical  evidence  that  was
         adduced to the FTT. No further oral  or  written  was  advanced  to
         suggest the second-named appellant's condition had worsened.

     13. The error of law occurred because the FTT  considered  the  second-
         named appellant's private life claim under paragraph 276ADE(vi)  HC
         395 as against sub-section (iv). The test is  different  with  sub-
         section (vi) applying  a  "very  significant  obstacles  test"  and
         applying only to person over the age of 18 whereas sub-section (iv)
         applies to persons under the age of 18 who have lived here  for  at
         least seven years and the test is whether it would be reasonable to
         expect the appellant to leave the United Kingdom.

     14. The Courts, including the Upper Tribunal, have provided advice  and
         guidance on applications outside of the Rules and cases I have  had
         considered,  in  particular,  include   Azimi-Moayed   and   others
         (decisions affecting children; onward appeals) [2013]  UKUT  00197,
         SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ  387,  AM  (S  117B)  Malawi
         [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC), MA  (Pakistan)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  707  and
         Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674  (IAC)  and
         Rhuppia [2016] EWCA Civ 803. These  cases  are  similarly  relevant
         when considering paragraph 276ADE HC  395  because  both  paragraph
         276ADE HC 395 and Section 117B(6) both require an appellant to be a
         child and to have been here for at  least  seven  years.  If  those
         requirements are met, then the test to be  applied  is  whether  it
         would  be  reasonable  to  require  the  appellant  to  leave.  The
         authorities  below   therefore   provide   useful   guidance   when
         considering either scenario.

     15. In Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
         appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197  the  Tribunal  gave  the   following
         guidance:

          a. As a starting point it is in the best interests of children to
             be with both their parents  and  if  both  parents  are  being
             removed from  the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point
             suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part  of
             their household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

          b. It is generally in the interests  of  children  to  have  both
             stability and continuity of social and  educational  provision
             and the benefit of growing up in the  cultural  norms  of  the
             society to which they belong.

          c. Lengthy residence in a country other than the state of  origin
             can lead to development of  social  cultural  and  educational
             ties that it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence
             of compelling reason to the contrary. What amounts to  lengthy
             residence is not clear cut but past and present policies  have
             identified seven years as a relevant period.

          d. Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
             Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to  be
             more significant to a child that  the  first  seven  years  of
             life. Very young children are focussed on their parents rather
             than their peers and are adaptable.

          e. Short periods of residence, particularly ones without leave or
             the reasonable expectation of leave to enter or remain,  while
             claims are promptly considered, are unlikely to give  rise  to
             private  life  deserving  of  respect  in   the   absence   of
             exceptional factors. In any event, protection of the  economic
             well-being of society amply justifies removal in such cases.

     16. In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the  Court  of  Appeal
         stated:

             "51.      ... the approach to Article 8 in light of the  Rules
             in Appendix FM-SE should be the same  as  in  respect  of  the
             substantive LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM. In other  words,
             the   same   general   position   applies,   that   compelling
             circumstances would have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or
             LTR where the evidence Rules are not complied with.

             52. This is for two principal  reasons.  First,  the  evidence
             rules have the  same  general  objective  as  the  substantive
             rules, namely to limit the risk that someone is admitted  into
             the United  Kingdom  and  then  becomes  a  burden  on  public
             resources, and the Secretary of State  has  the  same  primary
             function in relation to them, to assess the risk  and  put  in
             place measures which are judged suitable to contain it  within
             acceptable bounds. Similar  weight  should  be  given  to  her
             assessment of  what  the  public  interest  requires  in  both
             contexts.

             53. Secondly, enforcement of the evidence rules  ensures  that
             everyone applying for LTE or LTR is treated equally and fairly
             in relation to the evidential requirements they must  satisfy.
             As  well  as  keeping  the  costs  of  administration   within
             reasonable  bounds,  application  of  standard  rules  is   an
             important  means  of  minimising   the   risk   of   arbitrary
             differences in treatment of  cases  arising  across  the  wide
             range of officials, tribunals and courts which administer  the
             system of immigration controls. In this regard,  the  evidence
             Rules (like the substantive Rules) serve  as  a  safeguard  in
             relation to rights of  applicants  and  family  members  under
             Article 14 to equal treatment  within  the  scope  of  Article
             8....

             54. ... the fact that an applicant may be  able  to  say  that
             their case is a 'near miss'  in  relation  to  satisfying  the
             requirements  of  the  Rules  will  by  no  means  show   that
             compelling circumstances exist  requiring  the  grant  of  LTE
             outside the Rules. A good deal more than this would need to be
             shown to make out such a case. The respondents' argument fails
             to recognise the value  to  be  attached  to  having  a  clear
             statement of the standards applicable to everyone and fails to
             give proper weight to the judgment of the Secretary of  State,
             as expressed in the Rules, regarding what is  needed  to  meet
             the public  interest  which  is  in  issue.  The  'near  miss'
             argument of the respondents cannot be sustained in  the  light
             of these considerations and the authority of Miah v  Secretary
             of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  261,
             especially at [21]-[26]."

     17. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) the Tribunal stated:

             "14.      ... Upon their proper construction neither s117B(2),
             nor s117B(3), grants any form  of  immigration  status  to  an
             individual who does not otherwise  qualify  for  that  status,
             because they have failed to meet the requirements set  out  in
             the Immigration Rules for the grant of that status. If it  was
             the intention of  Parliament  that  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules should be  over-ridden,  merely  because  an
             individual could  establish  that  they  were  able  to  speak
             English, or were financially independent, to some degree, then
             we are satisfied that Parliament would have  said  so  in  the
             clearest terms. In addition, we consider that Parliament would
             have considered  it  necessary  to  set  out  what  degree  of
             fluency, or, level of financial independence was  required  of
             the individual, and the immigration status that the individual
             would be entitled to once it had  been  demonstrated.  Plainly
             these statutory provisions do no such thing. One must continue
             to look to the Immigration Rules to  discern  what  Parliament
             considers are the requirements to be met by  a  claimant,  and
             the length of the period of leave to be  granted  to  them  if
             those requirements are met.

             18. The mere fact that  the  evidence  in  a  particular  case
             establishes fluency or financial independence to some  degree,
             does not  prevent  the  Respondent  from  relying  upon  these
             matters  as  public  interest  factors  weighing  against  the
             claimant. The Respondent would only be prevented from doing so
             if  a  claimant  could  demonstrate  fluency,   or   financial
             independence, to the level of the requirements set out in  the
             Immigration Rules. There was therefore no error of law in  the
             Judge's approach  to  the  issues  of  fluency  and  financial
             independence in the context of her consideration of s117B. The
             Appellant could obtain no positive right to a grant  of  leave
             to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of
             his fluency in English,  or  the  strength  of  his  financial
             resources.

             23. ... We regard the immigration history  of  the  individual
             whose Article 8 rights are under consideration as an  integral
             part of the context in which any Article 8 decision  is  made,
             whether by the Respondent or the FtT.

             27. ... In our judgement all those who have  been  granted  by
             the Respondent a defined period of leave to enter the UK,  or,
             to remain in the UK (which includes both those with  a  period
             of limited leave  to  remain,  and  those  with  a  period  of
             discretionary leave to remain), hold during  the  currency  of
             that leave, an  immigration  status  that  is  lawful,  albeit
             "precarious".  Even  if  the  individual  genuinely  holds   a
             legitimate expectation that their  leave  will  ultimately  be
             extended further by the  Respondent,  they  have  no  absolute
             right to insist that this will occur, whether or not they meet
             the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of their
             application; HSMP Forum UK Limited [2008] EWHC 664. Still less
             will those who merely hold a genuine, and well founded belief,
             that they will at  some  future  date  be  able  to  meet  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  thus  be  able  to
             obtain an extension; E-A (Article 8  -  best  interests  of  a
             child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC).

             28. In all such cases, in order to obtain the  variation  that
             they seek (whether to gain a further grant of leave  which  is
             limited in duration, or is  indefinite)  the  individual  will
             need to meet at some  future  date  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules that are then in force; Odelola v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2009] 1WLR 1230. The ability
             of the individual to do so is not  capable  of  prediction  in
             advance - even if at any given moment during the  currency  of
             their existing leave the individual  genuinely  believes  that
             they are continuing to meet the requirements attached to their
             existing grant. Indeed, the ability of those who have not  yet
             been granted indefinite leave to remain, to obtain a variation
             of their leave in the future, will probably always  depend  in
             part upon matters that are outside  their  control  -  whether
             that be the actions of others, or  the  future  prosperity  of
             themselves or others.

             32. To put the  matter  shortly,  it  appears  to  us  that  a
             person's immigration status is "precarious" if their continued
             presence in the UK will be dependent upon  their  obtaining  a
             further grant of leave. It is precisely because such a  person
             has no  indefinite  right  to  be  in  the  country  that  the
             relationships they form ought to be considered in the light of
             the potential need to leave the country should that  grant  of
             leave not be forthcoming."

     18. In Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015]  UKUT  674  (IAC)
         the Tribunal concluded-

             "Section 117B (6) is a reflection  of  the  distinction  which
             Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are, and who
             are  not,  liable  to  deportation.  In  any  case  where  the
             conditions enshrined in section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are  satisfied,  the  section
             117B(6) public interest prevails  over  the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B (1)-(3)."

     19. The Court of Appeal  recently  considered  Section  117B(6)  in  MA
         (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 707  and  made  it  clear  that  "...the
         significance of section 117B(6) is that where the seven  year  rule
         is satisfied, it is a factor of some weight leaning  in  favour  of
         leave to remain being granted" although as the Court made clear  in
         its decision merely being under the age  of  eighteen  and  in  the
         country for  at  least  seven  years  did  not  mean  an  automatic
         entitlement to be allowed to remain.

     20. Turning to the facts of these appeals there is  ample  evidence  of
         the second-named appellant's progress at  school  and  his  medical
         condition.

     21. I also note that the second-named appellant only knows this country
         as his home and Mr Timpson described him as being more British than
         Ghanaian.

     22. The second-named appellant has done nothing wrong but in  assessing
         reasonableness I must, as argued by Mr McVeety, have regard to  all
         of the matters pertinent to the case. He was born here because  his
         parents overstayed beyond the terms of their leave.

     23. The child must not be blamed  for  his  parent's  poor  immigration
         history but I reject Mr Timpson's submission that it is something I
         should have no regard to. It remains  a  factor  to  consider  when
         reasonableness is assessed.

     24.  I  have  considered  the  second-named  appellant's  own  personal
         circumstances when considering his claim under the  Rules  and  the
         fact there are medical facilities available  in  Ghana  that  would
         enable him to continue his treatment is a factor  I  have  to  have
         regard to. The FTT found the second-named appellant's life has been
         saved due to NHS facilities and no doubt thousands of  pounds  have
         been spent to date treating him.

     25. Case law makes clear that the fact treatment may have  to  be  paid
         for in Ghana is not a reason to say it  would  be  unreasonable  to
         return  the  appellant.  The  parents  demonstrated  that  if  they
         returned with him they have the ability to obtain  work.  There  is
         evidence the second-named appellant's father has  worked  illegally
         in the United Kingdom. If there were no  facilities  to  treat  the
         appellant, then that would be a factor to have regard to  but  that
         is not the evidence before me.

     26. The argument advanced by Mr Timpson is that the factors that should
         be considered are neither significant enough nor serious enough  to
         lead to it being reasonable for this appellant to  have  to  leave.
         The test of reasonableness poses  a  less  exacting  and  demanding
         threshold than that posed in other  tests  in  this  area  such  as
         insurmountable  obstacles,  exceptional  circumstances   and   very
         compelling factors.

     27. The application of the reasonableness test involves  a  balance  of
         all material facts and considerations and is fact sensitive.

     28. Ultimately, the factors to which I give determinative weight are:

          a. The length of time the second-named Appellant has lived in the
             United Kingdom;

          b. His immersion into life in the United Kingdom having regard to
             his age;

          c. The fact he has not reached a critical stage of  his  personal
             and educational development;

          d. His minimal connections with his country of origin.

          e. The facts the first-named appellant  has  no  legal  right  to
             remain in the United Kingdom. Her immigration status  is  that
             of unlawful over-stayer and this is  a  factor  of  undeniable
             weight albeit I  have  regard  to  the  fact  a  child's  best
             interests  should  not  be  compromised  on  account  of   the
             misdemeanours of its parents.

          f. The fact there has been great reliance on the public purse  to
             fund his medical care.

          g. The child has benefited from being educated here but there  is
             no evidence to suggest he could not be educated in  Ghana  and
             he has not spent what are described as the "formative years of
             his life" in education here.

     29. Applying the test in paragraph 276ADE HC 395 and having  regard  to
         all of the above factors I  am  satisfied  that  it  would  not  be
         unreasonable for the second-named appellant to have  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom. The child, despite Mr Timpson's submission that  he
         is more British, remains  a  Ghanaian  national  who  can  be  both
         educated and  medically  treated  in  Ghana.  Those  are  important
         factors to consider and in assessing reasonableness of return under
         paragraph 276ADE they are more significant  than  the  second-named
         appellant's parents' poor immigration history. The fact the parents
         could obtain work and have spent most of their lives  in  Ghana  is
         also  a  factor  I  have  taken  into  consideration.  Mr   Timpson
         maintained that the second-named appellant's medical  condition  is
         of most significance in this appeal and the fact there is treatment
         available and he is stable are  significant  factors  I  must  have
         regard to.

     30. I therefore  find  the  second-named  appellant  does  not  satisfy
         paragraph 276ADE HC 395.

     31. The  first-named  appellant  could  only  succeed  under  paragraph
         276ADE(vi) and she had to show  "very  significant  obstacles".  Mr
         Timpson did not advance any such obstacles and in light of the fact
         I have rejected the claim for her  son  on  a  test  that  is  less
         stringent I also find that she does not satisfy the requirements of
         paragraph 276ADE HC 395.

     32. In order to consider the claim outside the Rules I would have to be
         satisfied there  are  exceptional,  or  compelling,  circumstances.
         Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act enables  me  to  consider  a  claim
         where

             "In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child; and

             (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom."

     33. The second-named  appellant  is  a  qualifying  child  and  I  have
         therefore considered all of the evidence above  and  in  particular
         the factors set out in paragraph [28] above.

     34. In EV (Phillipines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874  Lord  Justice  Christopher
         Clarke explained how a tribunal should  apply  the  proportionality
         test where wider public interest considerations  are  in  play,  in
         circumstances where the best interests of the child dictate that he
         should remain in the UK (paras. 34-37):

             "34.      In determining whether or not, in a case such as the
             present, the need for immigration control outweighs  the  best
             interests of the children, it is necessary  to  determine  the
             relative strength of the factors which make it in  their  best
             interests to remain here; and also  to  take  account  of  any
             factors that point the other way.

             35. A decision as to what is in the best interests of children
             will depend on a number of factors such as (a) their age;  (b)
             the length of time that they have been here; (c) how long they
             have been in education; (c) what  stage  their  education  has
             reached; (d) to what extent they have  become  distanced  from
             the country to which it is proposed that they return; (e)  how
             renewable their connection with it may be; (f) to what  extent
             they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in
             adapting to life in that country; and (g) the extent to  which
             the course proposed will interfere with their family  life  or
             their rights (if they have any) as British citizens

             36. In a sense the tribunal is concerned with how emphatic  an
             answer falls to be given to the question: is it  in  the  best
             interests of the child to remain? The  longer  the  child  has
             been here, the more advanced (or critical) the  stage  of  his
             education, the looser his ties with the country  in  question,
             and the more deleterious the consequences of his  return,  the
             greater the weight that falls into one side of the scales.  If
             it is overwhelmingly in the child's  best  interests  that  he
             should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration  control
             may well not tip the balance. By contrast  if  it  is  in  the
             child's best interests to remain, but only  on  balance  (with
             some factors pointing the other way), the result  may  be  the
             opposite.

             37. In the balance on the other side there falls to  be  taken
             into account the strong weight to be  given  to  the  need  to
             maintain immigration control in pursuit of the economic  well-
             being of the country and the  fact  that,  ex  hypothesi,  the
             applicants have no  entitlement  to  remain.  The  immigration
             history of the parents may also be relevant e.g. if  they  are
             overstayers, or have acted deceitfully."

     35. The fact that the second-named appellant has been  in  the  UK  for
         seven years would need  to  be  given  significant  weight  in  the
         proportionality exercise for two related reasons: first, because of
         its relevance to determining the nature and strength of the child's
         best interests; and second, because it establishes  as  a  starting
         point that leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful
         reasons to the contrary.

     36. All children speak English but English is spoken in Ghana. I accept
         none of the appellants have visited Ghana but that is due  entirely
         to the fact their parent failed to leave when their leave  expired.
         They have all been educated at the appropriate level but  there  is
         nothing in the material before me that supports a  submission  that
         they cannot be educated in Ghana. None of the  children  are  at  a
         critical age for schooling purposes. There is a  reference  in  the
         updated bundle to the  family  attending  a  Methodist  Church.  No
         material has been advanced to  suggest  they  would  be  unable  to
         attend church and Mr Timpson did not  suggest  any  issue  in  this
         regard. The second, third and fourth-named appellants  have  social
         lives consistent with their  ages  albeit  they  are  bound  to  be
         dominated by their lives with  each  other.  There  is  nothing  to
         suggest their parents provide anything other than a loving and safe
         environment for the appellants.  I  have  already  found  there  is
         medical treatment available  for  the  second-named  appellant  and
         there are no health issues for  the  other  minor  appellants.  Any
         return would be with their parents and  whilst  I  note  what  both
         parents said about their ties  it  seems  that  they  have  limited
         family ties here. The fact the eldest child has been here for  over
         seven years is a factor I attach weight to but it is  a  factor  to
         consider and not a trump card.

     37. Given the immigration history of the parents the decision to refuse
         leave to the minor appellants is proportionate even though it could
         be argued it is in their best interests to remain in the UK.  Their
         private life was all created at a time when the parent's status was
         precarious and that is a relevant factor for me to have  regard  to
         when considering proportionality as the conduct of the  parents  is
         relevant to the children's own situation and  does  not  amount  to
         blaming the children even if they may be prejudiced as a result.

     38. For these reasons I find removal would not be disproportionate  and
         I find all of the appellants' appeals under article 8 fail.

         DECISION

     39. There was a material error. I have remade the decision and  dismiss
         all claims under both the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.




    Signed:      Dated:


    [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    No fee award is made.


Signed      Dated




 [pic]
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
