


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal   Appeal Numbers: IA/48620/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          IA/48621/2013
             IA/48622/2013

                                        IA/48623/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3 December 2014                     |On 5 December 2014        |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     OA
                                     KA
                                     M1
                                     M2
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondents:    Ms Pickup (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a  decision  of  First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Saunders dated 2 October  2014  in  which  the
          respondents' appeals were allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.



Background


       2. The background to this case can be summarised for the purposes  of
          this appeal.  The first and second respondents are the parents  of
          the third and fourth respondents aged 6 and 4  respectively.   The
          parents have been in the UK unlawfully for a lengthy period.   The
          respondents appealed against decisions  to  remove  them  dated  4
          November 2013.  Judge Saunders allowed their appeals and the  SSHD
          has appealed with permission to this Tribunal.

       3. The matter therefore now comes before me to decide whether or not
          the decision contains an error of law.

Hearing

       4. At the hearing Mr Whitwell relied upon the grounds of appeal  but
          focussed  his  submissions  on  the  Judge's  approach   to   the
          children's best interests.  He reminded  me  of  relevant  recent
          authorities such as Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74,  Azimi  [2013]
          UKUT 00197 (IAC) and EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874,
          and invited me to  find  that  the  Judge  did  not  sufficiently
          address aspects relevant to the children's best interests.

       5. I did not need to hear from Ms Pickup and indicated that I  shall
          be dismissing the SSHD's appeal.

Discussion

       6. Judge Saunders' determination is  undoubtedly  a  very  carefully
          constructed and  detailed  one.   She  made  clear  and  detailed
          findings of fact concerning each of the respondents [8-12].   The
          Judge properly directed herself to and applied the relevant legal
          framework including the provisions of the  Immigration  Act  2014
          relevant to the public interest  question  [14-19,  23-24].   The
          Judge considered the children's best interests carefully and gave
          cogent reasons for finding that each child's best  interests  are
          'very strongly' to remain in the UK [21-22] and removal would  be
          'highly  detrimental'  to  those  interests  [24].    The   Judge
          addressed the fourth respondent's circumstances  with  particular
          care given his health  and  developmental  delay  concerns.   The
          Judge found that it is very clear that without the support he  is
          receiving, which would be unavailable in Nigeria his educational,
          emotional and social development will  be  badly  affected  at  a
          formative stage of his development.  Having considered  the  best
          interests of the children,  their  parents'  adverse  immigration
          history  and  the  public  interest  question  pursuant  to   the
          Immigration Act 2014 the Judge allowed the respondents' Article 8
          appeals.

       7. On what basis,  in  light  of  that  very  careful  and  detailed
          approach, does the SSHD submit that the Judge has erred  in  law?
          The grounds submit that the Judge has failed to provide  adequate
          reasons.  As I have already outlined above the Judge has provided
          very clear  and  detailed  reasons  for  each  of  her  findings.
          Contrary to the submissions of the SSHD the Judge has taken  into
          account  and  attached  significant  weight   to   the   parents'
          immigration history [24].  The Judge  has  also  found  that  the
          'family face a number of reasonably significant obstacles in  re-
          establishing themselves in  a  country  in  which  they  have  no
          housing, support or assets' [21], which are particularly  serious
          in light of the fourth  respondent's  health  and  medical  needs
          [22].

       8. The grounds of appeal also submit that the Judge  has  failed  to
          take into account EV (Philippines) (supra).  This is difficult to
          follow as the Judge expressly directed herself to this case [19].
           The Judge has effectively found that it is overwhelmingly not in
          the children's interests to go to Nigeria.  Christopher Clarke LJ
          acknowledged that in such a case immigration control may not  tip
          the balance.  Judge Saunders considered the parents'  immigration
          history but decided it did not tip balance.

       9. When granting permission to appeal Judge Levin observed that  the
          Judge may have considered the children's best  interests  as  the
          primary consideration and not a  primary  consideration.   In  my
          view that observation is unsupported by the manner in  which  the
          Judge carefully and expressly reminded  herself  of  the  correct
          approach to best interests and that it will be 'a (but  not  the)
          primary consideration' [19].

      10.  The  determination  is  a  detailed  and  admirable  one   which
          sufficiently reasons why  in  this  particular  case  the  public
          interest in  removing  the  respondents  does  not  outweigh  the
          interference with the children's private life in light  of  their
          best interests 'very strongly' favouring remaining in the UK.   I
          am satisfied that when read as a  whole  the  Judge  was  clearly
          aware of the fact that the children were not British citizens and
          were still at a young age and potentially able to adapt  to  life
          in Nigeria.  The Judge found that in this particular  case  there
          was compelling evidence why notwithstanding these  matters  their
          removal to Nigeria would be 'highly detrimental'.  She has  fully
          and properly address the children's best interests  in  light  of
          the principles set out in the authorities drawn to  my  attention
          by Mr Whitwell.

Decision

      11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
          of law and I do not set it aside.

Anonymity

      12. This decision refers  to  confidential  matters  relevant  to  two
          young children and I have therefore  anonymised  the  respondents'
          names.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
3 December 2014

