
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 April 2017                               |On 22 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                            Mr Malik Nadeem Ahmad
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The Appellant in Person
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth 15 February  1964,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 19 January  2014,  to
    refuse a claim based around human rights which the Secretary  of  State
    certified as clearly unfounded and therefore removed rights of appeal.

2.   The Appellant has on any view been ill-served by  his  former  advisers
    in that a fee was paid and for some reason accepted and there were  two
    adjourned hearings before ultimately the final hearing before the judge
    on 17 May 2016.  It is extremely unfortunate and to a degree unfair  on
    the  Appellant,  who  thought  that  he  had  an  ongoing  appeal,  but
    ultimately the judge correctly concluded that in a sequence  of  events
    an appeal was  erroneously  lodged  against  a  form  IS.151A  dated  4
    November 2014.  His  representatives  had  not  realised,  despite  the
    contents of an earlier Reasons for Refusal Letter which was substituted
    by that of 19 January 2015, that there was no right  of  appeal.   What
    should have happened if there was any basis for it was for there to  be
    an application for judicial review against the  certificate.  3.    The
    judge having made the decision, permission to appeal was refused by the
    First-tier Tribunal.

3.   On a renewed application  permission  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McWilliam on 8 February 2017.  It is less  than  clear  what  was
    before the judge, who certainly does not seem to have had the  critical
    pages of the Respondent's decision of January 2015 in which it is clear
    as can be that the claim was certified.  It therefore is to a degree  a
    complication for this Appellant that there  has  been  another  hearing
    where I am afraid the outcome remains that there is no right of appeal.

4.     The Appellant should have been told of this long ago and whoever  has
    been advising him should have told him as clear as can  be  that  there
    was no right of appeal which he could pursue through the appeal process
    before this Tribunal.  Having considered  the  papers  and  having  the
    advantage of a helpful note of the abortive hearings before the  First-
    tier Tribunal in November  2015  and  February  2016  it  is  the  more
    unfortunate that those advising did not tell him sooner that he had  no
    right of appeal and could not pursue an appeal.


NOTICE OF DECISION
The appeal is dismissed


ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity is necessary or appropriate.






Signed                                  Date 10 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been dismissed for want of jurisdiction.   There  can  be  no
fee award.






    Signed                                   Date 10 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

