
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 January 2017                           |On 7 February 2017            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                Dinesh Karki
                       (anonymity direction Not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Omotosho, promulgated on 9 February 2016,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom.
 2. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable that the judge  had
    overlooked the content of the documents filed by the Appellant with his
    application.


 3. The Appellant did not attend the hearing.  The file showed that  notice
    of the time and place of the hearing had been sent  to  the  Appellant.
    Further, on 5 January 2017 he had written to the Tribunal submitting  a
    supplementary witness statement.  In the  accompanying  letter  he  had
    indicated that he knew that the hearing was at Field House on  Thursday
    19 January 2017.  In the circumstances where  the  Appellant  had  been
    given notice of the date and time of the hearing, where  he  had  shown
    that he was aware of this, and  where  he  had  failed  to  request  an
    adjournment or indicate to the Tribunal that there was any  reason  for
    his failure to attend, I considered that I could proceed  to  hear  the
    appeal in his absence in  accordance  with  rule  38  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


 4. I heard brief submissions from Mr. Duffy following which I reserved  my
    decision.


Error of Law Decision


 5. Bearing in mind the grant of appeal, I have  carefully  considered  the
    Tribunal file to establish which documents were on file.  It is correct
    that there is a notice of immigration decision on the file  which  does
    not relate to the Appellant.  However the  full  decision  and  reasons
    dated 11 November 2014, which includes removal directions,  is  in  the
    Appellant's name, with the Appellant's nationality and date of birth as
    given by him.  There is also on  file,  although  not  found  with  the
    majority of documents, but on the right hand side of the file, a letter
    from the Appellant's representatives, UK Immigration Consultants, dated
    30 May 2014, to which the judge has referred in paragraph [15]  of  the
    decision.


 6. While there appears to be some confusion surrounding the  documents  on
    file, I find that the  judge  has  not  referred  in  the  decision  to
    documents which are not on the Tribunal file.  Further I have not  been
    able to find any evidence in the Tribunal file that there was a CAS  in
    the Respondent's bundle.  Mr. Duffy confirmed  that  Respondent's  file
    does not contain a CAS, so it is difficult to see how  the  bundle  the
    Respondent provided for the Tribunal would have contained one.


 7. The application form which I have before me, which is in  the  name  of
    the Appellant with  his  date  of  birth  and  nationality  as  stated,
    indicates in response to the question "do you have a CAS?" "No" (page 7
    of 14).  Given this, I would not expect to see a CAS in any bundle.


 8. The only reference to a CAS having been submitted is in  paragraph  [3]
    of the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  This states  that
    the Appellant is a "Bangladesh national", whereas he is a  national  of
    Nepal.  It states that "he applied for further leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the  points-
    based system.  Along with the Tier 4 application form, he  submitted  a
    CAS letter issued by his college, which was at the time listed  on  the
    Tier 4 Register of Sponsors.  However this was no longer the case  when
    checks were carried out by the respondant (sic)".   This was before the
    judge in the First-tier Tribunal.


 9. I was satisfied that the documents on file were as stated by the  judge
    in the decision.


10. Having satisfied myself  as  to  this  issue,  I  have  considered  the
    findings of the judge [14]  to  [20].   In  paragraph  [15]  the  judge
    states:


    "The appellant had applied for further leave to remain in the UK  as  a
    Tier 4 General Student Migrant.  In his application form in  answer  to
    the question whether he has  a  CAS,  he  answered  'NO'.   I  note  in
    addition that in a letter dated 30.05.14 from UK Immigration Consultant
    in support of his application, it was noted that the appellant did  not
    have a CAS "at the moment"."


11. Having considered the documents on file,  I  find  that  the  judge  is
    correct in stating that in his application form the Appellant indicated
    that he did not have a CAS, and that the  letter  from  UK  Immigration
    Consultants confirmed that the Appellant did not have a  CAS.   I  find
    there is no error in the judge's findings in paragraph [15].


12. In paragraph [16] the  judge  refers  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    paragraph 3.  In paragraph [17] he states that he is somewhat  confused
    by the grounds especially as  the  Appellant  and  his  representatives
    "accepted at the time of the application that he had no CAS".  There is
    no error in the finding that both the Appellant and his representatives
    had accepted that there was no CAS at  the  time  of  application.   He
    states in paragraph [17]: "No evidence of any CAS being issued has been
    produced in evidence  before  me".   As  stated  above,  I  have  fully
    considered the documents on file and there is no CAS.


13. Further, although the grounds of appeal  and  the  submission  to  this
    Tribunal state that the Appellant submitted a CAS issued  by  Docklands
    College, no evidence has been provided to corroborate this.  Given that
    the Appellant's own evidence and that of his representatives  was  that
    there was no CAS, this is not entirely  surprising.   No  evidence  has
    been provided to corroborate the claim that a CAS was ever provided.  I
    find that there is no error of law in the judge's finding in  paragraph
    [17].


14. Having found that there is no CAS, the judge goes on to state that  the
    decision was in accordance with the immigration  rules  [18].   I  find
    that he was entitled to come to this finding.  There  is  no  error  in
    this finding.


15. In the grounds  of  appeal  and  submission  to  this  Tribunal  it  is
    submitted that the judge's decision is not in keeping with the case law
    of Thakur (PBS decision - common law fairness) Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT
    0051 (IAC).  However, following the case of Thakur,  60  days  is  only
    granted to an applicant when he has provided a CAS,  and  when  between
    the date of application and decision, the CAS becomes invalid owing  to
    actions of the Respondent in removing the college which issued the  CAS
    from the Tier 4 Sponsor Register.  That has not happened in this  case.
    The Appellant and his representatives were clear that as at the date of
    the application the Appellant did not have a  CAS.   I  therefore  find
    that the case of Thakur is irrelevant to the appeal before me, just  as
    it was irrelevant to the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


16. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  involve
    the making of an error of law.  The judge set out  the  evidence  which
    was before him.  This evidence indicated that  the  Appellant  did  not
    have a valid CAS at the date of application.  In the circumstances  the
    judge was correct to dismiss the appeal on the basis that no valid  CAS
    had been provided and  therefore  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.


Notice of Decision


17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    an error of law and I do not set it aside.


18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
