
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48951/2014
                                                               IA/49231/2014
                                                               IA/49239/2014
                                                             & IA/49248/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Determination Promulgated            |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 24 September 2015                 |On 30 October 2015                   |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                               Mr M N M K (A1)
                               Mrs B F J (A2)
                              Miss W M K (A3) &
                              Master M M K (A4)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel, instructed by One Immigration
(Leicester)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



Immigration History

 1. A1 is the husband of A2 and A3 and A4 are their children. They are  all
    citizens of Mauritius. A1 and A2 came to the UK in  2002.  Their  leave
    expired in 2008. A1 and A2 were born in the UK on 17 July  2005  and  6
    February 2008 respectively. The Appellants applied for leave to  remain
    in the UK on 7 July 2012 on human rights grounds and their applications
    were refused on 31 July 2013. The  Respondent  then  reconsidered,  and
    maintained the refusal of their applications, the reasons for which are
    contained in a letter, dated 19 November 2014 (the RL).

 2. The Appellants appealed and their appeals were heard and  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chapman (the Judge) in a  decision  dated  17
    March 2015. The Appellants applied for  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that:

          a. The Judge's findings in relation to the appeal on the  grounds
             that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the  law  were
             flawed partly due to inconsistencies within the  decision  and
             partly due to the failure by the Judge to consider  and  apply
             the guidance in JO and Others (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014]
             UKUT 517 (IAC);

          b. The Judge accepted assertions made in the RL by the Respondent
             without having sight of the background evidence relied  on  by
             the Respondent in support of her assertions;

          c. The Judge conflated the assessment of the  Appellants'  claims
             under the Immigration Rules  with  the  Article  8  assessment
             rather than considering  the  Appellants'  appeals  under  the
             Immigration Rules and then under Article 8, which resulted  in
             the failure by the Judge to recognise the different  positions
             of A3 and A4 under the Rules, and to the provisions of s  117B
             being imported  into  the  assessment  under  the  immigration
             Rules; and

          d. The Judge made findings of fact that were not open to  him  at
             paras [45 - 50] and  failed  to  take  into  account,  in  his
             Article 8 assessment, that  A3  would  be  in  a  position  to
             register as a British national four months from  the  date  of
             hearing and did not consider the explanatory memorandum to the
             Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules 13 June 2013,  which
             provided decision makers with  guidance  on  how  applications
             from the parents of British citizens and  other  children  who
             had been in the UK for a continuous period of 7  years  should
             be dealt with.

 3. Permission was granted on the basis that the  grounds  raised  arguable
    errors of law in the approach to the child Appellants.

 4. Although there was a Rule 24 response from the Respondent, this did not
    deal substantively with the grounds of application because the  drafter
    of the grounds had neither the file nor the decision before him.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Chelvan provided copies  of  the  fax  sent  to  the
    Tribunal but not received by me. This was additional evidence  provided
    under paragraph 15 (2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, which related to an application by  A3  to  register  as  a
    British citizen. However, there was no need to admit this evidence;  it
    was evidence that could not have been before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    because A3 was not at that point entitled to apply for registration  as
    a British citizen. The Judge could only consider the facts as they were
    at the date of decision and he accepted that A3 would  be  entitled  to
    such registration in the future at [34]. The  additional  evidence  did
    not  therefore  assist  in  establishing  whether  or  not  the   Judge
    materially erred in law.

 6. During the hearing, I heard submissions from Mr Chelvan and Mr Smart to
    which I will refer where necessary  in  the  context  of  my  decision.
    Following submissions, I reserved my decision.

Submissions, analysis and decision

 7. As to the claim of failure by the Judge to apply JO,  this  ground  was
    not substantiated during submissions. The Judge found that the decision
    was in accordance with the law. Mr Chelvan submitted that the Judge had
    quite clearly stated at [28] "I reject the  submission  that  the  best
    interest of the third and fourth appellants were properly considered by
    the Respondent when making the decision in this matter", and  that  the
    Respondent had not applied for a slip rule amendment and could not  now
    submit that this was merely a typographical error. However, it is quite
    clear from a full reading of [28] that all that has been  omitted  from
    the first line of [28] is the word  'not'  after  'were',  particularly
    when the Judge concludes [28] with "Whilst the appellants may not agree
    with the conclusions reached,  it  does  not  mean  that  the  relevant
    material was not taken into account  nor  the  relevant  considerations
    made. On the evidence, I find it likely that they were,  and  therefore
    find  that  the  decision  was  made  in  accordance  with  the   law."
    Furthermore, as submitted by Mr Smart, it is clear that when the  Judge
    starts [28] with the words 'I reject the submission'  he  is  referring
    back to the  submission  made  by  the  Appellant's  representative  as
    recorded at para [23]. I find that it can reasonably be  inferred  that
    the Judge was rejecting the submission that the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law at [28], and that this is what he intended when
    he referred to this ground of appeal at the end of his decision.

 8. JO provides that the Respondent  must  consider  and  engage  with  the
    evidence presented by the Appellants to the Respondent. When  asked  by
    me to identify the evidence that was placed before the Respondent which
    the Respondent failed to engage with in the decision letter, Mr Chelvan
    was unable to point to any such evidence. Furthermore, as submitted  by
    Mr Smart, MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]  UKUT
    00223 (IAC) provided that there was  no  need  to  refer  to  statutory
    guidelines if it was clear that the best interests of the children  had
    been considered. I find that the Judge was entitled to  find  that  the
    decision of the Respondent was in accordance with the law and there  is
    no arguable merit in the grounds at paras 2 - 9.

 9. I turn now to the various submissions in the grounds in relation to the
    evidence before the Judge and the findings of fact made by him  as  set
    out in the grounds at 15 - 22. The Judge stated that he  did  not  have
    any objective evidence before him to confirm the assertions made by  A1
    and A2 as to the lack of prospects for their children in Mauritius;  he
    was right to so state because there was no  objective  evidence  before
    him and A1 and A2 were not objective witnesses. Whilst it  is  fair  to
    say that the  Respondent  did  not  provide  evidence  to  support  the
    assertion in  the  decision  letter  as  to  educational  provision  in
    Mauritius, it is also fair to say that the Judge did not rely  on  this
    assertion. In  the  absence  of  background  evidence  to  support  the
    assertions of A1 and A2, he drew  inferences  from  the  evidence  they
    provided to him, which he was entitled to do. Objections were raised in
    the grounds of application in relation to the Judge's findings at [45 -
    50]. I have read the grounds and the decision and I find that the Judge
    was entitled to make the findings that he made on the  evidence  before
    him and the grounds amount to no more than a  disagreement  with  those
    findings. His findings of fact at [45 - 50] and [52 - 54] are therefore
    preserved.

10. As to Article 8, Mr Smart was on notice from me during the hearing that
    there was some substance to the grounds in relation to  Article  8.  Mr
    Smart submitted that the Judge did not err in his assessment under para
    276ADE (1) (vi) of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  Article  8  by
    considering them together; he had not been  required  to  consider  the
    provisions of para 276ADE (1) (vi) as can be seen from the  submissions
    on behalf of the Appellants at [23], and the Judge therefore dealt with
    the appeal on this basis. Mr Smart submitted that although the  Judge's
    handling of the issues at [54] was not ideal, he had addressed each  of
    the provisions of s 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 and made proper and reasonable findings and there was no  material
    error of law in his approach.

11. It is, however, clear from the decision at [39] that it  was  submitted
    that A3 and A4 were entitled to  a  grant  of  leave  to  remain  under
    paragraph  276ADE  (1)  (vi).  The  relative  positions  of  these  two
    Appellants were not considered under  276ADE  (vi)  separately  by  the
    Judge; A3 had lived in the UK continuously for a period of 7  years  at
    the date of application and A4 had not. Furthermore, whilst  the  Judge
    did not have  the  benefit  of  the  guidance  in  Bossade  (ss.117A-D-
    interrelationship with Rules) [2015]  UKUT  00415  (IAC),  as  provided
    therein it is necessary to consider the provisions of  the  Immigration
    Rules before considering the appeals under Article 8 and the provisions
    of s 117A-B do not have  any  direct  application  to  the  Immigration
    Rules.

12. The difficulty with conflating the  assessment  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 is  that  the  assessment  of  reasonableness
    under para 276ADE  does  require  the  Judge  to  import  into  it  the
    requirements of s 117B of the Immigration Rules  pursuant  to  Bossade.
    Whilst it may have been possible to consider the decision  as  a  whole
    and it may have been clear that the Judge in fact dealt with the appeal
    on the basis of para 276ADE (vi) first and then turned  to  the  appeal
    under Article 8, having first reminded himself of the legal  provisions
    at [39 - 43], he in fact clearly states, at [43], "the  final  step  in
    Razgar [2004] is whether the refusal to give leave is proportionate  to
    the legitimate aims pursued. Since this seems to be a similar  test  to
    that of "and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  applicants  to
    leave the UK" (in paragraph 276ADE (iv)), I  deal  with  the  issue  of
    proportionality and reasonableness together." It is therefore not clear
    what factors he in fact considered in his assessment of  reasonableness
    under 276ADE (vi). Furthermore, when considering the appeal of A3,  the
    Judge did not consider the weight, if any, to be attached to  the  fact
    that A3 would be entitled to register as a British citizen four  months
    from the date of hearing. I find that  in  considering  proportionality
    and reasonableness together, the judge materially erred in law  in  his
    approach. The decisions under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8
    must therefore be set aside.

13. As to the remaking of the  decision,  Mr  Chelvan  submitted  that  the
    matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing of
    all the issues in the event that I find that the Judge  had  materially
    erred in law. However, if I were to decide that it was not  appropriate
    to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal, he asked for a  resumed
    hearing for the consideration of up to date evidence  and  submissions.
    Mr Smart submitted that I had sufficient evidence before me on which to
    make a decision and the decision should be made by the Upper Tribunal.

14. I have preserved the findings of fact made by the Judge at  [45  -  50]
    and  [53  -  54].  However,  given  the  errors  in  approach  in   the
    determination of the appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8, there was no structured  substantive  consideration  of  the
    appeals of A3 and A4, nor were  there  separate  findings  of  fact  in
    relation to each child. As I have found that there is a material  error
    of law in the decision of Judge Chapman, it is open to  the  Appellants
    to provide  evidence  in  relation  to  the  current  position  of  all
    Appellants under Article 8 for findings of fact  to  be  made.  In  the
    circumstances, I consider it appropriate to remit this hearing  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal  pursuant  to  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
    Statements relating to the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

15. As set out above, the decision  of  Judge  Chapman  contained  material
    errors of law in relation to the determination of the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules and  under  Article  8  ECHR  and  the  decisions  in
    relation to both are set aside. The Judge's findings of fact  at  paras
    [45 - 50] and [53 - 54] are preserved.

16. The matter is to be remitted  for  hearing  before  the  FtT  with  the
    following directions:

          a. The Appellant shall file and serve:

               i. A comprehensive bundle of documents that were  before  the
                  First-tier Tribunal at the date of the last hearing.

              ii. Any  additional  evidence,  including  statements,  to  be
                  relied on for the purposes of the substantive hearing.

          b. The matter is to be listed with a time estimate of 2 hours.

          c. It is my understanding that an interpreter is not required. If
             the  Appellants   need   an   interpreter,   they   or   their
             representatives must contact  the  Tribunal  and  confirm  the
             language and dialect required.

          d. This matter is not to be listed before Judge Chapman.

Anonymity

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    chamber) Rules 2014. Mr Chelvan asked for a direction to  be  made.  As
    the determination dealt with the appeals of  two  minor  appellants,  I
    find that an anonymity direction is appropriate.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member of
    their family. This direction applies both to  the  Appellants  and  the
    Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed   Date

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

