
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48871/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th May 2016                              |On 19th May 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                parul vaghela
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Bunting, Counsel, instructed by Bukhari
                    Chambers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Farmer (the judge), promulgated on 29 September 2015, in
    which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against the
    Respondent's decision of 17 November 2014 to remove the Appellant  from
    the United Kingdom by  way  of  directions  under  section  10  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. Before the judge the Appellant's  case  was  founded  exclusively  upon
    Article 8. She considered the evidence, made numerous findings of fact,
    and reached conclusions on all material issues.

 3. One, and only one, aspect of  her  decision  stands  out  as  being  of
    potential concern. In paragraph 5, when setting out the evidence before
    her, the judge refers to "the first appellant." There was only ever one
    Appellant. Paragraph 19 (which is found in amongst the findings)  again
    refers to a "first appellant." The contents of this  paragraph  do  not
    appear to relate to the Appellant's case. Paragraphs 20 and 21 refer to
    "they", indicating two Appellants rather than the one.

 4. At all other points in the  twenty-nine  paragraph  decision  only  one
    Appellant is referred to.

 5. The Appellant's challenge to the judge's decision  is  straightforward:
    the erroneous references to more than one Appellant render the decision
    as a whole unsafe.

 6. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 21 March
    2016.



The hearing before me

 7. Mr Bunting relied on the concise grounds. He submitted that the judge's
    errors  were  not  simply  slips.  I  should  look  at   the   decision
    holistically. Anxious scrutiny had not been accorded to the Appellant's
    case. Reliance was placed on the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  ML
    (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 844.

 8. Mr Bramble also asked me to consider the decision as a whole. The judge
    referred correctly to only one Appellant again and again. If one struck
    out the 'offending' references to twin  Appellants,  the  decision  was
    sustainable. The errors were not material.



Decision on error of law

 9. Having given this case a good deal of  thought,  I  conclude  that  the
    erroneous references to more than one Appellant are not material.

10. I have considered the decision as a whole and in light of the need  for
    anxious scrutiny to be given to all cases.

11. The judge makes correct  reference  to  the  Appellant  as  being  "the
    appellant" in no fewer than twenty-two paragraphs of her decision.  All
    of the evidence cited therein relates specifically to  the  Appellant's
    own case and not that of any other. In respect of the  section  of  the
    decision concerning findings and conclusions,  accurate  references  to
    the Appellant and her case are  made  in  eighteen  of  the  twenty-one
    relevant paragraphs.

12. There is a  specific  finding  in  paragraph  11  that  no  significant
    obstacles existed in relation to the Appellant's ability to  return  to
    India. That is a crucial finding in respect of the Article 8 as a whole
    and it relates  solely  to  the  Appellant.  There  then  follow  seven
    paragraphs  containing  perfectly  adequate  findings  and  reasons  in
    support of this  core  finding  on  return.  These  all  refer  to  the
    Appellant and her own case.

13. The judge's conclusion in paragraph 22  on  the  inability  to  satisfy
    Appendix FM relates solely to the Appellant, as does her assessment  of
    Article 8 outside of the Rules (paragraphs  23-28).  The  findings  and
    reasons containing therein are in and of themselves fully sustainable.

14. In respect of the judge's first reference to the "first  appellant"  in
    paragraph 5, it really cannot be said to be any more than a slip.  What
    follows in that paragraph is entirely related to  the  Appellant's  own
    case. The erroneous reference is immaterial.

15. The presence  of  paragraphs  19-21  is  odd,  and  one  can  certainly
    appreciate why the Appellant sought  to  challenge  the  decision:  the
    appearance of anxious scrutiny as well as  its  actual  application  is
    important. The contents of paragraph 19 are just  not  related  to  the
    Appellant's case.

16. I conclude that paragraphs 19-21 have been  inadvertently  left  in  or
    copied in from another decision drafted by the same judge, and they can
    be properly excised from the decision on the  Appellant's  case.  As  I
    have set out previously, the vast majority of the  judge's  references,
    findings and conclusions relate to the Appellant's  case,  both  before
    and after paragraph 19. Taking the decision  holistically,  and  having
    regard to everything I have  said  earlier,  the  core  conclusions  on
    paragraph 276ADE and Article 8 outside of the Rules are not  materially
    dependent upon paragraph 19. Paragraphs 20 and 21 add  little  and  are
    only really statements of conclusion. As with paragraph 19,  these  are
    not related to the Appellant's case and do not form part of the judge's
    conclusions thereon.

17. In my view the position in the present appeal can be distinguished from
    that in ML (Nigeria). There, the judge had made multiple factual errors
    when setting out and considering the appellant's case. He  referred  to
    evidence that did not exist and skeleton arguments which had  not  been
    provided. In short, the judge had committed a litany of factual  errors
    which plainly rendered the whole exercise unsustainable.

18. In the Appellant's case the judge has accurately described the evidence
    in all respects save for the single aberration in  paragraph  19.  That
    paragraph is not an inaccurate  portrayal  of  the  way  in  which  the
    Appellant put her case. Rather, it is a paragraph that  should  not  be
    there at all. Further, it does not in fact contain adverse  credibility
    findings.

19. I appreciate that the  judge  in  ML  (Nigeria)  had  also  included  a
    reference to another case (see paragraph 7). However,  that  error  was
    one amongst numerous others. The woeful state  of  the  decision  under
    scrutiny by the Court of Appeal is not in my  view  comparable  to  the
    judge's single error in the present case, having regard to what I  have
    said previously. The reference in paragraph  19  does  not  take  on  a
    "sinister turn."



Anonymity

20. I make no direction.



Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed and  the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                       Date:  18 May 2016


H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee was payable and so there can be no fee award.


Signed                                       Date:  18 May 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


