

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48437/2013
                                                               IA/48442/2013
                                                               IA/48448/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 January 2016                           |On 18 March 2016              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


                              SYED AUSAF HAIDER
                                 HAFSA AKTER
                          (AND ONE CHILD DEPENDENT)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Haji, Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The first appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He  says  that  he  was
    born in Saudi Arabia, where his parents lived and worked  for  most  of
    his early life. Although  he  visited  Pakistan  with  his  family  for
    holidays in the past he says that he  has  little  experience  of  life
    there, having grown up in Saudi Arabia. He entered the  UK  in  January
    2007  with  entry  clearance  as  a  student.  He  began  by   studying
    accountancy but then moved on to study towards a BA  (Hons)  degree  in
    Business and Management. The appellant accepts that he did not complete
    those courses, and in actual fact, has little to show  in  the  way  of
    formal academic achievement from his time spent studying in the UK. The
    appellant's exact immigration history is  a  little  unclear  from  the
    evidence but it seems that he may have overstayed for a period of  time
    from 2009, when his visa expired, and when he left the  UK  in  October
    2010.

2.    The second appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh. She  entered  the  UK
    in September 2006 with entry clearance as a student,  which  was  valid
    until 30 November 2009. She met the first appellant in 2008 while  they
    were both studying at the London School of Commerce. She  completed  an
    MBA in Finance. Their friendship developed into a relationship and they
    decided to marry. An Islamic ceremony took place in London on  29  July
    2010. The second appellant was granted further leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant, which was valid  until  16  September
    2012.

3.    In October 2010 the appellants  travelled  to  Pakistan  in  order  to
    register the marriage. The second  appellant  stayed  for  three  weeks
    while the marriage was registered and then  returned  to  the  UK.  The
    first appellant applied for entry clearance as the dependent of  a  PBS
    migrant. He re-entered the UK on 13 January 2011 with  entry  clearance
    as a PBS partner that was valid until 16 September  2012.  Their  first
    child was born on 11 June 2012 (3 years old). Their  second  child  was
    born on 18 December 2015 (newborn).

4.    On 13 September 2012 the appellants applied to vary and  extend  their
    leave to remain on human rights grounds. The application was refused in
    a decision dated 01 November 2013. The respondent  was  satisfied  that
    they did not meet the private or family life requirements contained  in
    the immigration rules and that there were no exceptional  circumstances
    to justify granting leave to remain outside the rules.  The  respondent
    took into account the fact that they came from different countries  but
    noted that they established a family life in the UK at a time when they
    knew that their immigration status  was  temporary  and  there  was  no
    expectation that they would be able to remain in the UK on a  permanent
    basis. They would be able to apply for entry into one or other country.
    Their child was young enough to adapt to life in Pakistan or Bangladesh
    with the help of his parents. If they feared that they would be at risk
    on return they should make a separate claim  at  the  Asylum  Screening
    Unit.

5.     The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Callender  Smith  allowed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 02 September 2014. In a decision  dated  06  March  2015
    Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Murray  concluded  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point  of  law.
    The Upper Tribunal found that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  failing
    to  have  sufficient  regard  to  the  public  interest  considerations
    weighing in favour of refusal of leave to remain.

6.    The appeal was listed for further hearing on 19 May 2015 in  order  to
    remake the decision. The appellants  did  not  appear.  An  adjournment
    request was made on the ground that the second appellant  was  pregnant
    and had suffered a fall. She had been advised to rest and would not  be
    able to attend the hearing.  The judge refused to adjourn and proceeded
    to hear the resumed appeal. She dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 18 June 2015.

7.    On 31 July 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds set aside the  decision  on
    the ground that it was in the interests of justice to do  so.  She  was
    satisfied that  the  conditions  specified  in  rule  43(2)(c)  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 were met. It clearly had
    been envisaged that the second appellant would  give  evidence  at  the
    resumed hearing.

8.    The appeal came before me to remake the decision. An error of law  has
    already been found in the earlier decision dated 06 March 2015. I heard
    evidence from both appellants and submissions from both parties. I have
    also considered the background and other documentary evidence relied on
    by the parties.

Decision and reasons

9.     It  is  accepted  that  the  appellants  do  not  meet   the   strict
    requirements of the immigration rules for  leave  to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds. The appeal falls  to  be  considered  under  Article  8
    outside the rules. The  immigration  rules  are  said  to  reflect  the
    respondent's view of where a fair balance should be struck between  the
    right to respect for  private  and  family  life  and  public  interest
    considerations relating to the maintenance of an  effective  system  of
    immigration control (paragraph GEN.1.1 Appendix FM).  The rules  should
    be read in a way that reflects a proper interpretation of Article 8  of
    the European Convention. However, there may some cases where the  rules
    do not address relevant Article 8 issues.  In  such  cases  it  may  be
    necessary to consider whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  to
    justify granting leave to remain outside the immigration rules: Huang v
    SSHD [2007] 2 AC 167 & SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387.   This
    should be assessed by reference to the five stage test outlined by  the
    House of Lords in R v SSHD ex parte Razgar [2004] 3 WLR 58.

Article 8(1) - Private and family life

10.   It  is  not  disputed  that  the  appellants  are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship. There is evidence to show  that  they  have  a
    child from their marriage. At the date of the hearing they had  another
    newborn child, born in December 2015.  The  appellants  explained  that
    they had not had time to register the birth. Both children attended the
    hearing. The respondent's representative didn't express any doubt about
    the fact that there might be another child. Although the  second  child
    is not an appellant in this appeal I take him into account in so far as
    he forms part of the family unit. Any future action taken  in  relation
    to the family should include  the  second  child  once  a  valid  birth
    certificate has been produced.

11.   The first appellant has lived in the UK for a period  of  nine  years.
    During that time he had leave to remain as  a  student  and  as  a  PBS
    dependent. It seems likely that there was a period of overstaying for a
    number of months before he travelled  to  Pakistan  with  his  wife  to
    register their marriage. It was not a bar to him  being  granted  entry
    clearance as a PBS dependent. He has remained in the  UK  on  a  lawful
    basis since 2011. The second appellant has lived in  the  UK  for  just
    over nine years. It appears that during that time she  has  resided  in
    the UK on a lawful basis.

12.   The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  any  clear  findings  regarding
    private and family life in the UK. The  appellants  are  likely  to  be
    removed as a family unit. On the face of it the decision is unlikely to
    interfere with the appellants' right  to  continue  their  family  life
    together. However, it is argued that their  ability  to  conduct  their
    private and family lives in the respective countries would be infringed
    by the difficulties that they would face  as  a  result  of  the  mixed
    religious/nationality nature of their marriage. The  children  are  not
    yet old enough to have established private lives of  their  own.  Their
    lives still revolve around their parents. The appellants have lived  in
    the UK for a fairly lengthy period of time.  In  that  time  they  have
    studied and worked and established themselves to some extent. As such I
    find that removal in consequence of the decision is likely to interfere
    with their right to private life in a sufficiently grave way to  engage
    the operation of Article 8(1) (questions (i) & (ii) of  Lord  Bingham's
    five stage approach in Razgar).

Article 8(2) - proportionality

13.   Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to family  and
    private life.  However,  it  is  not  an  absolute  right  and  can  be
    interfered with by the state in certain circumstances. It is trite  law
    that the state has a  right  to  control  immigration  and  that  rules
    governing the entry and residence of people into the  country  are  "in
    accordance with the law" for the purpose of Article 8. Any interference
    with the right to private or family  life  must  be  for  a  legitimate
    reason and should be reasonable and proportionate.

14.   In assessing whether removal in consequence of the decision  would  be
    a proportionate response I am required to take into account the  public
    interest considerations set out in section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (NIAA 2002). I take  into  account  the
    fact that significant weight should be given to the public interest  in
    maintaining an effective system of immigration control (s.117B(1)). The
    appellants do not meet the requirements of the immigration rules and in
    such circumstances they would normally be expected to leave the UK.

15.   The appellants have studied at  degree  level  and  gave  evidence  in
    English. They have both worked during their time in the UK and there is
    no evidence to suggest that they would become an unnecessary  financial
    burden on the public purse if they  remain  in  the  UK.  However,  the
    considerations outlined in sections 117B(2)-(3) are neutral factors  in
    the balancing exercise: see AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015]  UKUT  260.
    The fact that they can speak English, and are in a position to  support
    the family, simply doesn't  lend  additional  weight  to  the  existing
    public interest considerations.

16.   The considerations outlined in section 117B(4) do  not  appear  to  be
    applicable on the facts of this particular  case.  Save  for  a  fairly
    brief period of time in the case of the first appellant they have lived
    in the UK on a lawful basis. However, section  117B(5)  instructs  that
    little weight should be given to a private life established by a person
    at a time when their immigration status  is  precarious.  I  take  into
    account  the  fact  that  their  leave  to  remain  was  in   temporary
    categories. There was no expectation that  either  appellant  would  be
    able to reside in the UK on a longer term basis. That is the context in
    which they began their relationship in 2008 and the  context  in  which
    they decided to start a family. As such I give  little  weight  to  the
    private life that the two adult appellants have established as part  of
    my overall assessment.

17.    Section  117B(6)  is  not  applicable  in  this  case   because   the
    appellants' children are not British citizens and are too young  to  be
    'qualifying children' for the purpose of that provision.  The  children
    have not lived in the UK for a continuous period of  seven  years.  The
    fact that  the  appellants  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with children who are not yet well established in  the  UK
    is a matter that cannot be given weight in the balancing exercise.

18.   The considerations set out in section 117B are not  exhaustive  but  I
    can see no other relevant public  interest  considerations  that  would
    have any bearing on the proportionality assessment.

19.   I turn to consider the factors that  might  weigh  in  favour  of  the
    appellants. They argue that their circumstances are compelling  on  the
    very particular facts of their case. The marriage is  unusual  both  in
    terms of their mixed  nationalities  but  also  their  mixed  religious
    backgrounds. The first appellant  is  a  Shia  Muslim  and  the  second
    appellant is Sunni. They say that as a result of the  mixed  nature  of
    their marriage both families have shunned them. In both countries there
    would be difficulties in being able  to  establish  themselves  without
    family support. In addition, the first appellant  relies  on  the  fact
    that he grew up in Saudi Arabia and has  no  experience  of  earning  a
    living as an independent adult in Pakistan.

20.   The First-tier Tribunal set out the factual circumstances in full  and
    provided a summary of the expert evidence of Professor Dr Livia Holden,
    who is a Dean of the Faculty  of  Humanities  and  Social  Sciences  at
    Karakoram  International  University  in  Gilgit,  Pakistan.  Professor
    Holden's qualifications and experience indicate that she  is  qualified
    to comment as an expert on the conditions  that  the  appellants  might
    face. On the face of it she lives and works in Pakistan and  is  likely
    to have greater expertise to comment on the  situation  there  but  she
    provides an explanation as to why she also has knowledge and experience
    to comment on other countries in south Asia. The report is lengthy  and
    refers in detail to the sources relied upon to support her  opinion.  I
    am satisfied that I can give weight to the expert opinions expressed in
    the report.

21.   In summary, her opinion is that there  would  be  a  number  of  legal
    obstacles to the first appellant being able  to  enter  and  reside  in
    Bangladesh with his wife. In both countries they  are  likely  to  face
    ostracism  from   their   families   as   a   result   of   the   mixed
    nationality/religious nature of their marriage. She discusses the  risk
    of 'honour'  related  crimes  that  could  arise.  She  considers  that
    Pakistan would be the more realistic option for  the  family  but  goes
    into some detail about the increasing level  of  religious  intolerance
    towards religious minorities, including  Shia  Muslims.  She  concluded
    that in both countries there would be inadequate protection against the
    risk  of  'honour'  killing  or  targeted  violence  against  religious
    minorities.

22.   In this case the best interests  of  the  children  are  tied  to  the
    evidence relating to the conditions they might face if returned to  one
    or other country with their parents. In assessing the best interests of
    the children I have taken into account  the  statutory  guidance  "UKBA
    Every Child Matters: Change for Children" (November 2009), which  gives
    further detail about the duties owed to children under section  55.  In
    that guidance the UKBA acknowledges  the  importance  of  a  number  of
    international instruments relating to human  rights  including  the  UN
    Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). The guidance goes on  to
    confirm: "The UK Border Agency must fulfil the  requirements  of  these
    instruments in relation to children whilst exercising its functions  as
    expressed in UK domestic legislation and policies." I take into account
    the fact that the UNCRC sets out rights including a  child's  right  to
    survival and development, the right to know and be cared for by his  or
    her parents, the right  not  to  be  separated  from  parents  and  the
    enjoyment of the highest attainable standards  of  living,  health  and
    education without discrimination. The UNCRC also recognises the  common
    responsibility of both parents for the upbringing and development of  a
    child.

23.   I have also taken into account the decisions in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4, Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 and EV  (Philippines)  and
    others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874. The best interests of the child  are
    a primary consideration in this case  but  may  be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other matters that weigh in favour of  the  public
    interest. I take into account that  the  younger  the  child  the  more
    important the involvement of a parent is likely to be: see  Berrehab  v
    Netherlands (1988) 11 EHRR 322. It is in the best interests of a  child
    to be brought up by both parents unless it  is  contrary  to  his  best
    interests to see one or other of his parents: see also E-A (Article 8 -
    best interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315.

24.   The children are very young  and  their  lives  still  revolve  around
    their parents. It is clearly in the best interests of the  children  to
    remain in a family unit with their parents. In the UK their parents are
    able to work and provide the care and support that they need. In  terms
    of the best interests of the children the main  consideration  is  what
    conditions the family would face if  returned  to  either  Pakistan  or
    Bangladesh.

25.   I bear in mind that this is  not  a  protection  claim  and  that  the
    conditions in Pakistan and Bangladesh form part of my assessment of the
    proportionality of removal under Article 8. I find  that  none  of  the
    individual factors outlined in the report are likely to  be  sufficient
    to show a real risk of serious harm. While the appellants say that they
    have been ostracised by  their  respective  families  there  is  little
    evidence to suggest that there is a real risk of serious harm solely as
    a result of  their  mixed  marriage.  However,  a  holistic  assessment
    requires me to consider the cumulative nature of the difficulties faced
    by the appellants if they seek to live in one or other country.

26.   Professor Holden explains the legal obstacles to the  first  appellant
    being given entry to remain in Bangladesh with his wife. If  he  cannot
    enter and remain in Bangladesh it is clearly not in the best  interests
    of the children to be separated from  their  father.  Professor  Holden
    considers Pakistan to be the only realistic option for the  family  but
    they would face a number of difficulties in establishing themselves  in
    order to provide the children with a reasonable level of support.

27.   The first appellant has been ostracised from his family  as  a  result
    of the marriage. Although they have travelled to Pakistan in  order  to
    register their marriage in 2010 they only stayed for a brief period  of
    time. The appellant received some minor assistance from  a  cousin  but
    the rest of his family appear to want to have nothing to do  with  him.
    The first appellant will have cultural connections  with  Pakistan  but
    did not grow up there and  does  not  have  any  experience  of  living
    independently and earning a living there. In  a  society  where  family
    support  and  connections  are  of  great  importance   it   would   be
    particularly difficult for the first appellant to establish himself. In
    addition to this they would also face societal discrimination and  some
    risk of harm as a result of the mixed  nationality/religious  marriage.
    While none of these factors would be sufficient if taken alone, I  find
    that the combination of difficulties that they would face if they tried
    to relocate to Pakistan is likely to be such that they  would  struggle
    to provide  adequate  safety  and  support  for  the  family.  In  such
    circumstances I conclude that it would not be in the best interests  of
    the children to live with their parents in Pakistan.

28.   I have given careful  consideration  and  due  weight  to  the  public
    interest considerations in this  case  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    combination of factors outlined above are sufficient to show that there
    are compelling features. The best interests of the children point quite
    strongly to them remaining in the UK with their parents. While the fact
    that they don't meet the strict requirements of the  immigration  rules
    is a matter to be given significant weight there are few  other  public
    interest considerations to outweigh the best interests of the children.
    For example, there is no evidence of abuse of the immigration system at
    the more serious end of the scale such as use  of  false  documents  or
    fraud. The evidence suggests that both parents are  educated  and  they
    would be able to support the family without becoming a  burden  on  the
    public purse. For these reasons I find that removal in  consequence  of
    the decision would amount to a disproportionate interference  with  the
    appellants' rights under Article 8 of the European  Convention  (points
    (iv) & (v) of Lord Bingham's five stage approach in Razgar).


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law and was set aside at an earlier hearing

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeals

Signed   [pic]   Date 10 March 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan








