
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48728/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On the 27th November 2017             |On the 29th November 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                               SUKWINDER SINGH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Pennington-Benton of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of India, with permission, appeals against the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Green)   who,   in   a
    determination promulgated on the 30th March 2016 dismissed  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  his  claim  on  human
    rights grounds (Article  8).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make
    anonymity direction and no grounds been  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant such a direction is necessary.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history is set out within the determination
    at paragraph 1-2 of the FTT determination and in  the  decision  letter
    issued by the Secretary of State  of  the  17th  November.  It  can  be
    summarised briefly as follows.

 3. The appellant was issued with a six-month visit  visa  valid  from  the
    21st March 2003 until 21st of September 2003.  He  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in April of that year and in September 2003 applied for further
    leave to remain. The application was refused in November 2003 and it is
    recorded that the appellant did not appeal that  decision.  On  6  July
    2007 the appellant's children, S and J, entered the United  Kingdom  on
    student  visas  valid  from  2007  until  2009.  In  October  2009  the
    appellant's children applied for Tier 4 student  visas  but  they  were
    rejected having been made on the wrong form. Further applications  were
    rejected because mandatory sections of the form had not been completed.



 4. On 18 January 2011 the appellant was encountered working illegally.  An
    application for leave to remain was made outside of the  rules  on  the
    31st January 2011 which  was  rejected  with  no  right  of  appeal.  A
    reconsideration request was made which also was rejected.  He  appealed
    that decision in 2011  and  the  Tribunal  dismissed  his  appeal  (see
    decision of Judge Whiting referred to in the FTT decision at  paragraph
    15). He became appeal rights exhausted on 2 November  2011.  A  further
    human rights application was made refused in 2012 and following further
    representations a decision was made on the  human  rights  claim  in  a
    decision of the respondent  of  17  November  2014.  That  decision  is
    summarised in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph 2.

 5. The appeal came before the First- Tier Tribunal  at a  hearing  on  the
    18th March 2016. In a determination promulgated on the 30th March  2016
    he dismissed the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision and  permission
    was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  a  Judge  of  the
    Upper Tribunal granted  permission  on  the  12th  September  2016.  In
    consequence of the grant of permission, the  Upper  Tribunal  sent  out
    further directions on 30 January 2017 in which the Secretary  of  State
    was ordered to file and serve a statement reporting on the progress  of
    the consideration of an application made by J and the  approach  to  be
    taken to the immigration status of her and other members of the family.

 7. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal. There was  a
    level of agreement between the advocates as to whether  the  judge  had
    made an error on a point of law in reaching his decision. Mr Clarke  on
    behalf of the respondent accepted that the judge had  made  a  material
    error of law in that the judge had failed to consider the circumstances
    of the family members together and that  the  judge  had,  in  essence,
    misapplied the decision of PD and others (Article 8 - conjoined  family
    claims) Sri Lanka [2016]  UKUT  00108  (IAC).  He  submitted  that  the
    findings  of  fact  made  in  relation  to  J  were  relevant  to   any
    consideration of the circumstances of the appellant. He  accepted  that
    the judge had not expressly considered  section  117B(6)  although  the
    determination at paragraph 14 (ii) did reflect such a submission having
    been made. J, by reason of her length of  residence  was  a  qualifying
    child and it was not in dispute that the appellant had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  parental  relationship  with  her   and   the   issue   was
    reasonableness of  return.  In  respect  of  the  judge's  findings  at
    paragraph 17 and 18, he accepted that those paragraphs did  indicate  a
    best interest assessment and assessment  of  reasonableness  (paragraph
    17) and a consideration of the  other  public  interest  considerations
    under section 117B  (paragraph 180).

 8. Mr Pennington-Benton made the following submissions. He  also  referred
    the Tribunal to paragraphs 17 and 18 in which the  judge  set  out  his
    findings of fact which  were  relevant  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    family. He submitted that a significant finding of the judge was that J
    was dependent upon the appellant, her father. The findings of fact made
    in relation to J did not demonstrate that  the  established  dependence
    upon her father would end on her 18th birthday. In  the  light  of  the
    findings of fact made whereby the judge found that J was  a  minor  and
    had lived in the United Kingdom since 2007 for a period of  nine  years
    and that this was a "significant period of time the  development  of  a
    child identity" and in the light that her connections of United Kingdom
    was stronger than those in India, that his conclusion that her  removal
    was a disproportionate interference of the private  life  under  either
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) or outside  of  the  immigration  rules  and
    therefore would have allowed her appeal was a relevant consideration in
    the appellant's appeal.

 9. Thus he argued the judge should have allowed the appeal  and  it  would
    have been up to the Secretary of State to determine a  suitable  period
    of leave for the  appellant.  Therefore  as  the  judge  found  it  was
    disproportionate to remove J there had been no  basis  for  disallowing
    the appeal of the appellant (upon whom she was  dependent.  Furthermore
    he submitted that if the appellant's appeal was dismissed then J  would
    have to leave the UK (see paragraph 18). However it was  not  explained
    how a breach of J's Article 8 rights were displaced by the respondent's
    agreement not to remove her of the  appellant  until  the  summer.  The
    judge having found that J met the requirements of Article 8 should have
    granted the appellant leave because in not doing so would have resulted
    in the breakup of the family unit and the inevitable removal of  J.  He
    accepted in his submissions that the appellant would not have succeeded
    in his own right but that was not the issue given the  presence  of  J.
    Similarly he accepted that the circumstances of his adult son  who  was
    living independently were not sufficient support  for  the  appellant's
    claim. However it was the presence of J and the findings of  fact  made
    in relation to her that were relevant to the appellant's  appeal.  Thus
    he submitted the judge's disposal of the case was  incorrect  and  that
    the judge should have allowed the appeal and  the  Secretary  of  State
    would then have considered what period of leave was appropriate for the
    appellant. He confirmed that since the decision J had  been  granted  a
    period of leave.

10. After having  had  the  opportunity  to  hear  and  consider  the  oral
    submissions of the parties I informed  them  that  I  had  reached  the
    conclusion that I was satisfied that there was an error of law that was
    material and that I would allow the appeal. The reasons  for  doing  so
    are set out below.

Discussion:

11. Appendix FM, "Family Members", begins with a  general  statement  which
    explains that it sets out the requirements to be met by  those  seeking
    to enter or remain in the UK on the basis of their family life  with  a
    person who is a British citizen, is settled in the UK, or is in the  UK
    with  limited  leave  as  a  refugee  or  person  granted  humanitarian
    protection (para GEN.1.1). It is said to reflect how, under Article  8,
    the balance will be struck between the right to respect for private and
    family life and  the  legitimate  aims  listed  in  Article  8(2).  The
    Appendix nevertheless contemplates that the Rules will  not  cover  all
    the circumstances in which a person may have a valid claim to enter  or
    remain in the UK as a result of his or her Article 8 rights. Paragraphs
    GEN.1.10 and GEN.1.11 both make  provision  for  situations  "where  an
    applicant does not meet the requirements of this Appendix as a  partner
    or parent but the decision-maker grants entry  clearance  or  leave  to
    enter or remain outside the Rules on Article 8 grounds".

12. In his analysis the judge made reference to the earlier decision of the
    Tribunal made in 2011 whereby the appellants claim was refused. At that
    stage the appellant's minor children were dependents  upon  his  claim.
    The judge at paragraph 15 considered that the findings of fact made  in
    respect of the appellant were still relevant. In respect of S,  he  was
    now an adult and a married man and was living independently. However in
    respect of J, the findings of fact were  five  years  old  which  judge
    found was a "considerable period of time in J's life and I do not think
    that I can simply adopt those findings as they apply to her  in  2011."
    The judge went on to state that it was "appropriate and  necessary"  to
    make separate findings of fact in relation to J. There appears to  have
    been some argument as to the correct approach to take when  considering
    Article 8 and the decision of PD (as  cited).  The  judge  recorded  at
    paragraph 16 that there was no appeal before the Tribunal in respect of
    either S or J and that in those circumstances neither  were  appellants
    in the case. In respect of J, however, the judge having heard  her  own
    oral evidence, considered that it was right to make findings of fact as
    they apply to her. However whilst it was  correct  that  there  was  no
    separate appeal before the Tribunal that was made by J (or even S) that
    did not preclude the FTT from considering the family circumstances as a
    whole and in particular, the circumstances  of  the  appellant  in  the
    light of those of J.

13. J had given evidence on her own behalf  which  the  judge  recorded  at
    paragraph 9. In addition there was a "significant" bundle  of  evidence
    including letters written by J's friends at school ([10 -  14]  of  the
    bundle) and evidence of her scholastic achievements.

14. The judge concluded at paragraph 17 that removal of J (had she been  an
    appellant) was a disproportionate  interference  of  her  private  life
    under Article 8, either under paragraph  276  ADE  or  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The reasons given can be summarised as follows;  J's
    length of residence in the United Kingdom since  the  age  of  9  years
    which the  judge  found  to  be  a  "significant  period  of  time  the
    development of a child's identity", she had done well at school and the
    judge was impressed by her motivation to continue  with  her  education
    and her achievements. By reason of the  length  of  residence  she  had
    developed a private life beyond her own family and the Asian  community
    and that as she had grown older  (and  on  account  of  the  length  of
    residence in the United Kingdom) her connections  with  United  Kingdom
    had grown stronger and her connections with India had grown weaker. The
    judge took into account that she  had  some  cultural  connection  with
    India having lived there for the first nine years of her life but  that
    was counterbalanced by the fact that she had not been back to India  in
    the preceding nine years. The judge also took into account that she had
    a  familial  tie  there  through  her  mother  with  whom   she   spoke
    periodically but overall reached the  conclusion  that  her  connection
    with United Kingdom was far stronger than that with India.

15. At paragraph 18  the  judge  made  reference  to  the  public  interest
    considerations in respect  of  the  appellant  noting  his  significant
    period of residence but that had accrued either unlawfully or when  his
    status was precarious and as such little weight would be given to that.
    He spoke English was not financially  independent.  However  the  judge
    found that whilst J was not an appellant she was "dependent"  upon  her
    father and that the logical inference was if his appeal  was  dismissed
    it meant that she must return to India. The judge went on to  refer  to
    an undertaking given by the respondent not to remove the appellant or J
    before she had completed  her  A-levels.  At  paragraph  19  the  judge
    concluded by stating that in view of the findings of fact  in  relation
    to J that the course of action should be for her to appeal the  removal
    directions or make a separate application. There did not seem to be any
    consideration of how J's  circumstances affected those of the appellant
    in the light of the findings of fact made.

16. In this case, it was not said that the appellant could meet the
    requirements under the Rules under Appendix FM or Paragraph 276ADE but
    it was accepted by the parties that the issue related to an assessment
    outside of the Rules. There did not seem to be any issue as to whether
    the first four limbs of the Razgar test were satisfied thus the issue
    related to that of proportionality. This required a fair balance to be
    struck between the public interest and the rights and interests of the
    Appellant and others protected by Article 8 (1) (see Razgar at [20])
    which includes the Appellant and his children (see   R (MM and others)
    (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 10,
    the Supreme Court at [43].

17. When assessing the proportionality of the removal decision the judge
    was obliged to consider the best interest of the child, J, who would be
    affected by the decision. There is no specific reference made by the
    judge when  considering the circumstances of J as to  the statutory
    guidance "UKBA Every Child Matters: Change for Children" (November
    2009), which gives further detail about the duties owed to children
    under section 55. In that guidance the UKBA acknowledges the importance
    of a number of international instruments relating to human rights
    including the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC). However
    as Mr Clarke submitted paragraph 17 was essentially an assessment of
    J's best interests and the issue of reasonableness of return.

18. There was no dispute on the evidence before the judge that the
    Appellant had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with J.

19. In the assessment under Article 8, the best interests of the child must
    be a primary consideration.  That meant that they must be considered
    first.  They could, of course, be outweighed by the cumulative effect
    of other considerations.  In carrying out the balancing exercise and
    reaching a finding on proportionality, the Tribunal must "have regard"
    to the considerations set out in section 117B of the Nationality,
    immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (section 117A). Section 117A (2) of the
    2002 Act provides that where a Tribunal is required to determine
    whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts would be unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 it must, in considering
    'the public interest question', have regard in all cases to the
    considerations listed in section117B of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by the Immigration Act 2014). Section
    117 (3) provides that the 'public interest question' means the question
    of whether an interference with a person's right to respect for private
    and family life is justified under Article 8(2).

20. S117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
    cases:

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are  able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
         interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,  that
         persons who seek to enter or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
             the United Kingdom.

21. When looking at the determination, it had been submitted on behalf of
    the appellant that he had a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with a qualifying child (see paragraph 14(ii) recording
    the submissions of the appellant's Counsel). J was such a "qualifying
    child" on account of her residence in the United Kingdom of over 7
    years having arrived in the UK in June 2007.

22. S117B(6) provides that in the case of a person who is not liable to
    deportation, the public interest does not require the person's removal
    where, (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental
    relationship with a qualifying child, and (b) it would not be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.

23. However despite the strong findings of fact made in relation to J,  her
    best interests and the conclusion reached that she would have satisfied
    the Rules under Paragraph 276ADE (1)(vi)  and in the alternative,  that
    her removal was disproportionate ( see paragraph 17) the  judge  failed
    to  consider  those   overarching   findings   when   considering   the
    circumstances of the appellant and the effect of this upon his removal.
    In particular whilst the judge appeared to apply  the  public  interest
    considerations under Section 117 at paragraph 18 of the  decision,  the
    judge failed to consider S117B (6) on the basis that the appellant  had
    a genuine and subsisting relationship with  his  daughter,  who  was  a
    qualifying child based on her length of residence and that in the light
    of the findings of fact that it would not  be  reasonable  for  her  to
    leave the United Kingdom. I accept the submission made by Mr Pennington-
    Benton and in the written grounds that this was due  to  misreading  of
    the decision of PD (as cited) and how the family  circumstances  should
    be taken into account.

24. MA (Pakistan) concludes that the reasonableness test in this context is
    wide ranging, effectively bringing back into play all potentially
    relevant public interest considerations, including the matters
    identified in section 117B. Accordingly, when considering the
    reasonableness of a child leaving the UK, a relevant factor is that the
    appellant had remained for a significant period of time either
    unlawfully or when his status was precarious and this strengthens the
    public interest in his removal along with the matters set out in
    paragraph 18 of the decision.

25. However, taking the circumstances as a whole, as I have set out above,
    I am satisfied that the judge's findings properly construed were that
    it was not reasonable for J, a qualifying child to leave the United
    Kingdom. Her length of residence was for a substantial period of 9
    years from the age of 9. The judge, in accordance with the case law of
    Azimi-Moayed concluded that this was a significant period of time and
    she had developed a private life beyond that of her family. Her
    previous connections with India had grown weaker and the judge
    concluded that her connection with the UK was stronger than her
    connection with India (see paragraph 17). Indeed since the decision of
    the judge, the respondent has issued J with a period of leave to remain
    in the United Kingdom.  The judge did consider the public interest
    considerations at paragraph 18  as it is expressed in the S117
    considerations but did not include  a consideration of section 117B(6)
    on the mistaken basis that as J was not an appellant, it was not a
    relevant consideration when considering the appellant's appeal. In the
    light of the findings of fact made and in particular that J was
    dependent upon him (see paragraph 18) had the judge properly directed
    himself to Section 117B(6)  I find that the judge would have  reached
    the conclusion on the evidence that was before him that the Appellant's
    removal was disproportionate having regard to all of those
    circumstances.

26. Consequently I am satisfied that in the light of the factual findings
    made and when set against the correct legal framework that the
    submissions of Mr Pennington-Benton are correct and that the judge
    should have allowed the appellant's appeal. I accept his submission
    that in the light of those strong findings relating to the
    circumstances of J when put in the context of S117B(6) even taking into
    account his poor immigration history, the level of dependence between
    the parties  was such to justify the the conclusion that public
    interest did not require his removal. As Mr Pennington - Benton
    submitted the respondent would then consider the appropriate length of
    any grant of leave.

27. Consequently the appeal is allowed; the decision of the FTT is set
    aside and remade; the appeal is allowed.



Signed[pic]                             Date: 27/11/2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


