







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration And Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: IA/48995/2014

                                                            IA/49634/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House on          |                           Decision &    |
|On 22 December 2015               |Reasons Promulgated                      |
|                                  |On 18 January 2016                       |
|                                  |                                         |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                           Mr mir Jakaria Hossain
                          Mrs Dual Naher Chowdhury
                       (no anonymity directions made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellants:    No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are nationals of Bangladesh, born on 17 August 1982 and
      11 August 1985 respectively. They appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
      against the decision of the respondent refusing their applications for
      leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student and  dependant
      pursuant to the Immigration Rules.


   2. Their appeals were dismissed on 22 April 2015 by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Laws following separate decisions on  a  preliminary  issue.  He
      found that  the  appellants  had  failed  to  comply  with  legitimate
      requests for grounds of appeal. The respective notices of  appeal  did
      not contain the grounds of appeal and a request was sent to  them  for
      the proper documents to be prepared and served  by  22  January  2015.
      They had failed to comply with that request and accordingly the  Judge
      dismissed their appeals.


   3. On 10 September 2015,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McWilliam  granted  the
      appellants permission to  appeal.  She  noted  that  the  grounds  for
      permission asserted that the appellants did not  receive  the  notices
      sent by the Tribunal to their address directing them to supply grounds
      by 22 January 2015. It was also asserted that the  grounds  of  appeal
      had been submitted by the appellants  with  the  original  notices  of
      appeal. She considered the IAFT-1 forms completed  by  the  appellants
      and found it to be arguable from page 11 of the  form  that  they  had
      advanced grounds of appeal.


   4. Notices of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, in which  the  date,
      time and place were set out, were sent  to  the  appellants  at  their
      address on record as well as to their former solicitors, Liberty Legal
      Solicitors.


   5. On 22 December 2015, Liberty Legal Solicitors informed the Tribunal in
      a written fax relating to the appellants,  that  they  are  no  longer
      instructed on their behalf. They were also informed  that  Mr  Hossain
      would be instructing another  legal  representative  in  this  matter.
      Liberty Legal Solicitors were therefore no longer instructed  in  this
      matter.


   6. The appeal was stood down until the afternoon  on  22  December  2015.
      However, neither appellant attended the hearing.  Nor  did  any  other
      representative attend or  inform  the  Tribunal  that  they  had  been
      instructed to represent them.


   7. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  appellants  have  been
      informed of the hearing. I consider that it is  in  the  interests  of
      justice to proceed with the hearing in their absence.


   8. I shall  refer  to  Mr  Hossain,  the  principal  appellant,  as  "the
      appellant". He applied on 30 April 2014 for leave to remain in the  UK
      as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points  based  system.
      The respondent did not award him any points under Appendix  A  of  the
      rules. For applications made after 22 February 2010, it was  mandatory
      that applications as a Tier 4 (General) Student be  accompanied  by  a
      Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS). The  appellant  provided
      no evidence to establish that he had been assigned such a CAS  and  no
      valid CAS had been found.


   9. Accordingly he had not met the requirements and no points were awarded
      for his CAS.


  10. The second appellant's  application  was  refused  in  line  with  her
      husband's.


  11. The grounds of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  asserted  that  the
      decision was not in  accordance  with  the  rules;  that  it  was  not
      otherwise in accordance with the law and  that  discretion  under  the
      rules should have been exercised differently. It  was  also  contended
      that their removal from the UK would be incompatible with their rights
      under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.


  12. The appellants were issued one-stop warnings, requiring them to inform
      the respondent of any reasons why they think they should be allowed to
      stay in the UK. However, no statement of additional grounds  has  been
      filed.


  13. No removal directions have been served on the  appellants.  They  were
      given  a  right  of  appeal  and  informed  that  if  the  appeal   is
      unsuccessful, they must leave the UK  immediately.  If  they  did  not
      leave the UK voluntarily, they would be removed.


  14. As noted, Judge Law found as a preliminary issue, that they had failed
      to comply with directions and he dismissed  their  appeals  without  a
      hearing  under  the  provisions  of  Rule  25(1)(e)  of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules
      2014.


  15. Apart from the assertions in their grounds of appeal to the First-tier
      Tribunal, no further evidence  or  submissions  were  made  by  either
      appellant.


  16. In his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the appellant accepted
      that in his application to extend his leave under Tier 4, he failed to
      provide the CAS in time. He contends that the respondent  should  have
      given him time to provide his CAS before refusing his application.  In
      the circumstances, there was unfairness to the appellant.


  17. I have had regard to the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  Kaur  v  SSHD
      [2015] EWCA Civ 13  at  [42].  Lord  Justice  Burnett  concluded  that
      earlier decisions, namely Rahman v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  11  and   EK
      (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1517 are binding authority on the
      question as to whether the secretary of state should, as a  matter  of
      fairness, give notice to an applicant for leave to remain or the  Tier
      4 sponsor that she considers there to  be  a  deficiency  in  the  CAS
      before making an adverse decision on that  basis.  There  is  no  such
      obligation. The other two judges concurred with his decision.


  18. In any event, there has been no contention that there was a deficiency
      in the CAS that was provided to the respondent. There  was  simply  no
      CAS that was provided, this the appellants accept.


  19. It is a requirement under the rules that a valid CAS must be  provided
      at the date of application.


  20. In the circumstances, the appellant was not entitled to succeed  under
      paragraph 245ZX(c) with reference to paragraph 115A of Appendix A  and
      paragraph 245ZX(d) of the Immigration Rules.  His  wife's  application
      was refused in line with her husband's.


  21. The grounds of appeal submitted with the notice of appeal to the First-
      tier Tribunal contended that their removal from the UK as a result  of
      the decision would be incompatible with their rights under  Article  8
      of the Human Rights Convention.


  22. In paragraph 16 of the grounds for permission to appeal to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, it is simply  asserted  that  the  appellant  is  a  genuine
      student who has been studying diligently.  It  is  asserted  that  the
      respondent failed to consider  his  Article  8  "engagement"  that  he
      accrued through his residence in the UK. He also stated  at  paragraph
      16 that he has lived here since 2010 and has established  his  private
      life through his education  and  integration  with  society.  This  is
      repeated at paragraph 21. There is also reference to various  Tribunal
      decisions including CDS v SSHD and Izuazu  (Article  8  -  new  rules)
      [2013] UKUT 00045 (IAC) and it is asserted at paragraph  24  that  the
      respondent failed to apply conventional jurisprudence.


  23. However, no further evidence, statement or document has been  produced
      in support of these contentions. Apart from stating that he  has  been
      living here since 2010  and  that  he  has  established  private  life
      through his education and integration with  the  society,  no  further
      evidence has been produced. There are no specific assertions  made  in
      respect of the second appellant.


  24. I have had regard to the decision of the Supreme Court  in  Patel  and
      others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72. That served to re-focus attention on the
      nature and purpose of Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention and, in
      particular, to recognise the Article's limited utility in private life
      cases that are far removed from  the  protection  of  an  individual's
      moral and physical integrity.


  25. The Tribunal in Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  00025  found
      that Patel and others was a significant exhortation from  the  Supreme
      Court to re-focus attention on the nature and  purpose  of  Article  8
      and, in particular, to recognise its limited utility to an  individual
      where one has moved along the continuum, from that article's core area
      of operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
      The limitation arises, both from what will at that point  normally  be
      the tangential effect on the individual of the  proposed  interference
      and from the fact that, unless there are particular reasons to  reduce
      the public interest of enforcing immigration  controls,  the  interest
      will consequently prevail in  striking  the  proportionality  balance,
      even assuming that the stage is reached - at [20].  The use of Article
      8 has very limited use for private life cases which did not  interfere
      with a person's moral and physical integrity.


  26. In Nasim,  supra,  it  was  noted  that  the  Tribunal  in  CDS  (PBS:
      "available" : Article 8) Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  00305  (IAC)  expressly
      acknowledged that it was unlikely that a person would be able to  show
      an Article 8 right by coming to the UK  for  temporary  purposes.  The
      chances of such a right carrying the day have, the Tribunal  in  Nasim
      considered, further diminished, in  the  light  of  the  judgement  in
      Patel.


  27. In CDS, the Tribunal noted that a person who was admitted to follow  a
      course that has not yet  ended  may  build  up  a  private  life  that
      deserves respect, so that the public interest in  removal  before  the
      end of the course may be  reduced  where  there  are  ample  financial
      resources available.


  28. In this case, the appellant has  simply  asserted  that  he  has  been
      studying diligently and that  he  has  established  his  private  life
      through his education and integration with the  society.  No  evidence
      has been given by either appellant  of  any  relationships  developed,
      unique or otherwise, after coming to the UK in 2010.


  29. The circumstances relating to the appellants do not meet the threshold
      set by Nasim. The interference would not interfere  with  their  moral
      and physical integrity and  would  not  be  disproportionate.  Grounds
      outside the rules are reserved for  the  most  exceptional  cases  and
      should not be used as a means to circumvent the requirements under the
      rules which are in themselves a complete code.


  30. Having regard to the  circumstances  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
      asserted  interference  with   their   Article   8   rights   is   not
      disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end  relating  to   the
      maintenance of a coherent and fair system of immigration control.


  31. I accordingly find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
      not involve the making of any material error of law.


      Notice of Decision


      The appeals are dismissed. No anonymity directions are made.


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer Dated 15 January 2016

