






UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48056/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 16 October 2014                           |On: 30 October 2014          |
|Prepared: 27 October 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                         Mr Dharam Preet Singh Padda
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr E Waheed, counsel (instructed by Starck Ubeori
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of India, born on 17th  January  1978.  He
      appeals with leave against the determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge  Norton-Taylor  promulgated  on  9th  June  2014,  in  which  he
      dismissed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.


   2. The appellant appealed against the respondent's  decision  dated  12th
      October 2013 to remove him from the UK by way of directions under s.10
      of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.








     The appellant's immigration history


   3. The appellant arrived in the UK on 5th August 2007 with leave to  work
      as a work permit holder. That permit was valid  from  27th  July  2007
      until 24th July 2012. The stated employer was Four In  One  Fast  Food
      Restaurant Ltd ("Four In One"). The appellant was to work  as  a  Head
      Chef.


   4. The appellant asserted that as  a  result  of  bad  treatment  by  the
      employer, he left that employment in December 2007. In contrast,  Four
      In One wrote to the respondent alleging that the  appellant  had  left
      his employment on 20th October 2007.


   5. The appellant then commenced working for a tandoori restaurant  for  a
      brief period and in 2008 suffered a spontaneous pulmonary embolism for
      which he was treated and from which he recovered.


   6. After that he took up employment with various companies, mainly in the
      construction trade. At the date of the hearing he had an offer of full
      time employment.


   7. On 18th July 2012, the appellant made an  application  for  indefinite
      leave to remain as a person who has resided in the UK as a work permit
      holder for five  years.  The  covering  letter  that  accompanied  the
      application relied on Article 8.


   8. The respondent stated that Four In One wrote to  them  confirming  the
      cessation of that employment on 20th  October  2007.   The  respondent
      then decided that the appellant's leave would be curtailed as  he  had
      had ceased to satisfy the immigration rules under which his leave  was
      granted. His leave was consequently stated to expire on 19th  February
      2008 and accordingly the appellant was now therefore an overstayer.


   9. His application was considered under paragraph 134 of the  Immigration
      Rules. He failed to meet the requirements following the curtailment of
      his leave in 2008. No consideration was given to Article 8 despite the
      content of the covering letter.


  10. The first Tribunal Judge in a careful and detailed  determination  set
      out the relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules in full.


  11. He considered the evidence by the parties.  That included  a  copy  of
      the letter from Four In One to the respondent dated 22nd October  2007
      contending that the appellant had left their employ. The  response  to
      that letter was also produced.


  12. However, a copy of the curtailment decision form itself dated 2008 was
      not provided. Nor was there proof of  its  having  been  sent  to  the
      appellant.


  13. The appellant denied receiving the curtailment letter,  claiming  that
      he first knew of the curtailment of his leave when he was arrested  in
      October 2012. That arrest involved mistaken identity  and  was  of  no
      further relevance in the appeal [15].


  14. The appellant claimed that he in fact left Four  In  One  in  December
      2007 and not October.


  15. He confirmed that he had not told the  respondent  himself  about  his
      change in circumstances following his departure from Four In  One.  He
      claimed that his previous solicitors were supposed  to  have  informed
      the respondent instead. They had told him 'not to worry'. He  did  not
      tell the respondent about his further  and  subsequent  employment  or
      employers as he did not believe he needed to - [16].


  16. In cross-examination he confirmed that he had worked  in  India  as  a
      chef. He claimed that he could not be a chef on return as a result  of
      his health.


  17. He has not reported the alleged ill treatment by Four In  One  to  the
      police. The employer had threatened that if he did so, his  family  in
      India would be harmed. That was not in his statement but he claimed he
      had mentioned it to his solicitors.  He did not mention the threat  at
      the outset of the hearing as he had just remembered it.


  18. Counsel who represented the appellant at the hearing - not Mr Waheed -
      accepted that the appellant "struggled" to  satisfy  the  requirements
      under paragraph 134 of the rules, even if  he  is  correct  about  the
      treatment from Four In One [30].


  19. Counsel further accepted that he could not satisfy paragraph  276  ADE
      of the rules because of his ties to India. She nevertheless  submitted
      that the Judge should consider the Article  8  claim  outside  of  the
      rules on the basis that the respondent had  failed  to  consider  this
      issue at all despite its having been raised in  the  covering  letter.
      Submissions were then regarding private life and proportionality.


  20. Judge Norton-Taylor made  detailed  findings.  He  accepted  that  the
      appellant continued in employment until early December  2007.  He  was
      also willing to accept that the appellant was not well treated by Four
      In One  - [41] and [42].


  21. He found that the appellant's failure to report the alleged  abuse  to
      the police was untruthful [45]. His reasons for that finding  are  not
      the subject of any ground of appeal.


  22. He found that the appellant had left his employment with Four  In  One
      without informing the respondent.


  23. He had regard to the failure by the respondent to produce  the  actual
      conditions attached to the work permit which are on the reverse of the
      Permit at page 153AB [48].


  24. He nonetheless found that it was clear  that  the  appellant  was,  or
      should reasonably have been aware of his own obligations to inform the
      respondent  if  he  left  the  employment  specified  in  the  permit.
      Accordingly, the Judge found that the appellant was in breach  of  the
      conditions of his leave, finding that it was more  probable  than  not
      that he knew this to be so all along.


  25. The reasons were that the conditions on the reverse of the permit  are
      actually for the employer. The absence  of  these  conditions  is  not
      supportive of the appellant's claim that he was unaware of the need to
      tell the respondent of changes - [49-50]


  26. Further, the entry clearance issued to  the  appellant  in  July  2007
      clearly stated "Work (and any changes) must be authorised." The  words
      are clear and the Judge did not accept that the appellant was  unaware
      of the condition, or that he did not understand their effect.  It  was
      his business to understand the basis upon which he was coming  to  the
      UK to work. He was able to read and comprehend the words on his  entry
      clearance and the obligations imposed thereby - [51].


  27. He accordingly found that the appellant knew about the need to  inform
      the respondent of his departure from Four  In  One  at  least  on  his
      arrival in this country, if not beforehand.


  28. The appellant's attempt to blame his  previous  solicitors  for  their
      alleged failure to inform the respondent was  undermined  by  his  own
      oral evidence that he  did  not  know  that  he  needed  to  tell  the
      respondent about changes in his employment in the  first  place.  That
      claimed ignorance was found to be untrue [53]. There was  no  evidence
      that the solicitors had acted negligently as claimed.  Nor  was  there
      any evidence that he ever contacted them as he should have done  -  BT
      (Nepal).


  29. Further, when he made the application for indefinite leave  to  remain
      in July 2012, the SET(0) Form at  section  11  acknowledges  that  the
      appellant did not have confirmation from "the employer named  in  your
      current work permit" but this was still required for  "the  employment
      in question." In the application the respondent was  referred  to  the
      covering letter which was based on Article 8 considerations  which  in
      turn relied on the work permit as simply a factor in  respect  of  the
      human rights claim.


  30. The Judge accordingly inferred that the appellant knew at the time  of
      the application that he was not employed by the correct employer (Four
      In One) and that his application would  not  succeed  under  the  work
      permit rules. That is why Article 8  was  relied  on.  That  knowledge
      supported his previous finding that the appellant  was  aware  of  his
      breach of conditions. It also undermined  his  evidence  that  he  was
      unaware of the curtailment of his leave until October 2012.


  31. The Judge found that he knew full well prior to that time that he  was
      in breach of his leave and that the curtailment  of  that  leave  "was
      highly likely to have occurred." [55]


  32. Judge Norton-Taylor then dealt with the respondent's  contention  that
      the appellant's leave had been curtailed. Despite the  fact  that  the
      respondent was unable to produce the curtailment itself, or  at  least
      prove that it had  been  sent  to  the  appellant,  he  found  that  a
      curtailment decision was in fact made and that it was in fact sent  to
      the last known address of the appellant [57].


  33. The basis for that finding was that,  following  the  receipt  of  the
      letter from Four In One, it is highly likely that the respondent would
      have acted to curtail his leave. On the evidence, he  was  clearly  in
      breach of the conditions of his leave. Even  on  the  appellant's  own
      case, he left employment as specified in the work permit  in  December
      2007 without authorisation.


  34. Further, the appellant's employment with Four In One was in  Scotland.
      After leaving Four In One, he went to London  to  find  work.  He  has
      remained there since. He failed to inform  the  respondent  about  his
      departure from Four In One  and  consequently  failed  to  inform  the
      respondent about his change of address [59].


  35. In the circumstances, the Judge found that it is  more  probable  than
      not that the respondent did  send  the  curtailment  decision  to  the
      appellant's last known address, and his  failure  to  receive  it  was
      "down to his own inaction"- [60].


  36. He found that the  appellant  had  been  working  almost  continuously
      between 2008 and 2014. There was  a  wealth  of  documentary  evidence
      supporting that. (That is not disputed).


  37. He found however that all his employment after his departure from Four
      In One was unauthorised  and  in  breach  of  the  conditions  of  the
      appellant's leave. He found  that  as  the  appellant  knew  that  his
      departure from Four In One, without informing the respondent, rendered
      him in  breach  of  his  leave;  he  also  knew  that  all  subsequent
      employment was in breach as well [65].


  38. He also found that the appellant had continued to work in clear breach
      of the prohibition imposed by IS 96, dated 12th  October  2013.  There
      was no evidence that the respondent had given him  any  permission  to
      work following notification of his liability to removal.


  39. Judge Norton-Taylor had regard to the appellant's ties in the  UK.  He
      accepted that the appellant has established friendships here over  the
      course of time and is an active and important member of the Gurdwara's
      congregation. The relationships are not based on  genuine  dependency,
      emotional or health related. He  does  not  have  any  children  or  a
      partner.


  40. He went on to consider the appellant's circumstances in India, finding
      that he had worked as a chef in India for some eight  years  prior  to
      coming to the UK. Both his parents reside in India as does a  brother.
      [75-76]


  41. Judge Norton-Taylor set out his conclusions from paragraph 78 onwards.
      The appellant's case under paragraph 134 of the rules failed [78]. Nor
      could he satisfy paragraph 276ADE. He considered whether he should  go
      on and consider Article 8 outside the rules. He asked himself  whether
      there are  good  arguable  grounds  'for  moving  on  from  the  rules
      considering an independent Article 8 claim' [80]. He  found  that  the
      respondent  was  not  obliged  to  consider  Article  8   without   an
      application having been expressly made  in  the  application  on  that
      basis.


  42. In any event, he was able to take on  the  role  as  primary  decision
      maker in respect of the Article 8 claim [85].


  43. In assessing whether there are good grounds to consider the Article  8
      claim outside of the rules, he concluded that the appellant  had  only
      been in the UK for nearly seven years; about a  third  of  the  period
      required by paragraph 276ADE (iii). He  was  thus  not  close  to  the
      threshold expected by the rules.


  44. His time in the UK had been spent almost entirely  in  breach  of  the
      conditions of the leave to  which  he  had  been  initially  entitled.
      Accordingly,  his  position  ever  since  December   2007   has   been
      precarious. He has known this or at the very least ought to have known
      it. His work after Four In  One  has  been  effectively  unlawful.  He
      continued to work even after being notified of the removal decision.


  45. Article 8 does not protect a right to work. His  past  employment  and
      future job offer do not take the case  further.  His  friendships  and
      community ties do not disclose any significant relationships based  on
      inter-dependency. Communications with friends can be  maintained  from
      India. There are no health issues or children involved.  He  does  not
      have a partner.


  46. Accordingly, there was nothing in the appellant's Article 8 claim that
      gives rise to even an arguable case, let alone a  good  arguable  case
      for reaching out beyond the scope of paragraph 276ADE. [87]


  47. The Judge nevertheless stated that if a "belt and braces" approach was
      to be taken, and Article 8 was considered outside the rules, he  would
      conclude that the appellant does have a private  life  here  based  on
      friendships established over time and his good works for the Gurdwara.
      His removal to India would interfere with that life to a  sufficiently
      serious extent and so engage Article 8. The respondent's  decision  is
      in accordance with the law and pursues a legitimate aim.


  48. In terms of proportionality, the Judge referred  to  and  incorporated
      all the matters  set  out  from  paragraph  86  of  the  determination
      onwards. The respondent's side of the scales is added to by  the  fact
      that the appellant has not  satisfied  paragraphs  134  and  276  ADE.
      Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed on that basis as well.


     Appeal to the Upper Tribunal


  49. On  2nd  September  2014,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on teh basis that it is  arguable  that
      the failure  to  produce  the  notice  of  curtailment  together  with
      evidence of service in accordance with  the  Notices  Regulations  may
      have led to an error of law in determining an appeal  against  removal
      as  an  overstayer,  such  removal  decision  possibly  not  being  in
      accordance with the law on that basis.


  50. She stated that it was not clear from the determination on what  basis
      the Judge found that the curtailment notice had been properly served.


  51. She warned the appellant however that he should be aware  that  if  an
      error of law is found, given the detailed consideration by the  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge to the facts and evidence,  the  factual  findings
      may well stand.


  52. Mr Waheed submitted that there had been no evidence of  the  existence
      of the curtailment decision or proof of its  service.  The  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge "relied on imagination or wishful thinking" in arriving
      at the findings set out at paragraphs 56-60. Nor could it be  said  to
      have been served, even if it did exist.


  53. Mr Waheed conceded that the appellant was unable to succeed under  the
      rules relating to the work permit scheme.


  54. He submitted, however,  that  'taking  into  account  the  absence  of
      curtailment',  this  was  relevant  in  the  balancing  exercise   and
      constituted a "positive factor" in the appellant's favour.


  55. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Kandola submitted that the  Judge  has
      given full reasons relating to the Article 8 claim  in  the  light  of
      Gulshan. He  has  taken  into  account  all  the  "positive  features"
      applicable to the appellant's case, including the  fact  that  he  has
      been here for seven years.


  56. He submitted that the s.10 notice was not unlawful. It does not affect
      the outcome under Article 8. That is because the Judge  clearly  found
      that the appellant had been in breach of conditions - [49] [51]  [65].
      Those constituted weighty factors. The mere fact  that  the  appellant
      did not receive the curtailment decision  did  not  make  the  removal
      decision unlawful as it is clearly lawful on another basis.  Nor  does
      it affect the Article 8 claim with regard to private life.


  57. Mr Waheed replied that the reliance on the  curtailment  decision  for
      issuing a s.10 decision should  have  been  taken  into  account  when
      assessing the proportionality of the proposed decision.  It  had  been
      issued on a "misconceived basis".


     Assessment


  58. There are no issues raised in the grounds of  appeal  apart  from  the
      finding as to the  existence  of  the  curtailment  decision  and  its
      service on the appellant. It is not contended  that  the  findings  of
      fact made by the Judge relating to the appellant's state of mind after
      he left employment in December 2007 were not  properly  reasoned  from
      the available evidence.


  59. Judge Norton-Taylor has set out very clearly what  the  basis  of  his
      findings were, not only in relation to the curtailment decision itself
      and its service on the appellant,  but  also  his  findings  that  the
      appellant had knowingly remained in the UK in breach of the conditions
      which attached to his visa.


  60. The Judge was aware that the burden of proof on this issue was on  the
      respondent. He found that that burden had  been  discharged  [60].  He
      found it to be highly likely that the respondent would have  acted  to
      curtail the appellant's leave in the circumstances. In coming to  that
      conclusion the Judge referred to the letters sent by Four  In  One  to
      the respondent confirming the cessation of his employment  with  them.
      That would have triggered a decision to curtail his leave.


  61. Further, the appellant's employment had been in Scotland (which is not
      disputed). After leaving that employment, he went to London and  found
      work there.  He has remained there ever since. The appellant does  not
      dispute that he failed to inform the respondent about that  departure.
      He has  not  disputed  the  finding  that  he  failed  to  inform  the
      respondent about his change of address [59].


  62. In those circumstances the Judge found that it was probable  that  the
      respondent sent the curtailment decision to the appellant's last known
      address and his failure  to  receive  it  was  a  result  of  his  own
      inaction.


  63. I find from the available evidence that the  Judge  has  given  cogent
      reasons for his conclusions that the curtailment decision did in  fact
      exist and that it was sent to the appellant's last known address.


  64. In any event, the Judge went on to consider  whether  there  are  good
      grounds to consider the Article 8 claim outside the rules. Despite the
      fact that this had not been considered by the respondent on the  basis
      that she was not obliged to consider an Article  8  claim  without  an
      application having been expressly made on that basis, the  Judge  took
      on the role as a primary decision maker in respect of  the  Article  8
      claim.


  65. At paragraph 86 onwards, he has given cogent reasons  for  concluding,
      as he did, that there was nothing in the appellant's Article  8  claim
      that gave rise to an arguable case.  However,  he  briefly  considered
      Article 8 outside the rules and concluded that the interference was in
      the circumstances proportionate.


  66. In coming to that conclusion, Judge Norton-Taylor had  regard  to  the
      fact that the appellant had either known or ought to have  known  that
      most of his time spent  in  the  UK  working  was  in  breach  of  his
      conditions of leave to which he was initially  entitled.  Accordingly,
      his position ever since December 2007 had been precarious.


  67. In the circumstances he concluded that his removal to India would  not
      constitute an  unlawful  or  disproportionate  interference  with  his
      Article 8 rights. The only submission  made  by  Mr  Waheed  was  that
      because the reliance on the curtailment decision  was  'misconceived',
      that was a factor that  should  have  been  taken  into  account  when
      considering the Article 8 claim and in particular the  proportionality
      of the proposed interference.


  68. However, as indicated, the Judge has  found  that  the  appellant  was
      aware that he had remained in breach of conditions applicable  to  his
      visa, and was thus aware throughout of the precarious  nature  of  his
      immigration status in the UK.


  69. Accordingly, even assuming  that  there  has  been  an  error  of  law
      regarding the existence and service of the curtailment  decision,  the
      finding that the appellant was knowingly in breach of  the  conditions
      governing his leave was based on cogent reasoning and has not been the
      subject of any submission on appeal.


     Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
      making of any material error on a point of law. It  shall  accordingly
      stand.


     No anonymity order made.











     Signed:  Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer          Dated: 27  October
2014

