
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/48469/2013
      IA/48472/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  5th September 2014                        |On 12th September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between


                        Mrs victoria ahmed-cunha (1)
                         miss adaeze nwosu-cunha (2)
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Nwaekwu of Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The first appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  30th  September
       1975; the second appellant is her daughter  who  was  born  on  12th
       April 2010 in Portugal. I  understand  she  is  also  a  citizen  of
       Nigeria, but it seems likely she  is  also  entitled  to  Portuguese
       nationality as she was born in Portugal, her father is a  Portuguese
       citizen and her parents were married at the time of her  birth.  The
       first appellant was issued with a residence card  on  21st  December
       2010 as the wife of Mr Marco Paulo Dos  Santos  Leite  Da  Cunha,  a
       citizen of Portugal who was exercising Treaty rights as a worker  in
       the UK. She divorced Mr Cunha on  16th  July  2013.  The  appellants
       applied for permanent residence and residence cards as  evidence  of
       this on 17th August 2013.

    2. The applications were refused on 16th November  2013  on  the  basis
       that the first appellant did not qualify for  a  retained  right  of
       residence on her  divorce.  Her  appeal  against  the  decision  was
       dismissed on the papers by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hague  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 27th April 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Cruthers on 14th July 2014 on the basis that  it  was  arguable  the
       First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law  by  not  properly  considered
       evidence before it that showed that  the  ex-husband  of  the  first
       appellant was a qualified person working in the UK at  the  time  of
       the termination of the marriage.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. At the start of the hearing I asked Mr Nath for a copy of  the  full
       refusal letter dated 16th November 2013 as Judge Hague had  recorded
       he had determined the appeal with reference to only alternate  pages
       of the refusal letter, and I could not find a complete copy  on  the
       file.

    6. Mr Nwaekwu relied upon the grounds of  appeal.  These  contend  that
       Judge Hague erred in law because whilst  correctly  identifying  the
       legal  test  under  Regulation  10(5)  of  the   Immigration   (EEA)
       Regulations 2006 (henceforth the EEA Regulations) he failed to apply
       the facts of this case to  the  relevant  Regulation.  Evidence  was
       clearly in the bundle which showed that the  appellant  was  married
       for more than three years; that the couple had resided in the UK for
       more than a year; and that the appellant's husband had been a worker
       at the time of termination of the marriage in  July  2013  as  there
       were payslips relating to this month in the bundle.  The  appellants
       were thus entitled  to  succeed  in  their  appeal  that  the  first
       appellant had a retained right of residence in the UK on termination
       of her marriage.

    7. I put it to Mr Nath that it was clear that Judge Hague had erred  in
       making a wrong factual finding that the appellant had  not  provided
       payslips for her husband after 2010 when at pages VAC 2, 3, 4 and  5
       of the appellant's bundle there were payslips  for  the  appellant's
       husband from 2012 and 2013. This evidence was  clearly  material  as
       these payslips showed that the appellant could meet the test  for  a
       retained  right  of  residence  at  Regulation  10(5)  of  the   EEA
       Regulations. Mr Nath agreed that this was a material error of law.

Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. I find that Judge Hague had erred in law as he had  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons as to why  the  appellant  did  not  qualify  under
       Regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations given  the  evidence  before
       him.

    9. I set the determination  of  Judge  Hague  aside  with  no  retained
       findings of fact.

Evidence & Submissions - Re-making

   10. Mr Nwaekwu called the first appellant to give evidence. She gave her
       full name and address. She adopted her  statement,  signed  it,  and
       confirmed that it was true and correct. In summary in her  statement
       she says as follows. She married Mr Da Cunha on 3rd April 2008.  She
       was granted an EEA residence permit on 21st December 2010.  She  had
       lived with her spouse for more than four years when  their  marriage
       was terminated by divorce. She has provided the marriage certificate
       and the divorce certificate dated 16th July 2013. She  has  provided
       evidence he was a worker at the date  of  divorce  and  before  this
       time, which is attached to her  statement.  If  more  evidence  were
       needed the respondent  ought  to  have  contact  HMRC  for  evidence
       regarding her former husband's employment/ self-employment. She  had
       clearly lived in the UK with her husband for more than a  year,  and
       sets out evidence (in the  form  of  P60s  and  payslips)  that  she
       herself has worked in the UK for a continuous period at King  George
       Hospital from April 2007 to the present time.

   11. In oral evidence the appellant added that she believed  that  Mr  Da
       Cunha was working in security between October 2010  and  April  2012
       but he was not a good communicator and was a careless person so  she
       did not have the documents or any more details.

   12.  Both parties and I were agreed that the first  appellant  qualified
       for a retained right of residence under Regulation 10(5) of the  EEA
       Regulations  for  the  reasons  set  out  below.  Submissions   were
       therefore confined to the  issue  as  whether  the  first  appellant
       qualified for permanent residence under Regulation  15  of  the  EEA
       Regulations.

   13. It was agreed by both parties that the evidence for  Mr  Da  Cunha's
       work in the UK as included in the appellant's bundle is as  follows:
       2008 (3 payslips), 2009 (3 payslips and a  P60),  2010  (P60  and  3
       payslips). There was then a gap where there was no evidence  between
       October 2010 and April 2012. There was a P60 for April 2012 to April
       2013 with a payslip for 2012 and 3 payslips for May, June  and  July
       2013.

   14. Mr Nwaekwu argued that it was not the appellant's husband's  history
       of work which needed to be continuous for the five year  period  for
       the appellant to have obtained permanent residence under  Regulation
       15 of the EEA Regulations: it sufficed if  she  herself  had  worked
       continuously because of  what  was  said  in  Regulation  10(6)  and
       because she had a retained right of residence. In the alternative Mr
       Nwaekwu argued that he relied upon the case of Amos v SSHD 2011 EWCA
       Civ 552 in which he said it was found  that  the  respondent  should
       make  checks  on  HMRC  records  with  respect  of  the   continuous
       employment of a divorced husband. On this basis the decision of  the
       Secretary  of  State,  with  respect  to  the  permanent  right   of
       residence, would be not in accordance with the law  for  failure  to
       make these checks. Unfortunately he did not have a copy of  Amos  to
       refer us to at the Tribunal hearing.

   15. Mr Nath argued that Regulation 10(6) of the EEA Regulations did  not
       have the affect argued for by Mr Nwaekwu. He submitted that  it  was
       clear from Regulation  15(1)(f)(i) of the EEA Regulations  that  the
       appellant must show continuous exercising of Treaty rights which  up
       until her divorce  must  be  by  way  of  showing  her  husband  was
       exercising Treaty rights. The evidence before the Tribunal  did  not
       suffice due to the gap between October 2010 and April 2012,  and  so
       she could not succeed in her  claim  to  be  entitled  to  permanent
       residence.

   16. At the end of the hearing I reserved my determination.

Conclusions

   17. The first appellant is entitled to a  retained  right  of  residence
       under Regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations. She was the  wife  of
       qualified person on termination of her marriage. She was married  to
       Mr Da Cunha, a Portuguese national, on 3rd April 2008  and  divorced
       him on 16th July 2013, as is clear from the decree absolute at  page
       VAC 1 of her bundle. She has produced payslips showing  that  Mr  Da
       Cunha was working for Alpha Response 2004 Ltd in May, June and  July
       2013. The appellant therefore satisfies Regulation 10(5)(a) and  (b)
       of the EEA Regulations.

   18. The appellant is clearly  a  worker  herself  as  she  has  provided
       evidence of her continuous employment with BHR Hospitals  NHS  Trust
       from  April  2009  (P60s  and  payslips),  and  thus  satisfies  the
       requirement at Regulation 10(5)(c) by reference to Regulation  10(6)
       of the EEA Regulations.

   19. It is clear that the marriage lasted for over five years  (from  the
       divorce certificate), and that the couple lived in the UK  for  more
       than a year during their marriage - see the evidence of  their  both
       working in the UK which is continuous for the appellant  and  covers
       all but the period but October 2010 to April  2012  for  her  former
       husband. There is also evidence in the form  of  utility  bills  and
       bank statements for the appellant and two joint tenancy  agreements.
       I am therefore that the appellant satisfies Regulation 10(5) (d)  of
       the EEA Regulations.

   20. As a result of these findings the first appellant is entitled  to  a
       retained right of residence, and a residence card to reflect this.

   21. The first appellant also argues that she is entitled to a  permanent
       right of residence under Regulation 15(1)(f) of the EEA Regulations.
       There is no doubt that she has been in the UK  for  five  years  and
       that at the end of this period she was a family member  who  had  as
       retained right of residence as is set out above.

   22. However to have resided in the UK for five years in accordance  with
       the EEA Regulations as is required  at  Regulation  15(1)(f)(i)  she
       would have to show that up until 16th July 2013 she was  the  spouse
       of Mr Da Cunha and that he was exercising Treaty rights continuously
       during that period as during this period this was the basis  of  her
       EEA right to remain. I believe that  this  is  consistent  with  the
       approach taken in Samsam ( EEA revocation and retained rights)[2011]
       UKUT 165.

   23. I do not accept that Regulation 10(6) of the EEA  Regulations  makes
       any difference to this,  as  10(6)  is  a  qualifying  part  of  the
       conditions for a retained right of  residence.   It  is  clear  from
       paragraph 29(1) of the Court of Appeal judgement in  Amos  that  the
       appellant must show at all times  up  until  her  divorce  that  her
       husband was continuously exercising Treaty rights if she  wishes  to
       rely upon this period to satisfy the five years at Regulation (1)(f)
       of the EEA Regulations.  It is also clear that the Court  of  Appeal
       found that there was no duty on the Home Secretary to make enquiries
       with other departments, such as HMRC, about information  they  might
       hold which would assist the first appellant in  proving  her  former
       husband was working, see paragraph 42 of the judgement in Amos.

   24. I therefore conclude that the appellant can show she has resided  in
       accordance with the EEA Regulations since April 2012 on the basis of
       the P60 and payslip evidence  she  has  provided  about  her  former
       husband's work and thereafter on the basis of  her  own  work  as  a
       someone with a retained right of residence, but that this is clearly
       not long enough to meet the five year qualifying period set  out  at
       Regulation 15(1)(f)(i) of the EEA Regulations.

   25. There is no doubt that the second appellant is the daughter  of  the
       first  appellant  and  her  former  husband   (her   British   birth
       certificate is in the respondent's  bundle)  and  therefore  is  her
       family member  as  defined  under  Regulation  7(1)(b)  of  the  EEA
       Regulations and thus is entitled to a residence card on this  basis.



Decision

   26. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

   28. The decision is re-made allowing the appeal of the  first  appellant
       on the basis she is entitled to a retained right of residence  under
       Regulation 10(5) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  and  the
       second appellant on the basis that she  is  a  family  member  under
       Regulation 7(1)(b) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
8th September 2014


Fee Award

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee  award  (rule  23A
    (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
    2007).


    I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note:  Fee  Awards
    in Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


    I decline to make a fee award as key documents were  only  provided  at
    the appeal stage in the appellant's bundle submitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal and no representations were made requesting a fee award by her
    representative.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
8th September 2014



