
IAC-FH-nl-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/48778/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th March 2015                             |On 10th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             miss victoria olotu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Claimant: Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss M Hannan, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to Miss Olotu as the  claimant.   She  is  a  citizen  of
    Nigeria whose appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper in
    a decision promulgated on 25th November 2014.  She had  applied  for  a
    residence card as the primary carer of  two  British  citizen  children
    resident here.  The judge found her credible and went on to  allow  the
    appeal in respect of the EEA Regulations.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged indicating  that  it  had  initially
    been said that the Claimant  and  a  Mr  Samuel  Alaughe  were  jointly
    responsible for the children's upbringing and the judge had  failed  to
    deal  with  this  inconsistency  and  had  gone  on  to  misapply   the
    Regulations.  It is clear  that  the  father  of  the  British  citizen
    children maintained a relationship with the children as outlined in the
    grounds.

 3. Before me Mr Melvin  for  the  Home  Office  expanded  on  his  grounds
    indicating that there had been a lack of proper evidence placed  before
    the judge.  The Claimant had been the only witness and  it  was  to  be
    expected, given the terms of refusal,  that  corroboration  would  have
    been available to support her claim that she was the primary  carer  of
    the children.  The Claimant's  representatives  had  written  that  the
    Claimant and the husband had joint  responsibility  for  the  children.
    Absent proper evidence it was said that  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside and proper investigation into the circumstances made by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. For the claimant Miss Hannan said that there was no material  error  by
    the judge who had assessed all the evidence before him  and  had  found
    (paragraph 42)  that  the  Claimant  was  "consistent,  convincing  and
    credible".  The fact that the father had made  irregular  contributions
    did not mean he was able to look after the children.  It is true  there
    was an uncle who had some knowledge of the circumstances but this was a
    minor issue and his evidence would have been limited.  I was  asked  to
    uphold the decision.

 5. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 6. It was incumbent upon the  judge  to  make  findings  on  the  evidence
    presented to him backed up by adequate reasons.  The judge observed  in
    the Notice of Appeal that it was asserted that  the  Claimant  was  the
    primary carer of her British-born children and that  the  father  lived
    apart from  the  children  in  a  different  family  unit  and  had  no
    relationship with the Claimant.  The judge noted that  it  was  clearly
    stated in the application form that there was no one else who was  able
    and willing to provide the Claimant's children with care if she were to
    leave the United Kingdom.

 7. It is true that there was a contradiction in the evidence in the  sense
    that the solicitors acting for the Claimant had written  advising  that
    the Claimant and the father had joint responsibility of  the  children.
    The Claimant was tested on that point in oral evidence  and  the  judge
    noted that the Claimant did not know  why  the  solicitors  would  have
    written what they did write (paragraph 33).  The judge referred to that
    inconsistency again in his findings noting that there was "no doubt" an
    inconsistency between  the  Claimant's  evidence  and  the  solicitor's
    covering letter.

 8. However, in paragraph 42, the judge noted that the  Claimant  had  made
    clear in her oral evidence that she and Mr Alaughe had  separated  some
    four years ago and that he had established a new  family  relationship.
    He referred to the fact that the Claimant had been legitimately closely
    cross-examined by the Home Office Presenter but went on to say that  he
    found her answers "consistent, convincing and  credible".   Given  that
    evidence it was a small step for him to find that the Claimant did  not
    share equally the care of her daughters with  their  father  or  indeed
    with anybody else (paragraph 44).  Consequently he was  satisfied  that
    the Claimant met the  definition  of  a  primary  carer  in  Regulation
    15A(7)(b)(i) of the 2006 Regulations.

 9. The crucial finding is that the  judge  found  the  Claimant  to  be  a
    credible  witness.   In  my  view  he  was  entitled  to  do  so.   The
    inconsistency referred  to  was  one  which  did  not  arise  from  the
    Claimant's  own  evidence  but  from  the  information  given  in   the
    solicitor's letter.  Having heard the Claimant's oral  evidence  it  is
    clear enough  that  the  judge  considered  that  notwithstanding  that
    inconsistency, he preferred and accepted the evidence of the  Claimant.
    It should be noted that  the  inconsistency  arises  from  a  filtering
    process between the solicitors and the  Claimant  which  no  doubt  the
    judge was aware of.

10. It seems that the Claimant was thoroughly tested  in  cross-examination
    and there is nothing in the judge's determination, or in the grounds of
    application, to suggest that there  was  any  other  credibility  point
    which the judge should have considered and did not consider.  The judge
    had to make findings on the evidence placed before him.   There  is  no
    suggestion that he applied the wrong standard of proof and he did  have
    proper regard to the discrepancy which  is  the  centre  point  of  the
    appeal  before  me.   Having  assessed  the   evidence   the   positive
    credibility findings were ones which the judge was  perfectly  entitled
    to make.  It follows there is no error in law  and  the  decision  must
    stand.

Notice of Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

12. I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 9th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

