
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48180/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                             |
|On 11th December 2015                  |                 On 22nd December 2015  |
|                                       |                                        |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                MISS SHABNAM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. Jaisri of Counsel instructed by Deccan Prime
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against a decision  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Howard   promulgated on 1st July  2015,  in  which  he  dismissed  an
       appeal against the decision of the respondent of 18th November  2014,
       to refuse an application for leave to remain in the UK as  a  Tier  4
       (General) student.


    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on
       5th October 2015.  The matter comes before me to consider whether  or
       not the determination by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Howard  involved
       the making of a material error of law,  and  if  so,  to  remake  the
       decision.


    Background


    3. The appellant first entered the UK on  10th  March  2011  with  entry
       clearance conferring leave to enter until 28th April 2012 as a Tier 4
       (General) student.  On 28th April 2012, the appellant made a combined
       application for leave to remain in the  UK  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
       student and for a Biometric Residence Permit.   The  application  was
       first refused on 19th February 2014 and a removal decision  was  made
       on 12th August 2014.  The appellant commenced a  claim  for  Judicial
       Review and the respondent withdrew the decisions of 19th February and
       12th August 2014.


    4. The respondent served a decision dated 18th November 2014 and it  was
       the appellant's appeal against that decision, that gave rise  to  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Howard  promulgated  on  18th
       November 2014.


    5.  The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met  the
       requirements of paragraph 245ZA(a) of the Immigration Rules.  In  her
       decision, the respondent states:


         "The Secretary of State is satisfied you have  failed  to  produce,
         within a reasonable time, information, documents or other  evidence
         required by the Secretary of  State  to  establish  your  claim  to
         remain under these Rules;


         We wrote to you on the 16 December 2013 giving you 60 days,  to  14
         February 2014, in which to submit further information but have  not
         received a response to date. On 30 January 2014 it  was  identified
         that you had moved to a new  address  without  informing  the  Home
         Office, and a further letter was sent to you on 31 January 2014  to
         advise you that your application could not be approved  unless  you
         submitted further information by 14 February 2014.  Therefore  your
         application has  been  assessed  on  the  documentation  previously
         submitted and available at the time of consideration...


         You have claimed 30 points under  Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
         Rules for a valid Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS)
         assigned by London International College  of  Management,  However,
         the Secretary of State is not satisfied that you have a  valid  CAS
         because the Tier 4 Sponsor Register was checked on 16 December 2013
         but London International College of Management was not listed as of
         this date. Therefore you  have  not  met  the  requirements  to  be
         awarded 30 points under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules..."


    6. The appellant was awarded no points under  Appendix  A  (Attributes).
       The respondent stated:


         "In order for points to be awarded, a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance
         for Studies (CAS) must be assigned by  a  sponsor  with  a  Tier  4
         Sponsor Licence and that sponsor must still hold such a licence  on
         the date that the student's application is determined.


         The CAS that you submitted with your  application,  with  reference
         number E4G9RP0C14J0A6, was assigned by London International College
         of Management. The Tier  4  Sponsor  Register  was  checked  on  16
         December 2013 and London International College of  Management  were
         not listed as a Tier 4 Sponsor as of  this  date.  On  16  December
         2013, and again of 31 January 2014, you were informed of  this  and
         allowed 60 days to obtain a new sponsor and CAS, however  you  have
         not provided a new CAS within that period.


         As such, you are not in possession of a valid CAS and so  you  have
         not met the requirements of the rules. Therefore,  no  points  have
         been awarded for your CAS."


    7. As the appellant has not provided a valid CAS with  her  application,
       the respondent also awarded no points for maintenance funds.


The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal


    8. Notice of the hearing on 6th May 2015 was issued to  the  parties  on
       22nd January 2015.  The directions issued by the First-tier  Tribunal
       provided that the appellant  must send to the  Tribunal  and  to  the
       respondent, as soon as they are available, a bundle of all  documents
       upon which she wishes to rely in support of the appeal.  On  5th  May
       2015, the day before the  hearing  of  the  appeal,  the  appellant's
       representatives faxed to the Tribunal a  small  bundle  of  documents
       which included a number of documents  in  relation  to  the  Judicial
       Review claim brought by the appellant against a previous decision  of
       the respondent, and a witness statement of the  appellant  signed  by
       her on 5th May 2015.  The covering letter  stated  "We  are  herewith
       enclosing the following documents and request you to  consider  these
       documents as part of the Appeal and decide on papers only.".


    9. On 6th May 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard  heard  the  appeal
       and dismissed it for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on
       1st July 2015.  Paragraphs [2] to [5] set out the background  to  the
       respondent's decision of 18th November 2014  and  the  appeal  before
       him.  The decision records at paragraph [8]:


         "The  appellant  was  not  at  court....The  Notice  sent  to   the
         representative drew a bundle dated the 5th January  2015  in  which
         they state the have instructions from the appellant requesting  the
         appeal be considered on the papers."


   10. The findings of the Judge are set out at paragraphs [11] to  [14]  of
       the decision.  Insofar as is material to the  appeal  before  me,  at
       paragraph [11], the Judge states:


         "The appellant submitted no bundle.  Thus I must decide the  appeal
         on the material contained within the respondent's bundle."


   11. The Judge found that the appellant still has no CAS and has  provided
       no evidence of any continuing studies or other activities in  the  UK
       that could constitute a private or a family life.  He found that  the
       appellant  had  not  discharged  the  burden   of   establishing   an
       entitlement to the leave that she seeks, and that the requirements of
       paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules are not met.


The Grounds of appeal


   12. The appellant states that the Judge erred in his failure to take into
       account the documents that had been submitted  by  the  appellant  in
       advance of the hearing.  It is said that there  is  an  inconsistency
       between what is said at paragraphs [8]  and  [11]  of  the  decision.
       Paragraph [8] refers  to  the  Notice  sent  to  the  representative,
       drawing from them, a bundle  dated  the  5th  January  2015,  whereas
       paragraph [11] states the appellant submitted no bundle.  The  second
       ground relied upon by the  appellant  is  that  the  Judge  erred  in
       failing to consider the evidence of the appellant that the respondent
       failed to adduce any evidence that she has served a  "60-day"  letter
       upon the appellant, and that in the absence of such a letter,  it  is
       not possible for the appellant to secure a new  CAS.   The  appellant
       submits that the failure to make findings upon  the  evidence  relied
       upon by  the  appellant,  demonstrates  a  failure  to  give  anxious
       scrutiny.


   13. At the hearing before me, Mr Jaisri on behalf of the appellant adopts
       the grounds and submits that the  issue  as  to  whether  the  60-day
       curtailment letter had been received by the appellant is  central  to
       the appeal.  In her witness statement, the appellant contends that it
       was not received, whether on or about  16th  December  2013  or  31st
       January 2014.  He  submits  that  following  an  exchange  of  emails
       between the appellant and  an  officer  of  the  respondent  on  30th
       January 2014, it was identified that the appellant had moved to a new
       address.  He submits that whist the respondent's decision states that
       a further letter was sent to the appellant on 31st January 2014,  the
       appellant's evidence is that the appellant has  never  received  that
       letter.


   14. The respondent has filed a Rule 24 response.  The respondent  opposes
       the appeal and submits that the Judge directed himself appropriately.
        The respondent states, "It is unclear from the papers available what
       exactly was before the Judge or that it would have  made  a  material
       difference to the outcome of the appeal."  At the hearing before  me,
       Mr Tarlow adopted the Rule 24 response.  He was able to confirm  that
       there had been an exchange  of  emails  on  30th  January  2014  that
       resulted in the appellant providing the respondent with an up to date
       address,  but  he  could  not  identify  the  address  to  which  any
       correspondence sent to the appellant on 31st January 2014, was sent.





DISCUSSION


   15. In a short determination the Judge noted at paragraph  [8]  that  the
       Notice of Hearing sent to the appellants representative drew a bundle
       dated 5th January 2015.  Having looked at the fax received  from  the
       appellants representatives dated 5th May 2015, I  am  satisfied  that
       the Judge is in fact referring to the bundle received by the Tribunal
       by fax on 5th May 2015.   The  observation  by  the  Judge  that  the
       representatives state that they have instructions from the  appellant
       requesting the appeal be considered on the papers is consistent  with
       what is set out in the covering letter faxed to the Tribunal  on  5th
       May 2015.  The bundle relied upon  by  the  appellant  was  therefore
       before the Judge when he made his decision.


   16. It seems to me that most of the  documents  that  were  sent  to  the
       Tribunal under cover of the letter dated 5th May 2015 were irrelevant
       to the issues before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  related  to  the
       previous claim for Judicial Review.  However there  was  within  that
       bundle, a statement from the appellant signed on 5th May  2015.   The
       Judge states at paragraph [11] that the appellant submitted no bundle
       and there is no reference to the witness statement of  the  appellant
       having been considered by the Judge, in reaching his decision.


   17. In my judgment the decision of the Judge discloses material error  of
       law. The Judge failed to show any engagement with the evidence of the
       appellant as set out in her witness statement.  Whilst  it  has  been
       suggested that it was unclear what documents or  evidence  the  Judge
       had before him, this is by reference to the decision. I am  satisfied
       that the bundle of documents sent by fax to the Tribunal on  5th  May
       2015 was available in the Tribunal file.  I can find no  evidence  to
       show that the judge engaged with the evidence  of  the  appellant  or
       otherwise  conducted  any  independent  assessment  of  the  material
       relevant to the appeal.


ERROR OF LAW DECISION


   18. I find a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal which shall be set aside.


   19. I note that the Upper Tribunal in  accordance  with  Part  3  of  the
       Practice Statement for the Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the
       Upper Tribunal is in terms of disposal of  appeals,  likely  on  each
       occasion to proceed to remake the decision, instead of remitting  the
       case to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
       satisfied that the effect of the error of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
       Judge has been to deprive a party before the First Tribunal of a fair
       hearing or other opportunity for that parties case to be put to,  and
       considered by the First Tier Tribunal.


   20. In my view the most fair and proportionate way in which to deal  with
       this case and given the nature of the factual findings to be made, is
       to remit the matter for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision


   21. The appeal is allowed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       promulgated on 1st July 2015 is set aside and I remit the matter  for
       a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.


   22. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.

Signed                                  Date



       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

FEE AWARD


   23. The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award, and whether or not  a  fee
       award is appropriate, is again a matter for the  First-tier  Tribunal
       in due course.

Signed                                  Date


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
