
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48566/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham hearing centre   |Decision issued                      |
|On 11 November 2014                  |On 12 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                       PRINCIA FRANTINE LOUBANZA TOULA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pipe, instructed by Maya & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Congo, born 9 March  1986.  On  11  April
    2012 she made an application for leave to remain, ostensibly on Article
    8 grounds. At the time of such application  the  appellant  had  extant
    leave. This application was refused by the  Respondent  in  a  decision
    dated 3 July 2013. An appeal was brought  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    against such decision, and that  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ghani in a determination promulgated on 1 July 2014. The
    appellant sought, and obtained from  Judge  Holmes  on  23  July  2014,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Thus the matter came before
    me.

 2. Having heard detailed and careful submissions from both Mr Pipe and  Mr
    Smart I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal's determination contains
    a number of errors of law capable  of  affecting  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal and I set the determination  aside.  For  reasons  which  become
    apparent below I need do no more herein than summarise the errors  that
    I found the First-tier Tribunal's determination to contain, which I  do
    as follows.

 3. The reasons given in paragraph 21 and 22 of the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    are not legally adequate or  sufficient.  In  particular  the  Tribunal
    erred in failing:

         (a) to provide legally adequate reasons  for  its  conclusion  that
         there are 'serious  concerns  over  the  relationship  between  the
         appellant and her husband'

         (b)  to  consider  the  application  of  the  ratio  of  the  Upper
         Tribunal's decision in Sanade [2012] UKUT 00048,  when  determining
         whether the appellant's British Citizen child could  reasonably  be
         expected to travel or move to  Pakistan  -  such  issue  being  the
         subject of specific submissions before the First-tier Tribunal;

         (c) to consider the relevance and application of the ratio  of  the
         decision  in  Treebhowan  and  Hayat  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1054  when
         attaching weight to the ability  of  the  appellant  to  return  to
         Pakistan and make a "proper" application for entry clearance.

 4. Having set aside the First-tier Tribunal's determination at the hearing
    of 11 November I directed, without objection, that the  decision  under
    appeal should be re-made by the Upper Tribunal. I thereafter  proceeded
    immediately to hear submissions in relation  to  this  issue.  The  re-
    hearing of the appeal had, however, to be  adjourned  part-heard  as  a
    consequence of a potentially relevant recent  policy  authored  by  the
    Secretary of State coming  to  light  during  the  course  of  hearing.
    Directions were given at the hearing for the further  progress  of  the
    proceedings.

 5. However, on the 25 November 2014 the Tribunal received a letter from Mr
    Smart, of the same date, identifying that the Secretary  of  State  had
    decided to withdraw her "original decision" (which I take to  mean  the
    decision of the 3 July 2013) and that she intended  to  reconsider  the
    appellant's application on the basis of the circumstances as  they  now
    appertain. A request was therefore made for consent to be given to  the
    Secretary of State to withdraw her case before the Upper Tribunal.

 6. I observe that a copy of the letter of 25 November  2014  was  sent  to
    Maya & Co on the same date. I put back the drafting of this decision so
    as to enable Maya & Co to make any representations they wished to  make
    in relation to the contents of such letter and the course to  be  taken
    by the Upper Tribunal as a consequence of it. No  representations  have
    thus far been received, despite 2 weeks now  having  passed  since  the
    date of the letter. Neither  has  any  application  been  made  by  the
    appellant for time to make such representations.

 7. The Secretary of State does not require the  permission  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal to withdraw a decision she has made, even if such decision  is
    the subject of the appeal before the Tribunal  The  withdrawal  of  the
    decision underlying  the  appeal  does  not,  however,  extinguish  the
    jurisdiction of the Upper Tribunal under section  12(2)(b)(ii)  of  the
    2007 Act to re-make the decision in the appeal brought under  the  2002
    Act: See SM (Withdrawal of appeal decision effect) Pakistan [2014] UKUT
    64 (IAC).

 8. Having had regard, inter alia, to the matters identified  in  paragraph
    72 of  SM,  and  in  particular  observing  that  (i)  the  appellant's
    circumstances have  significantly  changed  since  the  last  time  the
    Secretary of State gave substantive consideration to her case (ii) that
    the respondent should, ordinarily, be the primary decision maker in the
    immigration field and (iii) there are no matters of  general  legal  or
    procedural guidance to be addressed in this appeal, I conclude,  having
    also considered the overriding objective in the 2008 Rules that consent
    should be given the Secretary of State to withdraw her case.

 9. Following the reasoning of the Tribunal in SM, I must formally  dispose
    of this appeal. The normal course in such  circumstances  would  be  to
    dismiss the appeal, unless there are matters which points  towards  not
    doing so (SM - paragraph 72). In all the circumstances  of  this  case,
    and having taken into account the reasons provided  by  the  Respondent
    for withdrawing her decision i.e. to reconsider it based on the changes
    in the appellant's circumstances, I conclude that it is appropriate  to
    formally dismiss the appellant's appeal.  I  make  clear  however  that
    this is no reflection on the merits of the case of either party and  is
    no more than a formality to bring these proceedings to an end.

10. Given the terms of the letter of 25 November it is prudent  for  me  to
    emphasis that none of the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  are  to
    remain standing and the findings of that Tribunal should not be  relied
    upon by either party in the future. For the  avoidance  of  doubt  this
    includes findings made as to the nature and  doubtful  quality  of  the
    appellant's relationship with her husband, as well as the  'history  of
    the appellant's husband' [whatever meaning is to be  ascribed  to  that
    phrase in the letter of 25 November].

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  for  the  reasons
given above.

The appellant's appeal is formally dismissed, such  conclusion  having  been
reached without the Upper Tribunal having  given  substantive  consideration
to the merits of the appeal.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 11 December 2014
