
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48723/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 10 March 2016                         |On 19 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Muhammad Jamil
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Parkin, Solicitor of Rayan Adams Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Maxwell) allowing an appeal by  Mr  Muhammad
    Jamil against a decision made on 4 December 2014 refusing him leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  The appeal was  allowed  to
    the extent  that  it  was  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
    consideration of the requirements of leave remaining  outstanding.   In
    this decision I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal, Mr Jamil as the appellant and the Secretary of State  as
    the respondent.

Background

2.   The background to this appeal can briefly be set out as  follows.   The
    appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 17 November 1985.  He  first
    entered the UK on 23 January 2011 with leave  to  enter  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student and was granted leave  to  remain  until  29  October
    2012.  Subsequently he was granted further leave to remain as a Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant until 4 September 2014.  On 3 September  2014
    he applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  The
    appellant was able to take advantage of the  transitional  arrangements
    in respect of Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrants and did  not  therefore
    have to meet the  requirement  of  using  funding  from  registered  UK
    entrepreneurial seed funding  competitions  or  from  one  or  more  UK
    government departments or devolved government departments.  However, he
    was required to provide one  or  more  documents  from  the  categories
    identified at G26 of his application form to cover a continuous  period
    commencing before 11 July 2014 up  to  no  earlier  than  three  months
    before the date of his application.  The applicant has ticked  the  box
    "advertising or marketing material".

3.    The  appellant  submitted  with  his  application  form  a  number  of
    documents but they were undated.  His application was  refused  on  the
    basis that the evidence he had submitted in relation to  marketing  and
    advertising  material  was  not  acceptable  as  it  did  not  cover  a
    continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014 up to no earlier  than
    three months before the date  of  his  application.   In  the  skeleton
    argument produced for the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    material submitted with the application is identified  as  follows:  an
    undated business card, an undated flyer and printouts from the  "Scoot"
    and the "Sun Business Directory" websites.   It  was  argued  that  the
    appellant had been treated unfairly and harshly by the  respondent  and
    this could have been avoided had the respondent given the appellant  an
    opportunity of being heard to clarify the  respondent's  concerns.   It
    was argued that the respondent had breached the principle of common law
    fairness  and  that  the  respondent's  decision  was  irrational   and
    unreasonable.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the judge  recorded  that
    the appellant's case was that in June 2014 he  had  purchased  leaflets
    from HT Signs Ltd and had produced their invoice dated  25  June  2014.
    These leaflets were distributed and the appellant had provided  letters
    from Loxford Muslim Society, undated but confirming that leaflets  were
    distributed outside their mosque on 25 and 27 June 2014, and from Radio
    Cars  Ltd,  again  undated  but  confirming  that  the  appellant   had
    distributed leaflets for his business outside  their  office  and  also
    handed over 200 leaflets for distribution on 26 June 2014.  In addition
    to the leaflets the appellant had been marketing via  a  website  under
    the name gulmahalsolutions.co.uk and had produced a copy of a  document
    from his service provider confirming his registration date  as  1  July
    2014.

5.   The judge commented that it was unfortunate  that  the  respondent  had
    chosen not to consider all  of  the  appellant's  application  but  had
    concentrated  on  what  was  a  relatively  unimportant   aspect,   the
    advertising material.  To succeed all the applicant had to  do  was  to
    provide  some  advertising  material  that  was  available  during  the
    required period, in this instance within the period 11 June  -  2  July
    2014.  The judge said that, disregarding the quality of the advertising
    and marketing and its apparent aim of garnering business  via  a  local
    mosque and taxi company, it was clear that he produced advertising  and
    marketing material within the specified  period.   He  then  said  that
    although this sort of marketing approach appeared on the face of it  to
    be futile this was not a matter for him as the respondent had  taken  a
    less than helpful approach in the present instance and he mentioned  it
    only to dispel any misapprehension that, by allowing  this  appeal  and
    criticising  the  approach  of  the  respondent,  he  had  formed   any
    favourable view as to the outcome of the application which  he  had  to
    remit to the respondent for a full and proper consideration of all  the
    outstanding issues.  For this reason the  appeal  was  allowed  to  the
    extent that it was remitted to  the  respondent  to  consider  all  the
    requirements of leave that remained outstanding.

The Grounds and Submissions

6.   In her grounds the respondent relied on the provisions of s.85A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, arguing that it was  only
    open to the appellant to rely on evidence submitted in support  of  the
    application.  The First-tier Tribunal had erred, so it  is  argued,  by
    relying on an invoice and letters mentioned at [5(ii)] as they had  not
    been produced with the application.  The advertising material  provided
    with the application  was  not  acceptable  as  specified  evidence  as
    defined by para 41-SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules as
    it did not cover a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014  up
    to no earlier than three months before the date of the application.

7.   In the appellant's rule 24 statement it is argued  that  the  documents
    on which the appellant sought to rely fell  within  the  exceptions  to
    s.85A(4) in that it was evidence adduced to show that  a  document  was
    genuine or valid.  There was no requirement in the rules that the  date
    of the advertising material needed to appear on the material itself and
    it was therefore open to the appellant to produce evidence  as  to  the
    date when it was not contained within the advertising material  itself.
    The evidence could be either oral or documentary.

8.   In her submissions Ms Isherwood relied on the grounds arguing that  the
    judge had clearly erred in law by relying  on  evidence  not  submitted
    with the application.  The evidence  produced  was  to  supplement  the
    evidence submitted and did not fall within  the  category  of  evidence
    designed to show that a document submitted was genuine or valid.

9.   Mr Parkin accepted that  the  judge  may  have  erred  in  law  in  his
    approach but the error was not material.  The purpose  of  the  further
    evidence had been to confirm that the documents submitted were  genuine
    or valid.  He accepted that the documents originally submitted were all
    undated but the appellant had been entitled to produce further evidence
    at the hearing to support an argument that the documents were valid  in
    the sense of existing at the time required by the rules.

Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in Law

10.  It is common ground between the parties that an application made  under
    the points-based scheme must be evidenced by the documents specified in
    the rules, which must be submitted with the application.  At G26 of his
    application  form  the  appellant  opted  to  produce  advertising   or
    marketing material to cover a continuous period  commencing  before  11
    July 2014 to up to no earlier than three months before the date of  the
    application, in this case, potentially a relatively short period as the
    application was made on 3 September 2014.  The documents submitted with
    the application were all undated.  However, further evidence both  oral
    and documentary was produced  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and in the light of  this  evidence  the  judge  remitted  the
    application to the respondent.

11.  By virtue of s.85(5) and s.85A it was not open under  the  points-based
    scheme to adduce evidence additional to the evidence submitted with the
    application save where it is produced  to  prove  that  a  document  is
    genuine or valid (s.85A(4)(c)).  There are a number of other exceptions
    but this is the only one applicable to this appeal.

12.  The judge did consider further evidence in addition to  that  submitted
    in support of and at the  time  of  making  the  application.   At  the
    hearing before me it was argued on behalf of  the  appellant  that  the
    evidence was in fact admissible (although it appears  that  this  point
    was not taken at the hearing before the judge) on the basis that it was
    produced to prove that the advertising material was genuine or valid in
    the sense that it demonstrated that the documents  covered  the  period
    required by the rules.

13.  However, I am not satisfied  that  the  further  evidence  is  evidence
    produced to prove that the advertising material was genuine  or  valid.
    No issue  was  taken  on  whether  the  documents  were  genuine.   The
    respondent's decision was based simply on the fact that as the evidence
    was undated it failed to show that it covered the  period  required  by
    the rules.  The evidence the appellant now seeks to rely upon does  not
    impact on whether the documents are  genuine  or  valid  but  seeks  by
    further evidence to supplement the documents or cure defects  in  them.
    The evidence does not go to their genuine nature or their validity.  In
    short, the appellant cannot rely on the exception that the evidence has
    been adduced to prove that the documents are  genuine  or  valid.   The
    fact remains that the evidence submitted did not meet the  requirements
    of the rules and the respondent was entitled to refuse the  application
    on that basis.  On the evidence the judge should have  found  that  the
    appeal could not succeed.

14.  It has not  been  argued  before  me  that  there  was  any  procedural
    unfairness on the part of the respondent.  The requirements to  be  met
    by an application under the points-based scheme  are  set  out  in  the
    rules,  complex  though  they  are,  and  properly  reflected  in   the
    application form.  If part of the rules were  not  met  such  that  the
    appellant could not obtain the required points, there was no reason why
    the respondent necessarily had to consider other aspects of  the  rules
    whether relating to points or  other  requirements.   The  respondent's
    decision makes it clear that the appellant had the option of  making  a
    new application and indicates that she reserved the right  to  consider
    the points' criteria outstanding and  any  other  requirements  in  any
    further reconsideration.

15.  In summary, I am satisfied that the judge erred  in  law  by  remitting
    the matter to the respondent for further consideration.   I  set  aside
    the decision.  In the light of my findings it is clear that the  appeal
    should  have  been  dismissed.   I  therefore  substitute  a   decision
    dismissing the appeal.

Decision

16.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision is set aside.   I
    re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal  against  the
    respondent's  decision  refusing  leave  to  remain   as   a   Tier   1
    (Entrepreneur).




Signed                                  Date: 13 April 2016
             H J E Latter
H J E Latter
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
