
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/48888/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29th February 2016                     |  On 26th April 2016              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                                Umar Siddique
                          (no ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who appeals with permission  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Grimmett  promulgated  on
    1st June 2015 to dismiss  his  appeal  against  refusal  to  grant  him
    further leave to remain as a student and to remove him to Pakistan.

 2. The decision made by the Secretary of State  was  dated  5th  September
    2014.  The application was refused on several grounds.  In the light of
    the Appellant's history the Secretary of State indicated that  she  was
    not satisfied that he was a genuine student  and  had  invited  him  to
    attend for interview on 22nd August 2014 but he had failed  to  appear.
    The application was refused under paragraph 245ZX(o) of the Immigration
    Rules and also under  paragraph  322(10),  for  failure  to  attend  an
    interview.  It was also the case that the  Confirmation  of  Acceptance
    for Studies (CAS) upon which the Appellant had been  relying  had  been
    cancelled immediately before the decision was made as the  licence  for
    the sponsoring college had been revoked.

 3. In her decision Judge Grimmett found  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a
    credible witness and that he had received a letter inviting him for  an
    interview and yet did not attend.  She was also not satisfied that  any
    unfairness had been worked in  the  circumstances  of  the  case.   The
    appeal was also dismissed with regard to Article 8, ECHR.

 4. In the Grounds of Appeal it was contended that the judge had  erred  in
    her approach to fairness as the CAS, through no fault of the Appellant,
    had been withdrawn immediately before the decision.  Reference was made
    to the guiding cases of Thakur (PBS decision -  common  law  fairness)
    Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC) and  Patel  (revocation  of  sponsor
    licence - fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211.  There  was  said  to  be
    unfairness also in the failure to give notice of decision  earlier  and
    that it had been irrational of the judge to consider that the interview
    letter had in fact been sent to the Appellant.

 5. In granting permission to  appeal  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cruthers considered it arguable that the  judge  had  not  sufficiently
    engaged with the Appellant's argument that it  had  not  been  fair  to
    refuse him leave to remain when his CAS had only been cancelled the day
    before the decision. However he commented (at paragraph 3 of the grant)
    that the Appellant should not take the grant as any indication that the
    appeal would ultimately be successful as apart from anything  else  the
    Appellant was faced with the judge's finding  that  he  had  failed  to
    attend the interview.

 6. At the hearing before me the Appellant was no longer  represented.   He
    explained that he  did  not  have  sufficient  funds  to  instruct  his
    solicitor to attend.  He speaks good English and said he was  happy  to
    proceed.  I explained the procedure to him.  As the Appellant  was  not
    represented I invited  Mr  Mills  to  address  me  first  so  that  the
    Appellant would understand the likely  opposition  to  his  appeal  and
    could then respond.  Mr Mills said that the policy of granting 60 days'
    further  leave  had  been  much  misunderstood  and  only  related   to
    restricting leave to 60 days following  curtailment  if  further  leave
    remained.  In the current case it was  not  the  first  time  that  the
    Appellant had been a student at a college where the  licence  had  been
    revoked and that, he said, had caused doubts to arise as to whether the
    Appellant was indeed a genuine student. He had accordingly been invited
    to attend for interview.  Fairness concerned the  opportunity  for  the
    Appellant to be able  to  put  his  case  but  he  had  given  up  that
    opportunity by failing to attend the  interview,  of  which  the  judge
    found that he had notice.  The  Appellant  was  faced  with  that  firm
    finding.  The challenge that the judge's  decision  on  the  matter  of
    whether the Appellant had received notice of the interview  appointment
    relied on  irrationality  but  the  judge's  findings  were  clear  and
    properly reasoned.

 7. In response the Appellant said that if he was not a genuine student why
    had he sought admission in three different colleges and spent a lot  of
    money on his education in this country.  He  questioned  why  the  Home
    Office had not sent him a text or an e-mail  concerning  the  interview
    which he maintained he had not known about.  He said  he  had  received
    the refusal letter, which was dated September of 2014 only in November.



 8. Having heard those submissions and considered the documentation I  came
    to the view that there was no material error of law in the decision  of
    Judge Grimmett and I announced my decision at the hearing.  The refusal
    was not based solely upon the Appellant not having a valid CAS.  Before
    that stage was reached the  Secretary  of  State  relied  on  paragraph
    245ZX(o) of the Rules, in which she questioned  whether  the  Appellant
    was a genuine student and also his failure to attend interview  in  the
    light of which she refused the  application  under  paragraph  322(10).
    The judge's findings with regard  to  those  preliminary  matters  were
    clear.  In her  decision  she  recites  at  paragraphs  9  and  10  the
    Appellant's evidence as to his whereabouts at the  relevant  times  and
    the Home Office records as to  his  address.   Paragraph  11  reads  as
    follows:

         "I found the Appellant's evidence most unpersuasive as  he  changed
         his evidence in the course of a very short  period  of  questioning
         from being at the house for one month to being at  the  house  from
         November 2013 to about September 2014 and then changed it again  to
         say that he moved out of the house  in  December  2014.   When  the
         inconsistencies were put to him he said  that  he  was  using  both
         addresses and had post at both addresses but  had  asked  the  Home
         Office       to       send       the        post        to        [
           ].  I did not believe him and I was not satisfied that he  was  a
         credible witness."

    In the following paragraph she stated that she  was  satisfied  on  the
    balance of probabilities that  the  invitation  to  the  interview  had
    indeed been sent and received.  The Appellant had failed to attend.

 9. In my judgment Judge Grimmett gave adequate and sustainable reasons for
    her finding that the Appellant had received notice of the interview and
    had failed to attend.  She heard oral  evidence  which  she  was  in  a
    position to  assess.   She  gave  sufficient  reasons  to  support  her
    conclusion.  The Secretary of State was clearly justified  in  refusing
    the application under paragraph 245ZX(o) and paragraph 322(10)  of  the
    Rules.  Any apparent unfairness with regard to revocation  of  the  CAS
    form without informing the Appellant could not have had any impact upon
    the outcome of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The appeal to this Tribunal is therefore dismissed.



Decision

11. There was no material error of law in the making of the decision by the
    First-tier Tribunal which therefore stands.

12. There was no application for an anonymity order.  I  saw  no  necessity
    for any such order and none is made.






Signed                              Dated 04 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
