
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48007/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th June 2014                               |On 9th July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the Home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Ms mwiinji nalwimba
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gregor Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Joy Kyakwita, Legal Representative.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against the decision  of
   the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Pacey) who, in a determination promulgated
   on the 1st April  2014,  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  against  the
   refusal of her application for leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  her
   established private life in the United Kingdom.



The primary decision

2. The Secretary  of  State's  official  (hereafter,  "the  decision-maker")
   considered the application under paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the  Immigration
   Rules. This requires that the applicant, at the date of application -



    ... is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for
    less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment but  has  no
    ties (including social, cultural or family ) with the country to  which
    he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

3. The material part of  the  decision-maker's  explanatory  letter  to  the
   respondent reads as follows:

    You entered the United Kingdom on 20th  September  2004  and  have  not
    lived continuously in the UK  for  at  least  20  years  therefore  the
    Secretary of State is not satisfied that you can meet the  requirements
    of Rule 276ADE(iii).

                                 ..........
    Having spent 21 years in your home country and in the absence of any
    evidence to the contrary, it is not accepted that in the period of time
    that you have been in the UK you have lost ties to your home country
    and therefor the Secretary of State is not satisfied that you can meet
    the requirements of Rule 276ADE(iv).

4. The decision-maker thereafter considered whether the  application  raised
   or  contained  any   exceptional   circumstances   that   might   warrant
   consideration outside the Immigration Rules, but concluded  that  it  did
   not. The decision-maker thus concluded that refusal of  the  respondent's
   application for leave to remain was compatible with her right to  respect
   for private and family life as  guaranteed  by  Article  8  of  the  1950
   European Convention for the Protection of Fundamental  Human  Rights  and
   Freedoms.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5. The Judge noted that the respondent had stated in  her  application  that
   she had "no-one" in Zambia, that her whole family was in  the  UK  (apart
   from a sister who was in Canada), and that the  appellant  spoke  English
   and Bemba [paragraph 6]. It was the appellant's case that she had come to
   the United Kingdom in order to join her mother [paragraph 7]. Her  mother
   had come to the United Kingdom in May 2003, the appellant had arrived  in
   September 2004, and her father and brothers had joined them  in  December
   2005. The respondent had been unable to obtain "a proper job" due to  the
   fact that she had only one year remaining on her visa,  and  so  she  did
   part-time charity work with  her  Church  in  Hatfield.  She  moved  from
   Hatfield to her parents' address in January 2014 [paragraph 13]. Although
   the appellant had previously asserted that she did not  have  any  family
   members in Zambia, she admitted at the hearing that she  had  in  fact  a
   number of aunts, uncles and cousins there [paragraphs 13,  19,  and  21].
   However, it was reasonable for the appellant not to class these relatives
   as 'family members; because she had grown up  in  a  boarding  school  in
   Zambia, and  had  thus  never  developed  any  emotional  ties  to  those
   relatives [paragraphs 19, 21 and 22].

6. The concluding paragraphs of the determination read as follows:

       [23]  In my view, despite the undoubted facts that the Appellant  is
       young, in good           health and highly educated, she  no  longer
       has ties to Zambia. Her higher education was  in  the  UK,  all  her
       immediate family are here and she has, clearly, no  job  in  Zambia.
       [24] On the balance of probabilities and  on  the  totality  of  the
       evidence before me, I find that the  Appellant  has  discharged  the
       balance the burden of proof. [25]  I  allow  the  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules.

7. A  preliminary  issue  arose  at  the  hearing  before  me  as  to  what,
   precisely, the judge had found that  the  appellant  had  discharged  the
   burden of proving. The references in paragraph 23 to the appellant  being
   young, in good health, and highly educated,  did  not  have  any  obvious
   relevance to the requirements for leave to remain under paragraph  276ADE
   of the Immigration Rules for being granted leave to remain on  the  basis
   of private life. It therefore appeared, at first blush,  that  the  judge
   had found  that  the  appellant  had  established  the  facts  that  were
   necessary  necessary  to  found  a  claim  that  her  removal  would   be
   incompatible with her right to respect for private life under  Article  8
   of  the  1950  Human  Rights  Convention.  However,  the  representatives
   ultimately agreed that the statement in paragraph 25, that the appeal was
   allowed "under the Immigration Rules", demonstrated that the judge was in
   fact finding that the appellant had discharged the burden of proving that
   she met the requirements of paragraph 275ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules.
   The arguments of the  representatives  were  thus  predicated  upon  this
   assumption.

Error of law analysis

8. The Secretary of State's  argument  may  conveniently  be  summarised  as
   follows. The assessment of a person's  ties  to  her  country  of  origin
   should  be  approached  holistically.  To  focus  exclusively  upon   the
   respondent's family ties to Zambia was thus an error of law.  Those  ties
   should  have  been  considered  within  the  broader   context   of   the
   respondent's social, cultural and other ties to Zambia.  Given  that  the
   respondent had lived in Zambia until the age of 21 and had retained  some
   (albeit not close) family ties to Zambia, the finding that the respondent
   had "no  ties"  to  Zambia  was  perverse.  Furthermore,  the  judge  had
   conflated the issues of private  and  family  life.  Whilst  the  judge's
   reference to the lack of emotional ties to her family members  in  Zambia
   may well have been  relevant  to  the  issue  of  the  existence  of  the
   respondent's family life in that country, it was irrelevant to the  issue
   of whether she had ties to that country for the purpose of assessing  her
   private life. What was relevant for the purposes of paragraph 276ADE  was
   whether the respondent's remaining ties to  Zambia  offered  a  practical
   possibility of her relocating to that country.  The  presence  of  family
   members in Zambia constituted a private  life  tie  that  would  aid  the
   respondent in establishing her own private life upon return to Zambia.

9. In response to the Secretary of State's arguments, Ms Kyakwita  submitted
   that the judge's conclusions had been  reasonably  open  to  her  on  the
   evidence. She stressed that a 'tie'  means  more  than  just  having  the
   nationality of the country in question,  or  having  remote  or  abstract
   links to it. It involved there being a continued connection  to  life  in
   that country, something which ties  an  applicant  to  their  country  of
   origin. She submitted that the judge  was  right  to  consider  that  the
   respondent did not have continuing 'ties' to Zambia  in  the  sense  that
   this term was properly to be understood.

10. In general, I prefer the arguments of the Secretary of State. I  do  not
   however agree with the argument that the judge conflated the concepts  of
   private and family life. It  is  clear  that  the  judge's  reference  in
   paragraph 21 to the respondent's lack of emotional ties to her  relatives
   in Zambia was one that was made within the context of her  accepting  the
   respondent's explanation for why she had not previously  mentioned  their
   existence. That finding was thus of relevance to an issue of  credibility
   that had arisen  during  the  course  of  the  hearing,  rather  than  an
   indication that the judge was conflating  the  concepts  of  private  and
   family life. I do however agree that the focus of the  judge's  attention
   with regard to the respondent's claimed lack of ties was too narrow,  and
   that it should have encompassed all  such  ties,  including  the  social,
   cultural and family ties. It was clear from  a  combination  of  all  the
   surrounding circumstances (such as the age at which  the  respondent  had
   left Zambia)  and  her  admitted  familial  links  to  Zambia,  that  the
   respondent continued to have meaningful ties to her  country  of  origin,
   notwithstanding the fact that she had not visited it since  hear  arrival
   in the United Kingdom some 9 years earlier. The Tribunal's  finding  that
   the respondent had met the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  was  thus
   contrary to the evidence. It is therefore set aside.

Re-determination of the appeal

11. This seems to me to be an  appropriate  case  in  which  to  remake  the
   decision on the basis of the evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, without a further hearing. For the reasons that I have  already
   given, the respondent does not meet the requirements for leave to  remain
   on the basis  of  private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE.  The  question
   therefore arises as to whether there are  compelling  circumstances,  not
   contemplated by the Immigration Rules, that would render the respondent's
   removal unjustifiably harsh and thus disproportionate for the purposes of
   Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention of Human Rights and Fundamental
   Freedoms (Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
   00640 (IAC)). In my judgement, there are not.  The  respondent  has  only
   ever  had  the  benefit  of  limited  leave  to  remain.  She   therefore
   established her private life in the United Kingdom in the knowledge  that
   she may one day have to return to Zambia. She retains  cultural  ties  to
   Zambia, having spent just short of the first 23 years of her life in that
   country. She continues to be able to speak Bemba. Whilst she is currently
   financially dependent upon  her  parents  in  the  United  Kingdom,  that
   dependency is a consequence of the very fact that she  has  only  limited
   leave to remain, and is thus now liable to be  removed  from  the  United
   Kingdom. It is undoubtedly true  that  the  appellant  has  far  stronger
   emotional ties to family members in the United Kingdom than to  those  in
   Zambia. On the other hand, she was already estranged  from  those  family
   members prior to her arrival in the United Kingdom, and  Article  8  does
   not impose a general obligation upon a state to respect a family's choice
   of residence (Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v United  Kingdom  [1985]
   ECHR 7). I therefore conclude that whilst  the  respondent's  removal  to
   Zambia may cause her a degree of hardship,  this  is  outweighed  by  the
   legitimate aim of maintaining the  economic  well-being  of  the  country
   through the consistent application of immigration controls.

Decision

12. The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  against
   refusal of further leave to remain in the United Kingdom is therefore set
   aside and is substituted by a decision to dismiss that appeal.

   Anonymity is not directed





Signed                                  Date

David Kelly

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
