
[pic]

Upper Tribunal                                                  Appeal
                                             Number : IA/48505/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 15 July 2014        On 16 July 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                             Sheikh Marina Karim
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr. K. Manzur of Haque & Hausman.
For the Respondent:    Mr. G. Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Mailer promulgated on 28 March 2014 dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
      against the decision dated 8 November 2013 to refuse to grant leave to
      remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student migrant.


Consideration

   2. I am grateful for the helpful and realistic way in which  Mr  Saunders
      dealt with this appeal today. In the circumstances it  is  unnecessary
      to set out the background to this case in any great detail.  All  such
      details are a matter of record  on  file  and  are  rehearsed  in  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I am able to be relatively  brief
      herein.


   3. The following matters are particularly germane:

(i) Although in the Respondent's combined  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision
      and 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 8  November  2013  the
      Appellant was treated as having made an application  on  18  September
      2013 (after the expiry of her last leave which ran to 31 August 2013),
      the Tribunal had ruled when considering the  validity  of  the  appeal
      that the Appellant's application had been made on  26  August  2013  -
      during the currency of her extant leave: see determination  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Mailer  at  paragraph  4.  It  was  common  ground
      between the parties before Judge Mailer that the date  of  application
      was 26 August 2013: see paragraph 42.

(ii) It followed that for the purposes of the application the Appellant  was
      to be treated as having an established presence in the UK, which meant
      that the maintenance requirements under the  Rules  were  at  a  lower
      amount than they would have been otherwise. The Respondent's  approach
      to this issue was in error because the Respondent had deemed the  date
      of application as being 18 September 2013.

(iii) To satisfy the maintenance requirements the Appellant  had  sought  to
      rely upon bank statements running up to 28 July  2013.  It  is  common
      ground between the parties - as confirmed to me  today  -  that  these
      bank statements demonstrated an adequate quantum of funds.  (See  also
      determination of Judge Mailer at paragraph 38.)

(iv) However, the bank statements were not submitted at  the  same  time  as
      the application of 26 August 2013, but were forwarded subsequently  to
      the Respondent on 18 September 2013. It is common ground that the bank
      statements were before the Respondent at the date of the  Respondent's
      decision - and indeed are referred to in the Notice of Decision/RFRL.

(v) Judge Mailer determined  that  because  the  bank  statements  were  not
      submitted at the same time as the application  "the  Respondent  would
      have been obliged to refuse the application made on 26th  August  2013
      as the documentation which was required to accompany it  was  not  yet
      available" (determination at paragraph 48).


   4. Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Designated
      Judge McClure on 21 May 2014. In granting permission to  appeal  Judge
      McClure identified that it was arguable that Judge  Mailer's  approach
      was not consistent with Nasim and others [2013] UKUT 610 (IAC), and in
      particular paragraph 76 thereof.


   5. The relevant passages in Nasim are from paragraphs 72-76. Mr  Saunders
      indicated that he did not resile from the position of  the  Respondent
      indicated in those paragraphs: in particular, "an application is to be
      treated as continuing for evidential purposes"  (paragraph  73);  "the
      SSHD has never suggested in this appeal that the SSHD is not  entitled
      to consider post-submission but pre-decision evidence.  The  SSHD  has
      also made it clear that, in any event, the  Tribunal  is  entitled  to
      consider the evidence that the decision maker  considered"  (paragraph
      74); "Accordingly, the respondent's position, in  cases  such  as  the
      present, is that (as held in Khatel) section 85A precludes a Tribunal,
      in a points-based appeal, from considering evidence as  to  compliance
      with points-based Rules,  where  that  evidence  was  not  before  the
      respondent when she took  her  decision;  but  the  section  does  not
      prevent a tribunal from  considering  evidence  that  was  before  the
      respondent when she took the decision, whether or  not  that  evidence
      reached the respondent only after the  date  of  application  for  the
      purposes of paragraph 34F" (paragraph 76). (See also paragraph (4)  of
      the headnote in Nasim.)


   6. Otherwise Mr Saunders indicated he had no other observations  to  make
      in the appeal - save  that  he  confirmed  acceptance  that  the  bank
      statements  submitted  to  the  Respondent  prior  to   the   decision
      demonstrated adequate funds to meet the  quantum  of  the  maintenance
      requirements.


   7. In the circumstances it was unnecessary to invite submissions from  Mr
      Manzur.


   8. The Respondent by accepting the position as stated to the Tribunal  in
      Nasim acknowledges that even if the  decision-maker  had  treated  the
      application as made on 26 August 2013 he would have been able to  take
      into account the  bank  statements,  notwithstanding  that  they  were
      submitted after the date of the application. In turn it is effectively
      acknowledged by the Respondent that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should
      have had regard to the  bank  statements  in  evaluating  whether  the
      Appellant met the Maintenance requirements of the Rules.


   9. In all such circumstances I find that Judge Mailer  erred  in  law  in
      excluding from consideration the bank statements. This was a  material
      error as it related to the core issue raised against  the  Appellant's
      application. I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      accordingly.


  10. In remaking the decision in the appeal I note that it is not  disputed
      that the evidence  submitted  by  the  Appellant  in  support  of  her
      application demonstrated that she met the maintenance requirements  of
      the Rules. There being no other issue taken against the Appellant, she
      scored sufficient points  to  meet  the  requirements  for  a  Tier  4
      (General)  Student  migrant  under  the  Points  Based   System.   The
      Respondent's decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  Rules  and
      variation of leave should properly have been granted to the Appellant.


  11. I allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


  12. In the circumstances it is unnecessary to consider Article  8  of  the
      ECHR.


  13. For completeness I note that Judge Mailer made reference to a  section
      47 decision at paragraph 25 of the determination. No such decision  is
      contained in the Notice of Immigration Decision/RFRL, and I am  unable
      to identify any other document containing such a decision  in  respect
      of the Appellant on file. Be that as it may, Mr Saunders  acknowledged
      that if there were to have been a section 47 removal decision it would
      fall away in light of the decision now made on the appeal.


Decision

  14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside. The decision  in  the  appeal  is  re-made.  The
      appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     15 July 2014




