
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: IA/48531/2015


                            the immigration Acts


|Heard at: Field House    |                         |Determination promulgated|
|On 8 December 2015                   |On 13 January 2016                   |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                                 Asmoth Miah
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, of Counsel, instructed by  Edward  Alam
& Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijinwala, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                                  Decision

 1. The appellant, a national of Bangladesh, has been granted permission to
    challenge the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Hawden-Beal
    promulgated on 18 June 2015 dismissing his appeal under the Immigration
    Rules  and  on  human  rights  grounds  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent of 11 November 2014 to refuse his  application  of  6  March
    2014 for leave to remain in the UK on the basis of  Article  8  of  the
    1950 European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
    Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR).

 2. The appellant's grounds only challenged the decision of  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appeal under para 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules.   They
    did not challenge her decision to dismiss the appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant claimed to have arrived in the UK in  1989.  It  was  his
    case before the judge that he had lived continuously in the UK  for  at
    least 20 years and that he therefore satisfied the requirements of para
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules.

 4. In order to satisfy para 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration  Rules,  the
    appellant had to establish that he had lived continuously in the UK for
    at least 20 years as at the date of his application, i.e. that  he  had
    lived continuously in the UK from at least 6 March 1994.

 5. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, a  Mrs.  Rinku  Begum
    and a Mr Sultan Ahmed. The appellant's evidence was summarised at paras
    5-10 of her decision, Mrs. Begum's at para 11 and Mr  Ahmed's  at  para
    12. Mrs. Begum gave evidence  that  she  came  to  know  the  appellant
    following her arrival in the UK in 1997,  as  a  close  friend  of  her
    father's. Mr Ahmed gave evidence of having known the appellant prior to
    1994, from 1991 and perhaps earlier (para 12 of the judge's  decision).



 6. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant  had  been  continuously
    resident in the UK for at least 20 years. She gave her reasons at  para
    16 onwards of her decision. In summary, she noted that,  apart  from  a
    letter from his doctor to say that he has been registered at his clinic
    since 2005, there were no official documents to confirm  his  residence
    prior to 2005 and only two after that date from 2010.  She  noted  that
    Mrs. Begum had herself only been resident in the UK for  less  than  20
    years.

 7. In assessing his private life claim outside the  Immigration  Rules  at
    para 17 onwards, she gave further reasons  for  her  finding  that  the
    appellant had not established continuous  residence  for  at  least  20
    years. The judge said at paragraph 18: "I accept that it is likely that
    he has been here since 2005, by virtue of his doctor's letter but  that
    is it". She considered letters of support from other friends but placed
    little or no weight on them.  She  also  considered  the  copy  of  the
    appellant's passport. Plainly, she did not find it  credible  that  the
    appellant had submitted copies of certain pages only of  his  passport,
    claiming that he had lost his passport.  She said that, as she only had
    copies of certain pages, she could not be sure that there were no entry
    or exit stamps for other dates in the passport.

 8. At no point in her assessment did the judge indicate what she  made  of
    the evidence of Mr.  Ahmed  or  why  she  did  not  find  his  evidence
    credible.

 9. I heard briefly from  Mr  Bellara  and  Ms  Fiwala  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.

10. I have decided that the judge made one error of  law.  Given  that  the
    judge found that the appellant had not shown that he had lived  in  the
    UK continuously for at least 20 years, it follows that  she  found  the
    evidence before her, including the evidence of Mr.  Ahmed,  incredible.
    Although she did not say so in terms, it is  nevertheless  plain,  from
    her adverse finding on the 20-year residence issue, that  she  did  not
    find Mr. Ahmed credible.

11. However, the judge failed to give  any  reasons  for  not  finding  Mr.
    Ahmed's credible.  It  is  plain  that  his  evidence  was  capable  of
    supporting the evidence of the appellant, that he has lived in  the  UK
    continuously since 1989. He gave evidence of having met  the  appellant
    prior to 1994: para 12 suggests that he gave evidence that he had known
    the appellant from 1991 and perhaps even earlier. He gave evidence that
    he kept in touch with the appellant by telephone once or twice  a  week
    and that they meet up 8-10 times a year. There is nothing at  all  from
    para 13 onwards of the decision that explains why  the  judge  was  not
    persuaded by his evidence.

12. I am therefore satisfied that the judge failed to given any reasons for
    not finding the evidence of Mr. Ahmed credible.  I  am  satisfied  that
    this error is material, in that, Mr. Ahmed's evidence, if accepted, was
    material to the outcome.

13. I do not accept Ms Fijiwala's submission that the judge must  have  had
    Mr Ahmed's evidence in mind  simply  because  she  had  summarised  his
    evidence at para 12. This submission does not address the fact that the
    judge gave no reasons for not being persuaded by the  evidence  of  Mr.
    Ahmed.

14. I do not accept Mr Bellara's submission that the judge also  materially
    erred in law by failing to assess the evidence of Mrs. Begum or  giving
    adequate reasons for not accepting her evidence. Mrs. Begum's  evidence
    was that she met the appellant in 1997. She did not  give  evidence  of
    having met the appellant in 1994 and since. Accordingly, any failure to
    assess her evidence, taken on its own, was not material to the outcome,
    albeit that her evidence was capable of supporting the  credibility  of
    the evidence of the appellant and Mr Ahmed that the appellant has lived
    in the UK from 1997.

15. I also do not accept Mr Bellara's submission that the judge  materially
    erred in law in failing to  take  into  account  that  the  appellant's
    photograph in his passport shows that he was a much younger man at  the
    date of his arrival in the UK, given that  the  judge  noted  that,  as
    certain pages only of the passport had been submitted, she could not be
    sure that there were no entry and exit stamps on the missing pages.

16. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that Judge Hawden-Beal materially
    erred in law, pursuant to s.12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
    Act 2007, read together with the above Practice Statement. I set  aside
    her decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal under para 276ADE of the
    Immigration Rules. Her decision  to  dismiss  his  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules stands.

17. Given that the evidence of the appellant, Mr Ahmed and Mrs. Begum  will
    need to be re-assessed,  I  am  satisfied  that  this  case  should  be
    remitted to the FtT with the direction that it not  be  dealt  with  by
    Judge Hawden-Beal.

18. Paras 5-12 of the decision of Judge Hawden-Beal stand as  a  record  of
    the oral evidence given at the hearing before the judge.


Signed   Date: 31 December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill
