
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48939/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th July 2014                               |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               mrs Razia Begum
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Rehman, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mrs K Heaps


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January  1943.   The
    Appellant first arrived in the UK on 18th May 2007 with valid leave  to
    enter as a visitor until 17th October 2007.  The Appellant subsequently
    entered the United Kingdom on 14th October 2008 with leave to enter  as
    a visitor valid to 12th August 2010.  The Appellant  last  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 1st March 2012 with leave to enter as a visitor valid
    to 13th January 2014.  Leave to enter was granted  for  six  months  on
    entry and therefore leave expired  on  1st  September  2012.   On  30th
    August 2012 the application was made for leave to remain on the grounds
    of private life in the United Kingdom and medical conditions.

 2. On 1st November 2013 the Home  Office  issued  a  reasons  for  refusal
    letter.  The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Law sitting at Manchester on 13th March 2014.  In a
    determination promulgated on 21st July 2014 the Appellant's appeal  was
    allowed under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 7th April 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended:

      1) That the judge had erred in law by failing to identify the  reasons
         by which he allowed the appeal.

      2) If (which was denied) the judge had made a finding  to  the  effect
         that the refusal was incompatible with the  Appellant's  Convention
         rights, the judge misdirected himself by:

          a) failing to identify a compelling circumstance not sufficiently
             recognised by the Rules raising an arguable case that  Article
             8 fell to be considered separately; and

          b) failed to consider the public  interest  in  firm  immigration
             control  which   was   a   relevant   consideration   in   any
             proportionality evaluation.

 4. On  16th  May  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  granted
    permission to  appeal.   Judge  Hollingworth  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    allowing the appeal on compassionate  grounds  outside  the  Rules  and
    neither did he attach sufficient weight to the availability of  medical
    treatment in Pakistan in relation to the Appellant's  condition  or  to
    the need properly  to  have  regard  to  the  public  interest  in  the
    proportionality evaluation.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  This is an appeal
    brought by the Secretary of State but for  the  purpose  of  continuity
    within proceedings the Secretary of State is herein referred to as  the
    Respondent and Mrs Begum as the Appellant.  The Appellant appears by Mr
    Rehman, the Sponsor and the Secretary of State  by  their  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer Mrs Heaps.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mrs Heaps refers me to the Grounds of Appeal pointing out that they are
    detailed and that it is unclear from the determination as to the  basis
    on which the appeal was allowed.  She submits that the findings of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge make reference to Rules 276ADE but  that  the
    judge has not made  a  finding  that  the  Rule  cannot  be  met.   She
    acknowledges that there is a discussion  on  medical  issues  and  care
    within the determination before the judge makes a  ruling  deciding  to
    allow the appeal outside the Rules.  However she submits that the Rules
    are a detailed statement  and  before  finding  the  circumstances  are
    compelling, it is necessary to follow the test set out in  Gulshan  and
    the subsequent authorities.  She submits that the Immigration Judge did
    not carry out that task.  Further she points out that it is accepted at
    paragraph 18 of the determination that medical treatment  is  available
    in Pakistan and the Appellant has daughters in Pakistan.   She  submits
    that there is a material error of law and asked me  to  set  aside  the
    decision.

 7. Mr Rehman is the Appellant's son and he indicates that he felt  it  was
    appropriate for him to attend  to  explain  what  he  feels  about  his
    mother.  He acknowledges the basis of the appeal and points out that it
    has been made clear that his mother could not get the requisite care in
    Pakistan where she has a daughter and that her daughter (his sister) is
    in poor health and needs looking after herself.  Apparently his  sister
    can barely stand, it would be physically impossible  for  her  to  look
    after her mother bearing in mind that his sister requires 24-hour-care.
     He states that he was faced with the decision as to whether he  should
    leave his three children and his wife and go and look after his  mother
    in Pakistan or quite simply leave her without any support to die there.
     He points out that his mother is on three forms of antidepressants and
    that she suffers from severe osteoarthritis.  He submits that the judge
    took all these factors into account and  that  the  decision  does  not
    disclose any material error of law.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

10. I start by noting that this is a court  of  law  and  not  a  court  of
    sympathy.  Further the First-tier Tribunal Judge who heard this  appeal
    is a very experienced judge, certainly not one known to  be  influenced
    by a sympathetic approach rather than by following the law.   Like  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  I  have  had  the  opportunity  to  see  the
    Appellant and her son.  Whilst Mr Rehman has only given submissions  of
    the evidence before me I note the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  in
    paragraph 17 that he was  a  credible  witness  with  obvious  concerns
    regarding the health of his mother and that he believed it was  a  duty
    placed upon him and his family to look after his  mother  in  old  age.
    Where the judge, it is argued, has erred, is in his failure to give due
    consideration to the relevant case law and to give the basis  by  which
    he allowed the appeal.  The latter point is  unsustainable.   Paragraph
    21 of the determination sets it out quite  clearly  "as  indicated  the
    appeal is limited to the question of the Appellant's rights outside the
    Immigration Rules".  It is abundantly clear  that  this  is  an  appeal
    pursuant to Article 8 outside the Rules and it does not sit  well  with
    the Secretary of State to maintain that that is  not  the  manner  upon
    which this matter has been looked at by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.



11. The question then arises as to whether or not the judge has applied the
    law.  I am satisfied that he has, although I acknowledge had there been
    consideration of the authorities and an explanation  thereof  then  the
    basis upon which the judge came to  his  conclusions  would  have  been
    easier to follow.

12. The law in this matter is rapidly evolving and there have been  several
    authorities which postdate that of the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

13. The Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and  has  repeated  subsequently  in
    Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  00085  (IAC)  at
    paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

14. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

15. What  the  judge  has  done  is  effectively  set  out  the  compelling
    circumstance at paragraphs 18 to 21  of  his  determination.   Had  the
    judge emphasised  that  those  paragraphs  constituted  the  compelling
    circumstances by which this matter should  be  looked  at  outside  the
    Rules and made a detailed reference to the relevant  authorities  there
    would have been much greater clarity in  the  determination  which  may
    well have satisfied the Secretary of State.  However the  fact  remains
    that he did not.  To that extent there was an error of law but I do not
    consider it material bearing in mind the full details  set  out  within
    the determination and the analysis that I have given herein.   In  such
    circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose
    a material error of law and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
    maintained.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error of law and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


