
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA481472014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 1st April 2016                         |On 14th June 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                             Mr ashit kumar das
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Maxwell, promulgated on 13th May 2015,  following  a  hearing  at
    Richmond on 7th May 2015.  In the determination, the judge allowed  the
    appeal of Mr Ashit Kumar Das, whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of
    State subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, who was born  on  1st
    July  1950.   He  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State refusing his application under paragraph 276ADE  and
    Appendix FM for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of  his  poor
    health and incapacity, such that he is dependent on his family  in  the
    UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that his now 65 years  of  age,  suffers  from
    poor health,  and  is  incapable  of  looking  after  himself.   He  is
    effectively bedridden and his condition is  a  worsening  one.   He  no
    longer has any family in  Bangladesh  who  can  look  after  him.   All
    efforts made to find a care home for  him  in  Bangladesh  have  proved
    fruitless and it is his family in this country  that  is  in  the  best
    position to provide care for him.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge made the observation earlier on  in  the  determination  that
    this was a case  which  had  previously  been  before  the  Immigration
    Tribunal (appeal number IA/49550/2013), where the judge had  held  that
    the decision of the Secretary of State was not in accordance  with  the
    law, and had directed the matter be remitted  back  to  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State for further consideration and a fresh decision.

 5. Judge Maxwell on this occasion had regard to the principles set out  in
    Devaseelan [2002] UKAIT 00702.  The judge went on to conclude that,

         "There is a significant  body  of  evidence  before  me;  including
         several reports from his general practitioner, which  lead  to  the
         conclusion he is incapable of looking after himself.  He has, as  I
         find it, little if any connection to life in Bangladesh other  than
         on what might be termed an historical and linguistic  basis.   This
         was insufficient for  there  to  be  any  meaningful  tie  in  this
         Appellant's instance.  His ties are family ties and it was conceded
         by the Respondent in the first sitting of this appeal that  he  has
         no family life in Bangladesh" (see paragraph 16).

 6. The appeal is allowed.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  enunciate  a
    holistic assessment of the facts of the case and it was not  enough  to
    say that just because the Appellant lacked familial ties to  Bangladesh
    that he had "no ties".  Reference was made  to  the  case  of  Ogundimu
    (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 60.

 8. On 11th February 2016 confirmation to appeal was granted by the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 9. On 1st March 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered  by  the  Appellant's
    representative stating that the judge was perfectly entitled to  attach
    as much weight as he saw fit to the  evidence,  given  that  there  was
    evidence from various hospitals in Bangladesh that  no  facilities  are
    available for the Appellant's care there, and there were no credibility
    challenges to the Appellant's evidence.

Submissions

10. At the  hearing  before  me  on  1st  April  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr S Karim and the  Respondent  was  represented  by  Mr
    Walker.  Mr Walker submitted that it was the Respondent's appeal before
    this Tribunal and that there was essentially one ground,  namely,  that
    the judge failed to consider that the Appellant had  "no  ties"  in  an
    appropriate fashion, focusing simply on the lack of  familial  ties  in
    Bangladesh.  The Appellant had lived most of his life in Bangladesh and
    it was not correct that he would have an inability to reintegrate  into
    that society.  In fact, no enquiry had been made in this  respect  into
    the prospect of his reintegration.

11. For his part, Mr Karim submitted that  the  Appellant  was  effectively
    housebound.  He was not here today.  The judge had made findings on the
    evidence and the Secretary of State  had  to  show  that  there  was  a
    "perversity" in the decision-making process, which was a  high  hurdle,
    and which could no be met on the facts of this case.  It cannot be said
    that  no  enquiries  were  made  about   the   Appellant's   care   and
    reintegration  in  Bangladesh.   There  were  two  bundles  before  the
    Tribunal.  These showed  the  direct  contact  having  been  made  with
    various  hospitals  and  institutions  in  Bangladesh  and  there   was
    confirmation that there were no geriatric facilities in Bangladesh  for
    this Appellant.  There was a lengthy email sent by the Sponsor, the son
    of the Appellant, and this met with the confirmation that no facilities
    were available for the Appellant's care.

12. Indeed, there was an expressed  concession  made  by  the  Respondent's
    representative in the previous appeal that the Appellant had no  family
    left in Bangladesh (see paragraph 5).  The  judge  proceeded  with  the
    application of Devaseelan on the facts of this case (see paragraph  7).
    He set out the Immigration Rules (see paragraph 9) he observed how  the
    Appellant's case had been set out in the  documentary  evidence  before
    him (see paragraph 10).  He confirmed how this showed the Appellant  to
    be 65 years of age and being in poor health and  incapable  of  looking
    after himself (see paragraph 11).  He then went on to say  that,  "Many
    efforts have been made to find suitable care for him in Bangladesh  but
    to no avail.  There is no-one to whom he can turn for physical support"
    (paragraph 12).  It was after having observed all  of  this,  that  the
    judge came to the firm conclusion that, "The Appellant  no  longer  has
    any ties to  Bangladesh  as  his  family  is  in  the  United  Kingdom"
    (paragraph 13).

13. The fact that the reference here is to the Appellant's family does  not
    mean to say that the focus has only been on the family because  in  the
    previous paragraphs the judge had  set  out  everything  that  went  to
    showing how the Appellant had no meaningful ties  to  Bangladesh.   The
    case of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  60  makes
    it clear that what one has to show are "meaningful"  ties.   The  judge
    refers to this particularly  at  paragraph  16  of  the  determination.
    Therefore, all the evidence has been meticulously referred  to  by  the
    judge.

14.  This  was  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement   with   the   judge's
    determination.  As for the question of integration, the judge makes  it
    quite clear that, "Attempts seem to have been made to effect a form  of
    integration by way of finding residential care  for  the  Appellant  in
    Bangladesh but these have proved fruitless" (paragraph 18).   It  could
    not be said that the decision was perverse.

15. In reply, Mr Walker submitted that as far as reference has been made to
    the two bundles of evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  it
    was likely that the person who drafted the  Grounds  of  Appeal  before
    this Tribunal would not have had access to this evidence,  and  it  was
    important that this was made clear.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  It is well-known
    that perversity "represents a very high hurdle" (see paragraph 11 of  R
    (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, and  it  salutary  to  bear  in  mind  Lord
    Justice Brookes' statement that, "Far too often practitioners  use  the
    word 'irrational' or 'perverse' where  these  epithets  are  completely
    inappropriate" (paragraph 12).  This is a case where these comments are
    particularly opposite.  The judge had referred to a concession  at  the
    earlier hearing in 2013 where it had been conceded that  the  Appellant
    did not have any family left in Bangladesh.  He had applied the Rule in
    Devaseelan.  He had made findings of fact  on  the  basis  of  the  two
    bundles of evidence before him  now.   He  had  noted  the  Appellant's
    condition.  He had noted  how  many  efforts  had  been  made  to  find
    suitable care for the Appellant in Bangladesh but to no avail.  He  had
    addressed his  mind  to  the  fact  that  what  one  has  to  show  are
    "meaningful" ties and that in the light of  the  "significant  body  of
    evidence ... including several reports from his  medical  practitioner"
    it could not be said that the Appellant would be  able  to  look  after
    himself in Bangladesh.  He had proceeded to allow the appeal.  That was
    a course that was entirely open to the judge on the facts of this case.

Notice of Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th June 2016
