
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48470/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st March 2016                        |On 25th April 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                         mr sayed ashfaq ud din shah
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Grace Brown (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge D Morgan, promulgated on 28th July 2015, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 16th  July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed  the  appeal  of  Sayed  Ashfaq  Ud  Din  Shah,  whereupon  the
    Respondent  Secretary  of  State  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  18th
    February 1966.  He is 40 years of age.  He appeals against the decision
    of the Respondent refusing his application for leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant, made  on  4th  April  2014  following  a
    period of leave as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he  complied  with  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 245DD of the  Immigration  Rules  because  he  has  genuinely
    invested money in the business and there  is  a  contract  between  the
    Appellant and Rye Telecom.  The Respondent states that this contract is
    not a valid contract because it did not specify a fee.  The  Respondent
    also states that there are concerns in respect of the  market  research
    conducted by the Appellant.  The Appellant's response to this  is  that
    there are no requirements  in  the  Rules  for  market  research.   The
    Respondent also states that there are concerns about the  website  used
    by the Appellant to promote his business this was a  relationship  with
    another company.  The Appellant's response for this  is  that  websites
    are frequently registered to third parties.   The  Appellant  maintains
    that  he  has  completed  his  Masters  from  Glamorgan  University  in
    Strategic Human Resources Management and he has set up this business to
    pursue a human resource  management  providing  small  businesses,  who
    could not afford their own separate HR department, with human  resource
    management service.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that  he  was  persuaded  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requisite standard in the Immigration Rules and that he  was  genuinely
    intending  and  is  able  to  establish  a  human  resource  management
    business.  He genuinely intended to invest the available funds  and  he
    did not intend to take other employment.  The judge  went  on  to  say,
    "the best evidence of the genuineness of the  Appellant's  business  is
    that he is seeking  to pursue a business in which he has a postgraduate
    qualification for which he  maintains  and  accept  there  is  a  clear
    market" (see paragraph 12).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to give adequate
    reasons since coming to his conclusions and violated the  principle  in
    MK (Duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.

 6. On 5 February 2016, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    it was argued that the judge had not engaged with the reasons given  by
    the Secretary of State in the refusal letter because the refusal letter
    made it clear that the business plan appeared to have been copied  from
    different sources and text had been inserted but that was not explained
    by the Appellant and it is arguably insufficient to say that there  was
    nothing wrong with that without any more being explained by the  judge.



Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me on  21st  March  2016,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller,
    appearing on behalf  of  the  Respondent  as  the  Senior  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, stated that there was a complete lack of  reasoning
    to engage with the refusal letter by the  Home  Office.   For  example,
    from paragraph 7 the judge  accepts  simply  at  face  value  what  the
    Appellant states.  At paragraph 8 of the determination it is said  that
    no fee has been paid, but when Counsel says that the  page  is  missing
    that was the explanation for it, the judge simply accepts this at  face
    value.

 8. For her part, Ms Brown, appearing on behalf of the Appellant, submitted
    that this was nothing more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  decision.
    There was a Presenting Officer in attendance at the hearing.   He  made
    submissions with the judge fully recorded at paragraph  4.   The  judge
    did engage the refusal letter, and had the court bundles, and  referred
    to a "detailed skeleton argument" (at paragraph  6).   This  letter  is
    seven pages long and all it says is that at page 3 there  are  problems
    with the business plan, the contract,  the  market  research,  and  the
    website.  Yet, when one looks at each of these there  are  explanations
    that were given before the Tribunal.  For example,  if  one  takes  the
    "business plan", the quibble by the Respondent with  this  is  that  he
    chooses Americanised spelling but, it is not clear why this should be a
    problem in a globalised world.

 9. Second, if one takes  the  contract,  it  is  said  that  there  is  no
    specified fee, but as Counsel at  the  hearing  made  clear,  this  was
    because there was a page missing, and the determination  records  that,
    "a copy of which is reproduced at page 76 of the  Appellant's  bundle",
    but this was not evidence emerging just at the hearing itself, but  was
    available to the Home Office as well, and all  it  amounted  to  was  a
    single page number 76 missing from the bundle.

10. Third, if one takes the market research concern of  the  Respondent,  a
    list of companies was provided by the Appellant for the  Home  Office's
    consideration.

11. Finally, if one considers the concerns of a website  the  objection  to
    this is  that "checks of website domain registration records show  that
    your website appears to have been registered by Scorp Group Ltd,  which
    it transpired are legal representatives based in Manchester".  However,
    it is not clear why this should be a matter of any concern  whatsoever.



12. The refusal letter (at page 3) also goes  on  to  say  that  there  are
    concerns given the applicant's  immigration,  but  the  judge  gives  a
    resounding  answer  to  this  by  explaining  that  the  Appellant  had
    completed a Masters  from  Glamorgan  University  in  "Strategic  Human
    Resources Management" which is precisely  the  area  in  which  he  now
    wished to specialise further by setting up a business.  It  was  simply
    not clear what the objection was.  This was just  a  disagreement  with
    the determination of the Judge.

13. In reply Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that as far as market  research
    was concerned all the Appellant had done  was  to  produce  a  list  of
    companies and this was not sufficient.

No Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the  judge  does  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law such that I should set
    aside the decision (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007).  It is clear  from
    R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 that, "it is well-known that  'perversity'
    represents a very high  hurdle"  (at  paragraph  11).   That  level  of
    perversity has simply not been  demonstrated  in  this  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The  judge's  findings  at  paragraph  11  and  at
    paragraph  12  are  a  sufficient  answer  to  any  criticism  of   the
    determination.  In fact, as Budhathoki [2014] UKUT  341,  makes  clear,
    "it is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to rehearse every detail raised in the case".  The judge here has
    resolved the conflicts in the evidence in his concluding paragraphs.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 21st April 2016

