

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal

 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: IA/48040/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

 Heard at Field House
               Decision and Reasons Promulgated
 On 11 December 2015
             On 23 December 2015




                                   Before


                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA

                                   Between




               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     And






                        MRS COMFORT AGYEIMAAH ARTHUR


                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
 For the Respondent:   Mr M Rashid, counsel instructed by David A Grand


                                 DECISION AND REASONS


  1. This is an appeal against a decision of FTTJ R G Walters,  promulgated
     on 3 July 2015.


     Background


  2. The respondent, her partner and three minor children sought  leave  to
     remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of their private and  family
     lives which had been mainly or wholly established while none  of  them
     had leave to remain. That application was refused on 21 November  2014
     because the respondent considered that the requirements of  the  Rules
     relating to partners, parents and EX.1 could not be met.  In  relation
     to paragraph 276ADE, the respondent accepted that only the  middle  of
     the three children had lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  7  years,
     however it was not considered unreasonable for her to leave  with  her
     parents and siblings.  It  was  not  accepted  that  there  were  very
     significant obstacles to the integration of  the  respondent  and  her
     family in Ghana.  It was also considered  there  were  no  exceptional
     circumstances involved.





     The hearing before the FTTJ


  3. The FTTJ allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  on  the  basis  that  the
     appellant's eldest child, E,  born  in  October  2003,  may  meet  the
     requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  (1)(iv)  in   terms   of   living
     continuously in the United Kingdom for at least  seven  years.  Indeed
     the FTTJ saw evidence indicating that by the time of the hearing  this
     child may well have been residing in the United Kingdom for  close  to
     ten years. The  FTTJ  noted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  not
     considered the circumstances of E under the relevant paragraph of  the
     Rules or under EX.1 of Appendix FM.



      Error of law


    4. The grounds of appeal argue  that  the  FTTJ  "erred  by  not  giving
       adequate reason (sic) why he allowed the appeal under the Immigration
       rules (sic)."

    5. FTTJ Garratt granted permission, finding that it  was  arguable  that
       the FTTJ's decision was inadequate because it gives  no  reasons  for
       concluding that the appellant can meet the  provisions  of  paragraph
       276ADE. In addition, it was noted that at [7]  of  the  decision,  it
       appears to have been suggested that the burden  of  proving  that  it
       would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom rested on the  respondent.  It  was  said  that  [9]  of  the
       decision allowed for a similar arguable conclusion.


 The hearing


  6. Mr Walker  was  perplexed  as  to  why  the  Secretary  of  State  had
     challenged a decision, which allowed the appeal only to the extent  of
     remitting the case for further consideration. He was of the view  that
     the challenge was a waste of time.

  7. Mr Rashid advised me that the error found by the  FTTJ  was  that  the
     Secretary of State had not considered paragraph 276ADE in relation  to
     E. Furthermore, there had been no scrupulous analysis  in  respect  of
     section 55, as required by the case of JO and Others (section 55 duty)
     Nigeria (2014) UKUT 00517 (IAC).

  8. Ultimately, Mr Walker conceded that he was  unable  to  maintain  that
     there is an error of law.

  9. The FTTJ concluded only that the  respondent's  decision  was  not  in
     accordance with the law. Notwithstanding a mention of the  Immigration
     Rules at [13], it is clear from a reading of the entire paragraph that
     the appeal was allowed only to that limited  extent.  In  view  of  Mr
     Walker's concession, with which I  consider  to  be  rightly  made,  I
     conclude that the FTTJ made no error of law and accordingly uphold his
     decision.

Conclusion

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I uphold the decision of the FTTJ.

No anonymity direction was made by the FTTJ and I am aware of no reasons
for making such a direction now.

Signed      Date: 13 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
