
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48883/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         ekemini roseline ekpenyong
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Adeolu, Moorehouse solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 20 November
    2014 to refuse her application for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a
    domestic worker under paragraph 159EA of the Immigration Rules.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge M R Oliver allowed the appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The background to this appeal is not in dispute. The appellant  entered
    the UK on 22 October 2011 with leave as a domestic  worker.  Her  leave
    was extended, on the last occasion until 21 August 2014. On  9  October
    2013 she left her employment with the employer with whom she  had  come
    to the UK. She found new employment as a domestic worker and  commenced
    that employment on 9 June 2014. She applied for an extension  of  leave
    to remain on 22 July 2014.  The  respondent  refused  that  application
    under paragraph 159EA (ii) of the Rules on the basis that the appellant
    had not been employed in the UK as a domestic worker between 9  October
    2013 and 9 June 2014 and therefore could not demonstrate that  she  had
    continued to be employed  for  the  duration  of  leave  granted  as  a
    domestic worker in a private household as required by  paragraph  159EA
    (ii).

 4. The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  oral  evidence  and  correctly
    identified  the  issue  to  be  determined  at  paragraph  7   of   the
    determination where he said; 'The appeals [sic] turns on the meaning of
    "has continued to be employed for the duration of leave  granted  as  a
    domestic worker in a  private  household  in  paragraph  159EA  of  the
    rules.' The Judge went on to say  that  there  clearly  could  be  gaps
    between  employers  'of  short  duration'  which  would  not  interrupt
    continuity of employment. The Judge  then  said;  'Here,  however,  the
    interruption is at least 8 months'. The Judge went on to make  negative
    findings about the appellant including the fact that he  had  not  been
    told how the appellant maintained herself during the  8  month  period;
    there was no evidence as to how difficult it would have  been  for  the
    appellant to find other domestic work; he doubted the appellant's claim
    that she had left her previous employer because she was treated like  a
    slave given that she had been working for her for 8 years; he found  it
    difficult to accept the appellant's claim that she was unaware  of  how
    to contact the Home Office given the ease with which she  did  so  when
    she found further employment; the appellant failed to inform  the  Home
    Office of the end of her employment with her first employer  until  she
    made an application for an extension; and, although she says  that  her
    new employment began on 9 June 2014, the  contract  is  dated  the  day
    before the application for an  extension.  Having  made  all  of  these
    findings the Judge concluded at paragraph 8;

         "In the absence of evidence that she did any positive act in breach
         of her leave I find, with some reluctance, that she  has  satisfied
         the requirement of continuity."

 5. In the grounds of appeal it is submitted on behalf of the Secretary  of
    State that the conclusion lacks reasoning or is perverse.  Ms  Fijiwala
    submitted that the Judge applied the wrong test in paragraph 8 in  that
    there does not need to be evidence of a positive act in breach  of  the
    appellant's  leave.  She  submitted  that  the  issue  is  whether  the
    appellant has shown continuous employment as  a  domestic  worker.  She
    submitted that the Judge made clear findings that there was a gap of  8
    months which is more than a short gap. She  submitted  that  the  Judge
    should have dismissed the appeal in light of his findings at  paragraph
    7.

 6. Mr  Adeolu  submitted  that  the  Judge  had  no  guidance  as  to  the
    interpretation of 'continued to be employed' in paragraph  159EA  (ii).
    He submitted that there  is  no  definition  within  the  Rules  or  in
    guidance or case  law.  He  submitted  that  breaks  are  permitted  in
    continuity of employment under the provisions for Tier 2  work  permits
    where periods of 28 or  60  days  are  permitted  to  seek  alternative
    employment and that absences of 6 months are not counted in determining
    continuity of residence in relation to indefinite leave to  remain.  He
    submitted that in the absence of guidance in the Rules or in policy  or
    case law the Judge had a discretion based on the facts of the case  and
    his judgement and that he was entitled to exercise that  discretion  in
    the appellant's favour. He submitted that some of the concerns set  out
    by the Judge in paragraph 7 are not relevant and some were based  on  a
    lack of evidence.

 7. Ms Fijiwala accepted that there is no guidance as to  what  constitutes
    continuity of employment under paragraph 159EA (ii). She also  accepted
    that there can be gaps between employers of short duration,  as  stated
    by the Judge. However she submitted that, for the reasons given in  the
    determination, the Judge in this case was clearly  not  satisfied  with
    the gap in this case. She submitted that, having made the  findings  he
    went on to  ask  himself  the  wrong  question,  that  is  whether  the
    appellant had done 'any positive act'  in  breach  of  her  leave.  The
    question should have been whether the appellant had  been  continuously
    employed. She submitted that the Judge had erred in  failing  to  apply
    the law to his findings of fact.

Error of Law

 8. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did make  a  material
    error of law. Having made findings and expressed  concerns  as  to  the
    duration of the gap in employment the Judge went on to allow the appeal
    on the ground that there was no evidence that the  appellant  'did  any
    positive act in breach of her leave'. In my view it is not  clear  what
    this means. Paragraph 159EA (ii) requires the  Judge  to  be  satisfied
    that the appellant 'has continued to be employed for  the  duration  of
    leave granted as a domestic worker in a private household'.  The  Judge
    did not make a properly reasoned finding as to this issue and therefore
    failed to apply the law to the facts found. To that  extent  the  Judge
    erred in law.

 9. Mr Adeolu asked that I remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    the interests of justice as  the  appellant  needs  to  submit  further
    evidence. However the Secretary of State did not challenge the  Judge's
    findings of fact and  there  was  no  cross  appeal  by  the  appellant
    challenging these findings. Further, the appellant did not  submit  any
    further evidence for consideration should the Upper Tribunal remake the
    decision.  In  these  circumstances  I  considered  that  it   is   not
    appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Instead  I
    indicated that I would remake the decision  myself.  As  there  was  no
    challenge to the findings of  fact  I  preserve  them  and  remake  the
    decision on the basis of the findings of fact made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.

Remaking the decision

10. Mr Adeolu submitted that it would be open to me to decide that 8 months
    is not a long enough gap to break continuity of employment. Ms Fijiwala
    submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that 8 months is not
    a short gap and that this finding has not been challenged.

11. It is not in dispute that the appellant was not employed as a  domestic
    worker between 9 October 2013 and 9 June 2014, a period of 8 months.  I
    note that there is no guidance as to the  interpretation  of  paragraph
    159EA (ii). I therefore give the  provision  its  ordinary  meaning.  I
    accept Ms Fijiwala's submission  and  the  Judge's  opinion  that  gaps
    between employers of short duration would not interrupt  continuity  of
    employment. However in my view a gap between employers of 8  months  is
    not one of short duration. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept
    the explanation put forward for  the  appellant  leaving  her  previous
    employment and noted  the  lack  of  evidence  around  the  appellant's
    efforts to secure alternative employment. In these circumstances I find
    that the appellant has not shown that she continued to be employed  for
    the duration of leave granted as a domestic worker in light of the  gap
    of 8 months  between  employers.  Accordingly  the  appellant  has  not
    discharged the  burden  upon  her  to  establish  that  she  meets  the
    requirements of the Rules.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider  the  appeal  under  any
    other provisions of the Rules  or  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and no challenge was made to his failure  to
    do so. No evidence was put to me in relation to the appellant's private
    life and no submissions were made. There is nothing before me  to  show
    that the appellant can meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the
    Rules. There is nothing to indicate  that  there  is  anything  in  the
    appellant's case which would require consideration outside the Rules.

Conclusion

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

14. I set the decision aside and remake it by dismissing the appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State under the Immigration Rules.


Signed      Date: 7 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

