
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48681/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M I
                        (ANONYMITY HAS BEEN DIRECTED)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hossain, on behalf of A1 Law Chambers, London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First Tier Tribunal

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 2  October  1986.   He
    appealed against the Respondent's decision of 1 December 2014  refusing
    him leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  and  cancelling  his  entry
    clearance under Paragraph 320B of HC395 as  amended.   His  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Flynn.  He allowed the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules in a Decision promulgated on 27 July 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal Foudi on 31  October  2015.
    The appeal concerned the investigation by ATS into alleged  bogus  test
    results at various sites holding TOEIC tests on behalf of ETS.  It  was
    alleged that the Appellant relied on one such bogus  test.   The  Judge
    found that the evidence relied on by the Respondent did  not  meet  the
    high test required to establish that a fraud had been committed by  the
    Appellant but the Respondent states that the Judge  failed  to  explain
    why he discounted the witness statements relied on  by  the  Respondent
    and that this lack of reasoning is an arguable error of law.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that she is relying on the grounds  of
    application.   She  submitted  that  the  Respondent  provided   proper
    evidence to show  the  Appellant's  deception.   She  referred  to  the
    witness statements from Peter Millington and Rebecca Collings and an e-
    mail  document  from  ETS  Taskforce  dated  10  September  2014.   She
    submitted that based on the evidence provided by the witnesses and  the
    e-mail  document  there  is  evidence   of   proxy   test   taking   or
    impersonation.

 6. I was referred to Paragraphs 22  and  23  of  the  First  Tier  Judge's
    decision and the Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge has  taken
    a  biased  view  of  the  statements  by  Rebecca  Collings  and  Peter
    Millington.  She submitted that the grounds make it clear  exactly  how
    the tests are identified and validated and that in this case there  was
    substantial invalidity relating to the test.

 7. I was referred to Paragraph 24 of the decision which states there is no
    evidence to show the reason ETS invalidated the Appellant's  test.  The
    Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge had no engagement with  the
    Respondent's evidence.  The Judge gave  no  reason  for  rejecting  the
    Respondent's evidence.   The  Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  the
    Appellant may have taken a test later which he passed but that does not
    mean that the test in question was not taken by proxy.

 8. I was referred to Paragraph 27 of the decision which  states  that  the
    print-out from ETS states that  the  Appellant  took  the  test  on  26
    September 2012 whereas the extract from the Home Office  records  (F1),
    states that the test was taken on 21 and  26  September  2012  and  the
    Appellant has consistently stated that he took the test over  two  days
    so his evidence is supported by the Home Office`s  record.   There  was
    discussion about this.  Only one test was invalidated and this test was
    taken on 26 September 2012.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Judge did  not  consider  the
    methodology in the witness statements provided by the Respondent.   She
    submitted that the burden of proof was discharged by the Respondent.

10. Mr Hossain for the Appellant submitted that the permission states  that
    the Judge found that the evidence relied on by the Respondent  did  not
    meet the high  test  required  to  establish  that  a  fraud  had  been
    committed by the Appellant.  He submitted that the Judge  followed  the
    case of AA Nigeria (2010) EWCA Civ773.

11. I was referred to  Paragraph  28  of  the  decision  which  states  the
    Respondent has failed to demonstrate, on the balance  of  probabilities
    that the Appellant used deception  or  provided  a  false  certificate.
    This is a lower standard of  proof  than  the  standard  of  proof  the
    Respondent had to satisfy.  The  Appellant's  representative  submitted
    that at Paragraph 21 the Judge states that the Respondent relied  on  a
    computer print-out from ETS and two witnesses.   The  report  from  ETS
    states that the Appellant took the test at Colwell  College  which  the
    Appellant denies.  The representative pointed  out  that  there  is  no
    other evidence to confirm the location of the test, for example a  copy
    of the test certificate or identity  evidence,  including  photographs,
    which the Appellant  said  were  taken  when  he  sat  the  test.   The
    representative submitted that the Judge considered everything that  was
    before him and his reasoning is clear.

12. The representative submitted that the Judge  carefully  considered  the
    witness statements.  Rebecca Collings  refers  to  ETS  confirming  the
    definition of "questionable" which is where an individual's test result
    is  cancelled  on  the  basis  of  test  administration   irregularity,
    including the fact that the test was taken at a UK testing centre where
    numerous other results have been invalidated on the basis of  a  match.
    In Mr Millington's statement the Judge refers to the  Appellant`s  test
    being "invalid"  not  "questionable".   He  submitted  that  the  Judge
    highlighted the two statements.  He  submitted  that  if  Ms  Collings'
    statement is correct then a new test should have been  offered  as  she
    states that the Appellant's test was "questionable" not "invalid".   He
    referred  to  the  differences  in  the  two  witness  statements.   He
    submitted that it appears that this Appellant's  test  was  invalidated
    only because it was taken at a test centre where numerous other results
    had been invalidated on the basis of a match.  He  submitted  that  the
    witnesses' statements  are  not  directly  linked  to  this  particular
    appeal, they are purely an explanation of how the tests are run.

13. The representative submitted that the Judge considered the evidence and
    considered credibility.  The Judge noted that the Appellant  had  a  B2
    result before, in  an  English  test  in  2013.   He  referred  to  the
    Presenting Officer's submission that  the  Appellant  may  have  passed
    tests after this test but that is not the case. He passed tests at  the
    correct level long before he sat this particular test.

14. I was referred to the Appellant's bundle which shows that in  2009  the
    Appellant passed a speaking test equivalent to B2 level and in 2011  he
    passed another test in English speaking at B2 level.  He submitted that
    there would be no reason for the Appellant to use a proxy test in  2012
    as he can speak English, as was clear from the Hearing.

15. I was referred to the Respondent's bundle and the  interview  with  the
    Appellant, in which the Immigration Officer found the Appellant  to  be
    credible.

16. The representative submitted that in the decision, the First Tier Judge
    also found the Appellant to be credible.

17. He submitted that each case has to be decided on its own facts and  the
    Judge has done this and  has  done  this  correctly  and  given  proper
    explanations of why he has come to the decision he has.

18. The Presenting Officer submitted that the statements of Ms Collings and
    Mr Millington are clear.  It  is  only  when  tests  are  found  to  be
    "questionable" that a re-test is  offered.   She  submitted  that  this
    Appellant's test was found to be "invalid" so no re-test  was  offered.
    She submitted that no reasons were given by the Judge for rejecting the
    Respondent's evidence.

Decision

19. I have to decide if there is a material error of law in the First  Tier
    Judge's decision.  The Judge has carefully considered the evidence  put
    forward by the Respondent but is not satisfied that this evidence meets
    the standard of proof required to  establish  that  a  fraud  has  been
    committed by the Appellant.

20. The Judge sets out the statements of  Ms  Collings  and  Mr  Millington
    pointing out differences in their  statements  and  he  refers  to  the
    computer print-out from ETS which states that the  Appellant  took  the
    test at Colwell College which the Appellant  denies.  No  evidence  was
    provided by the Respondent to support this.  The Appellant states  that
    he took the test at the College of Advanced  Studies.   The  Judge  has
    noted that the Appellant previously gained a  B2  result  when  he  was
    tested at the University of Ulster  and  a  certificate  for  that  was
    produced.

21. It is  clear  that  the  Judge  found  the  Appellant  to  be  credible
    (Paragraph 26).  The Judge  noted  that  the  Immigration  Officer  who
    interviewed him on 18 August 2014 also found him to be credible and  he
    spoke English at the First Tier Hearing.  At  Paragraph  26  the  Judge
    states that he is satisfied that the Appellant achieved level B2  in  a
    test he took before his 2013 application.

22. The Judge has clearly considered all the evidence in  the  round.   The
    Judge has given reasons for finding that the standard of proof was  not
    achieved by the Respondent relating to the accusation of fraud.

Notice of Decision

23. I find that there is no material error of law in the Judge's  decision.
    His decision, promulgated on 27 July 2015, allowing  the  appeal,  must
    stand.

24. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray
