

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)         Appeal Number:  IA/48253/2013
            IA/48254/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                  Decision  and  Reasons
                                             promulgated
On 17 October 2014     On 20 October 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                        1) Eranga Dulmali Jayasuriya
                     2) Kasun Sameera De Silva Kadupiti
                           (No anonymity directions made)
                                                   Respondents
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondents:   Ms. G. Peterson of Counsel instructed  by  Lloyds  PR
                       Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. These are linked appeals against the decisions of First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Deavin promulgated on 6 February 2014, allowing Ms  Jayasuriya's
      and Mr Kadupiti's appeals against the Secretary of  State's  decisions
      dated 2 November 2013 to refuse to vary  their  leave  to  remain  as,
      respectively, a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant  and  her  dependant,
      and to remove them from the UK.

   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Ms
      Jayasuriya and Mr Kadupiti  are  the  respondents,  for  the  sake  of
      consistency with the proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  I
      shall hereafter refer  to  Mrs  Jayasuriya  and  Mr  Kadupiti  as  the
      Appellants and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.


Background

   3. The Appellants are nationals of Sri Lanka born on 20 March 1982 and 23
      October 1982. They are wife and husband.  At  all  material  times  Mr
      Kadupiti (the Second  Appellant)  has  been  treated  for  immigration
      purposes as the dependant of his wife and has been granted  leave  'in
      line' with her. The outcome of his appeal depends upon the outcome  of
      Mrs Jayasuriya's (the First Appellant's) appeal.


   4. The Appellants entered the UK on 15 March 2010 with leave valid  to  2
      April 2011 - the  First  Appellant  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
      migrant, the Second Appellant as her dependant. A  further  period  of
      leave was granted to each of them until 27 August 2012.


   5. On 5 April 2012 the First Appellant made an application to vary  leave
      to remain as a Tier 1 (Post Study Work) Migrant. (The Second Appellant
      also made a further application as his wife's  dependant.)  The  First
      Appellant relied, in part, upon having secured a BA (Hons)  degree  in
      International Business from the City of London College.  However,  the
      degree was not awarded until 6 June 2012.  In  the  circumstances  the
      Respondent refused the First Appellant's application for  reasons  set
      out in a combined Notice of  Immigration  Decision  and  'reasons  for
      refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  2  November  2013  with  particular
      reference to paragraphs 245FD(c) and 245FD(d) of the Immigration Rules
      - essentially because she had not been awarded her degree by the  date
      she submitted her application. (For completeness I note that there was
      an earlier refusal of the  application  in  September  2012,  but  the
      Respondent's decision was subsequently withdrawn.)


   6. The Second Appellant was refused 'in line' with his wife.


   7. The Appellants appealed to the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed the appeals under the Immigration Rules for reasons set out in
      his determination.

   8. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal which
      was initially refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chambers,  but
      subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Freeman.


Error of Law

   9. In respect of the award of the First Appellant's degree postdating the
      making of her application for variation of leave to remain, the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge summarised the parties' respective positions:  the
      Appellants' at paragraphs 20, 21, and 29 - essentially "An application
      is open and can be varied, up until the date of  decision"  (paragraph
      21); the Respondent's at paragraph  27  -  "The  Appellant  must  been
      awarded the qualification at the date of application". At paragraph 31
      the Judge decided in favour of the Appellants:  "It  is  open  to  the
      [First] Appellant to amend her application before it is considered and
      this is what she did by sending her degree award to the Respondent  as
      soon as it came into her possession". The appeals of  both  Appellants
      were allowed in consequence.


  10. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Freeman  addressed  the  matter  succinctly  in
      granting the Respondent permission to appeal:  "The  (main)  appellant
      made her application on 5 April 2012, but was not awarded  her  degree
      till 6 June: as the renewed grounds themselves point out, it was  held
      in  Raju  and  others  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  754,  that   the   necessary
      qualification must be obtained before an application is made as a post
      study work migrant".


  11. Ms Peterson without expressly  conceding  the  appeal  on  this  point
      nonetheless very properly acknowledged the difficulty the case of Raju
      and the case of Nasim and others (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013]
      UKUT 00610 (IAC) presented the Appellants, and did not seek to advance
      any  submissions  in  defence  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge's
      reasoning in this regard.


  12. I find that the Judge was plainly in error for the reasons  identified
      by Judge Freeman. The Judge misdirected  himself  in  respect  of  the
      Rules, and his decision in this regard must be set aside accordingly.


Re-making the Decision

  13. In light of Raju only one outcome is feasible in remaking the decision
      under the Rules. The First Appellant did not satisfy the  requirements
      of the Rules: the Respondent's decision was  in  accordance  with  the
      Immigration Rules. The  concomitant  decision  to  refuse  the  Second
      Appellant variation of leave was also in accordance  with  the  Rules.
      The Appellants' appeals are dismissed under the Rules accordingly.


  14. Ms Peterson did not seek to dispute this outcome, but  rather  invited
      me to permit the Appellants an opportunity  to  advance  evidence  and
      arguments in respect of Article 8 of the ECHR by  reference  to  their
      private lives. (In respect of family  life,  I  note  that  the  First
      Appellant was delivered of a child 3 weeks ago. However,  any  removal
      of the Appellants in consequence of the Respondent's decision will  be
      as a family unit, and as such it is not to  be  contended  that  there
      would be any interference with their mutual family lives.)


  15. The Appellants' grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  comprise
      19 paragraphs,  only  one  of  which  makes  reference  to  the  ECHR.
      Paragraph 18 is in these  terms:  "The  removal  decision  is  not  in
      accordance with the law and is in breach  of  the  appellant's  rights
      under the Human Rights Act 1988 and the  European  Convention  of  the
      Human Rights. (ECHR)". No specific article of the ECHR is  identified;
      far less is any attempt made to particularise this ground of appeal.


  16. Nor is it apparent that there was any attempt to  develop  or  amplify
      ECHR grounds in the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. Only brief
      evidence  was  heard  from  the  First  Appellant  (determination   at
      paragraph 7), and no submission is recorded as  having  been  made  in
      reliance upon Article 8  in  the  alternative  to  the  submission  in
      respect of the Rules (paragraphs 28-29). The Appellants have not  made
      a cross-appeal in respect of the First-tier Tribunal's approach to the
      ECHR, and no Rule 24 response has been filed inviting the Tribunal  to
      uphold the Judge's decision on an alternative basis. Yet  further,  no
      materials have been filed, pursuant to the Directions  issued  by  the
      Upper Tribunal to the effect  that  the  parties  should  prepare  for
      today's hearing on the basis that the Upper Tribunal would be able  to
      consider any further evidence that the parties might wish to rely upon
      in remaking the decision in the appeal.


  17. I invited Ms Peterson to identify what matters  the  Appellants  might
      wish to advance if they were permitted time to  prepare  evidence  and
      submissions in respect of Article 8 beyond the length of time they had
      been  in  the  UK,  the  First  Appellant's  studies  and  the  Second
      Appellant's employment. She acknowledged  that  there  was  "hardly  a
      surfeit of information"; essentially time  was  sought  to  permit  Ms
      Peterson's  instructing  solicitors  to  take  instructions  from  the
      Appellants and file evidence. Ms Peterson reminded me that some of the
      appellants in Nasim and others (Raju:  reasons  not  to  follow?)  had
      indeed been afforded  a  further  hearing  to  air  Article  8  issues
      (paragraphs 115-117). However, in this latter context I note that  the
      relevant appellants had "done so in the previous course of proceedings
      in their appeals or by responding to the directions given by the Upper
      Tribunal" (paragraph 115). No  such  reliance  had  been  made  herein
      before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, and there had been no indication
      of a wish to advance matters relevant to Article 8 in response to  the
      Directions previously given by the Upper Tribunal, or otherwise  prior
      to today's hearing.


  18. The difficulty in relying upon Article 8 as a  person  with  leave  to
      study in the UK is highlighted in Patel and others [2013] UKSC 72 (see
      in particular per Lord Carnwath at paragraph 57) and also in Nasim and
      others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC).


  19. In my judgement the Appellants have had more than adequate opportunity
      to put before the Tribunal any evidence upon which they might wish  to
      rely in this regard, and also to formulate any  relevant  submissions.
      To date no such evidence has been filed, and no such submissions  have
      been formulated. Moreover  Ms  Peterson  was  not  in  a  position  to
      summarise the substance of any claim  that  might  give  rise  to  any
      prospect of success  in  this  regard.  I  have  noted  Ms  Peterson's
      reference  to  the  fact  that  the  earlier  decisions  refusing  the
      Appellants'  applications  were  withdrawn,  but   in   all   of   the
      circumstances I do not consider this  circumstance  is  of  any  great
      significance in advancing an Article 8 claim based  on  the  potential
      interference  with  their  respective  private  lives  were  they  now
      required to quit the  UK:  more  particularly,  it  does  not  warrant
      extending further time  to  prepare  their  case  in  this  regard  in
      circumstances where the Appellants have already had adequate time.


  20. Accordingly, in circumstances where no Article  8  case  was  advanced
      before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  no  Article  8  case  has  been
      formulated for consideration by the Upper Tribunal, I am not minded to
      find any material  error  in  respect  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
      failure expressly to address Article 8,  and  I  do  not  consider  it
      appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to permit  further  exploration  of
      that aspect of the appeals. Were it otherwise, and were I prepared  to
      consider Article 8, the cases would fall to be determined on the basis
      of the available materials, which in my judgement demonstrate  nothing
      that would take the Appellants beyond the  restrictive  scope  of  the
      decisions in Patel and Nasim and others (Article 8).


  21. There is no other challenge to the section 47 removal decisions.


Notice of Decisions

  22. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal Judge were each  based  on  a
      material error of law and are set aside.


  23. I re-make the decisions in the appeals. The appeals are dismissed.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     17 October 2014




