
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48171/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |     Decision & Reasons          |
|                                              |Promulgated                      |
|On 8 January 2016                             |     On 20 January 2016          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                            PROSPER KELVIN SAGAY
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bahja of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria.  His date of birth is 29 October
    1973.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's decision dated  20  November  2014
    refusing his application for further leave to remain under Appendix  FM
    paragraphs 276ADE(1)-276DH of  the  Rules.   Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Wyman (the judge) allowed the appeal against the  respondent's
    refusal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the  ECHR  because
    she found  that  there  would  be  "insurmountable  obstacles"  to  the
    appellant having a family life with his wife in Nigeria.  She  set  out
    her reasons in that regard at [64]-[67] of her decision.  She  went  on
    to consider paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and  found  for  the  reasons
    that she set  out  at  [68]-[69]  of  her  decision,  that  there  were
    "exceptional circumstances" in the sense that whilst there would not be
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Nigeria,  there
    would be significant obstacles to the  appellant's  wife's  integration
    because she had said in oral evidence that she would  not  go  back  to
    Nigeria due to her recent experience there  of  carjacking.   In  those
    circumstances, the judge found there were  "exceptional  circumstances"
    and allowed the appeal under the Rules and under Article 8.

 3. The respondent appealed the judge's decision claiming  that  the  judge
    had materially  misdirected  herself  in  law  in  considering  whether
    insurmountable obstacles existed.  The grounds claimed  the  judge  had
    not imposed the rigorous threshold as considered in Agyarko [2015] EWCA
    Civ 440 such that she  had  erred  in  her  assessment  as  to  whether
    insurmountable obstacles existed and further, that the judge  erred  in
    an  inadequate  analysis  that  "exceptional  circumstances"   existed.
    Overall, the judge's Article 8 assessment was entirely misguided.

 4. Judge Cox granted permission to appeal on 14 October  2015.   He  found
    the grounds arguably revealed a material error of law in that the judge
    misdirected herself in her consideration of "insurmountable  obstacles"
    under EX.1 and also with regard to Article 8 outside  the  Rules.   The
    test was stringent.  See Agyarko.  The judge arguably applied too low a
    standard.

 5. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Mr Nath relied upon the grounds and drew my attention in particular  to
    [25] of Agyarko.

 7. Mr Bahja relied upon his skeleton argument.  In particular that Agyarko
    and SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 were being appealed to  the  Supreme
    Court.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 8. The  respondent  accepted  the  appellant  satisfied  the  relationship
    requirements  of  E-LTRP.1.2-1.12  but  not  the   immigration   status
    requirements of E-LTRP such that the respondent  went  on  to  consider
    whether EX.1 applied in  terms  of  E-LTRP.2.2.   EX.1(b)  provided  an
    exception to eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a partner.
     No issue was taken that the appellant and the sponsor  had  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship.   The  appellant's  spouse  is  a  British
    citizen.   The  issue  was  with  regard  to  whether  there  were  any
    insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  in  Nigeria  rather
    than in the UK.  EX.2 reads as follows:

         "For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) 'insurmountable  obstacles'
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner."

 9. Case law has  subsequently  considered  "insurmountable  obstacles"  in
    relation to EX.1.  See Agyarko, in particular at [21]-[25]:

         "21.  The  phrase  'insurmountable  obstacles'  as  used  in   this
             paragraph of the Rules clearly imposes a  high  hurdle  to  be
             overcome by an applicant for leave to remain under the  Rules.
             The test is significantly more demanding than a mere  test  of
             whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to  continue
             their family life outside the United Kingdom.

          22. This interpretation is in line with  the  relevant  Strasbourg
             jurisprudence.  The phrase 'insurmountable obstacles' has  its
             origin  in  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  in   relation   to
             immigration cases in a family context, where it  is  mentioned
             as one factor  among  others  to  be  taken  into  account  in
             determining whether any  right  under  Article  8  exists  for
             family members to be granted leave to remain or leave to enter
             a Contracting State: see e.g. Rodrigues Da Silva and Hoogkamer
             v Netherlands (2007) 44EHRR 34  [39]  ('...whether  there  are
             insurmountable obstacles in  the  way  of  the  family  living
             together in the country of origin of one or more of them...').
              The phrases used in the Rules is intended to  have  the  same
             meaning as in the Strasbourg jurisprudence.  It is clear  that
             the ECTHR regards it as a  formulation  imposing  a  stringent
             test in respect of that factor, as is illustrated by  Jeunesse
             v  Netherlands  (see  [117]:  there  were  no   insurmountable
             obstacles to the family settling in Suriname, even though  the
             applicant and her family would experience hardship  if  forced
             to do so).

           23.  For  clarity,  two  points  should   be   made   about   the
             'insurmountable  obstacles'  criterion.   First,  although  it
             involves a stringent test, it is obviously  intended  in  both
             the case law and the Rules to be interpreted in a sensible and
             practical rather than a purely literal way: see, e.g., the way
             in which  the  Grand  Chamber  approached  that  criterion  in
             Jeunesse v Netherlands at [117]; also the observation by  this
             court in MF (Nigeria) v the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] EWCA Civ 1192;  [2014]  1WLR  544,  at  [49]
             (although it should be noted that the passage in the  judgment
             of the Upper Tribunal in Izuazu v Secretary of State  for  the
             Home Department [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC); [2013] Imm AR 453  there
             referred to, at  [53]-[59],  was  making  a  rather  different
             point, namely that  explained  in  [24]  below  regarding  the
             significance of the criterion in the context of an  Article  8
             assessment).

          24. Secondly, the 'insurmountable obstacles' criterion is used  in
             the Rules to define  one  of  the  preconditions  set  out  in
             Section EX.1(b) which need to be satisfied before an applicant
             can claim to be entitled to be granted leave to  remain  under
             the Rules.  In that context, it is not simply a factor  to  be
             taken into account.  However, in the context of making a wider
             Article 8 assessment outside the Rules, it is a factor  to  be
             taken into account, not an absolute requirement which  has  to
             be satisfied in every single case across the  whole  range  of
             cases covered by Article 8; see [29]-[30] below.

          25. ......The mere facts that Mr Benette is a British citizen, has
             lived all his life in the United Kingdom and has a job here  -
             and hence  might  it  difficult  and  might  be  reluctant  to
             relocate to Ghana to continue their family life there -  could
             not constitute insurmountable obstacles to his doing so."

10. Both with regard to the substantive appeal in terms of the Rules,  case
    law, in particular Agyarko and with regard to S.117B, I find the  judge
    erred in failing to take account of the public interest  considerations
    applicable and in failing to carry out or carrying  out  an  inadequate
    analysis with regard to the same.

11. I drew the advocate's attention to Sunassee [2005]  EWHC  1604  (Admin)
    which gave a helpful analysis of SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  and
    sought  to  simplify  the  complex  requirements  under  the  Rules  by
    suggesting   that   whether   circumstances   were   "compelling"    or
    "exceptional" was not a  matter  of  substance  rather,  they  must  be
    relevant, weighty and not fully provided for within  the  Rules.   That
    is, there must be a  "gap",  not  covered  by  the  Rules.   Whilst  in
    practice, those gap issues  were  likely  to  be  both  compelling  and
    exceptional, that was not a legal requirement.

12. The judge erred because she failed to carry  out  any  analysis  or  an
    inadequate  analysis  with  regard  to  the   public   interest.    The
    exceptional circumstances identified were that the  appellant's  spouse
    had lived here for twenty years and had only  returned  to  Nigeria  on
    three occasions for very short visits.  During the last visit  she  was
    the victim of  an  attempted  carjacking  which  frightened  her.   The
    appellant and his wife both have family  in  Nigeria  although  contact
    with them has been limited.  I find the judge's  analysis  that  whilst
    there would not be significant obstacles to the appellant's integration
    back in Nigeria, there would be significant  obstacles  to  his  wife's
    integration there due to the recent attempted carjacking inadequate.  I
    set aside the  decision  of  the  judge  and  proceed  to  re-make  the
    decision.

13. I have carefully considered but do not  accept  that  the  matters  the
    judge set out in the evidence  of  the  hearing  at  [28]-[45]  or  her
    findings and conclusions at [55]-[69] of the decision are  such  as  to
    amount to compelling  circumstances  preventing  the  location  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor to Nigeria.  The appellant  and  the  sponsor
    both have family in Nigeria.  They can both  obtain  employment  there.
    See Agyarko at [25]. Agyarko was authority  for  the  proposition  that
    merely because the sponsor had  lived  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    considerable time and had a part-time job here such that he might  find
    it difficult and might be reluctant to relocate to continue family life
    abroad, could not constitute insurmountable obstacles to him doing  so.



14. I am also required to give consideration to the  aspects  specified  in
    S.117 of the 2002 Act as amended by the Immigration Act 2014.  There is
    an overlap between the Rules and S.117.  Relevant factors  under  S.117
    are as follows:

15. I bear in mind the public interest  considerations  in  S.117B  and  in
    particular S.117B(5)  that  little  weight  should  be  given  to  life
    established here when immigration status was  precarious.   See  SS  at
    [37] which discusses marriage and family life  to  a  foreign  national
    when that person had no right to be here.   I  find  these  are  issues
    which  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  considered  or  should   have
    considered at the time they entered into their relationship.

16. The appellant does not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    such that I have considered  his  circumstances  in  terms  of  SS  and
    Sunassee, described as the "gap" issues at [36] of  Sunassee.   I  find
    there are no relevant, weighty matters which are not fully provided for
    within the Rules.  If there are then I find the  respondent's  decision
    to be proportionate, for the reasons I have set out above.

17. For the reasons I have given, I set  aside  the  judge's  decision  and
    remake the same.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed under  the  Rules
    and on Human Rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

18. Appeal dismissed.

Anonymity direction not made.






Signed                              Date 8 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 8 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


