
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48183/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20th November 2015                |On 3rd December 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          PRISCILA DANSOA FRIMPONG
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mohzam of Burton & Burton Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal E M M Smith, promulgated on 27th March
    2015, to allow the appeal of  Ms  Frimpong  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal to  grant  to  her,  under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006, a residence card as the partner of the
    Sponsor, George Owusu Afram, who is a Dutch national,

 2. Ms Frimpong's application had been refused as it was not accepted  that
    she was in a durable relationship with the Sponsor.  The judge at first
    instance heard from Ms Frimpong and from  the  Sponsor  and  two  other
    witnesses. He found that the couple were in a durable relationship  and
    he allowed the appeal outright.

 3. In the application for permission to appeal, which now  stands  as  the
    Grounds of Appeal, the Secretary of State argued  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred  in  law  by  allowing  the  appeal  outright  as  the
    Secretary  of  State  had  not  yet  exercised  her  discretion   under
    Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.   It  was  said  that  having
    found that the couple were in a durable relationship  under  Regulation
    8(5) the judge should have remitted the case to the Secretary of  State
    for consideration under Regulation 17(4).  Reliance was placed  on  the
    reported decision in Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340
    (IAC).

 4. At the hearing Mr Mohzam, on behalf of  the  Respondent,  handed  in  a
    skeleton argument in which it was  argued  that  the  judge's  decision
    should stand on the basis that the Secretary of  State  had  in  effect
    already exercised her discretion.  Mr Mills said that  it  appeared  to
    him that the Secretary of State's appeal was irresistible.  He said the
    point in issue had been clear since the decision in Ihemedu was  handed
    down.  Unless there was a clear exercise of discretion by the Secretary
    of State a case such as this had to be remitted for the  discretion  to
    be exercised.  The refusal itself was simply  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State did not accept that the couple were  in  fact  in  a
    durable relationship.  In response Mr Mohzam  relied  upon  the  points
    made in his skeleton argument.  He said that  the  Secretary  of  State
    should have considered all  matters  at  the  same  time.   Finally  in
    response Mr Mills said that the point had been argued  before  but  had
    not  been  accepted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  discretion  under
    Regulation 17(4) was only reached once it was found that the  Appellant
    could qualify under Regulation 8 and  that  was  the  position  at  the
    hearing.

 5. Having heard those submissions I announced at the hearing  my  decision
    that there was a material error of law in the judge's decision to allow
    the appeal outright.  There was no challenge to  the  factual  findings
    with regard to the relationship and the judge's conclusion that  as  at
    the date of the hearing before him Ms Frimpong and the Sponsor were  in
    a durable relationship therefore stands.

 6. In the refusal letter the Secretary of State did not  accept  that  the
    Respondent qualified as an "extended family member"  and  she  did  not
    purport to exercise any discretion under Regulation 17(4).   Head  note
    (iii) of Ihemedu is very clear on the point  in  issue.   It  is  there
    stated:

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family member  a  matter  of  discretion.   Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law, leaving the matter of whether
         to exercise the discretion in the Appellant's favour or not to  the
         Secretary of State".

 7. Support for that view  also  comes  from  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Ukus (discretion: when reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307  (IAC)
    in which it is made clear that if a decision maker  has  not  exercised
    discretion vested in him the Tribunal's jurisdiction is  limited  to  a
    decision that the failure renders the decision "not in accordance  with
    the law" under Section 86(3)(a) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

 8. I accordingly find that the judge did err in purporting  to  find  that
    the Respondent should be granted a residence  card.   I  therefore  set
    aside his decision in that regard and remake the decision in terms that
    it having been found that the Respondent did  qualify  as  an  extended
    family  member  and  the  discretion  under  paragraph  17(4)  of   the
    Regulations not having been exercised the decision under appeal was not
    in accordance with  the  law  and  the  application  therefore  remains
    outstanding for a decision by the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error on  a  point
    of law and I set aside that decision insofar as it purported  to  allow
    the appeal outright.

10. I have remade the decision and for the reasons set out  above,  I  find
    that the decision under appeal was not in accordance with the law.  The
    application accordingly remains outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of
    State for exercise of her discretion  under  Regulation  17(4)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended.

11. The Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  no  fee  award  and  that
    decision stands.

12. No application was made for an anonymity order and  no  such  order  is
    made.


Signed   Date 26 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

