
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH--V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48362/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 7 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                           Mr abdul basit quddusi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A H Newax, counsel instructed by Woodford Wise
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davey, promulgated on 19 May 2016. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 27 September 2016.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The appellant entered the United Kingdom on 9 September 2007 as a  Tier
    4 migrant at the age of 16. On 30 June 2012 he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds.

 4.  On  11  February  2013,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  said
    application on the basis that at  the  time  of  the  application,  the
    appellant had spent less than 5  years  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  a
    temporary  category  and  could  not,  therefore,  meet  any   of   the
    requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Rules.  Furthermore,  the
    respondent did not accept that the appellant had no social or  cultural
    ties to his home country. The appellant did not claim to have a partner
    or child. There were considered to be no exceptional  circumstances.  A
    decision was also taken to remove the appellant under section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 5. The appellant appealed out of time. It was accepted  by  a  duty  judge
    that the notice of decision only came to the appellant's  attention  in
    November 2014 and therefore his appeal was  in  time.  His  grounds  of
    appeal stated that he wished to rely on his private and family life and
    length  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.  No  particulars  were
    provided.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appeal was initially listed for an  oral  hearing  on  4  September
    2015. On 28 August 2015, the appeal was adjourned by letter sent to the
    respondent, the appellant and Maalik & Co, his previous representative.
    A notice of hearing containing the new hearing date of 23  March  2016,
    was posted to the parties on  7  December  2016.  In  advance  of  that
    hearing, both parties submitted bundles of documentary evidence.

 7. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  did  not
    attend. His representative sent counsel, Mr A H Newaz,  who  sought  an
    adjournment but withdrew representation  upon  that  application  being
    refused. The judge decided that the respondent had no power to  make  a
    combined decision including removal directions prior to  May  2013  and
    therefore those directions were invalid. He found  that  the  appellant
    submitted an altered press report in  order  to  support  an  important
    aspect of his case. Otherwise, he did not  accept  that  the  appellant
    could meet any of the requirements of the Rules and also found that his
    removal from the United Kingdom was not a disproportionate interference
    with his private life.

The grounds of appeal

 8. The grounds of appeal in support of the  application  argued  that  the
    appeal should have been adjourned owing to the appellant's inability to
    attend due to medical reasons.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

10. The respondent's  Rule  24  response,  received  on  11  October  2016,
    indicated that the appeal was opposed. It was noted that the judge  had
    considered the medical evidence, found it to be vague and unhelpful and
    that the grounds failed to identify any unfairness in the  disposal  of
    the appeal. It  was  further  noted  that  the  appellant's  claim  was
    confined to his private life, the judge considered all the evidence and
    made sustainable findings. No family life claim was  particularised  in
    the evidence and was not a material issue.

The hearing

11. Mr Newaz advised me that the appellant  had  been  admitted  to  Whipps
    Cross Hospital and was therefore unable to attend the hearing at  Field
    House. He admitted to having no documentary evidence of this. While  Mr
    Newaz did not seek an  adjournment,  I  considered  it  appropriate  to
    proceed with the error of law hearing regarding which  the  appellant's
    presence was unlikely to be relevant, unless a  decision  was  made  to
    remake or remit the matter, in which case it could be adjourned at that
    stage. It transpired  that  Mr  Newaz's    papers  were  incomplete.  I
    therefore loaned him a copy of the permission application and the grant
    of permission and afforded him time to consider them before making  his
    submissions.

12.  Mr  Newaz  concentrated  his  submissions  on  the  basis  upon  which
    permission was granted, that is it  was  at  least  arguable  that  the
    appellant's presence would have assisted his appeal.   He  argued  that
    the evidence of the appellant was crucial as he was  claiming  that  he
    could not achieve any leave to remain in Saudi Arabia. Furthermore, the
    appellant would have been able to give more detail of his  private  and
    family life.

13. In terms of materiality, Mr  Newaz  submitted  that,  on  balance,  the
    appellant could succeed solely on the basis of 8 years of residence  in
    the United Kingdom and that the documentary evidence before  the  judge
    was limited. The appellant, in his witness statement said  he  did  not
    speak any Pakistani  language  and  this  could  have  been  tested  in
    evidence.  He accepted that the grounds of appeal did not challenge the
    appellant's use  of  a  doctored  document,  but  argued  that  if  the
    appellant had been present he could have been  cross-examined  on  that
    point. He urged me to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    new hearing.

14. In reply, Mr Avery emphasised that the grounds were  framed  purely  on
    whether the appeal should have been adjourned for medical  reasons.  He
    argued that the judge's dealings with the adjournment application  were
    entirely proper. The content of the medical note raised  clear  issues;
    issues which were put to the appellant's  representative  and  who  was
    given an opportunity to clarify  those  issues.  That  opportunity  was
    declined and it was appropriate for  the  judge  to  proceed  in  those
    circumstances.

15. Mr Avery referred me to [2] and [3] of the decision  and  asked  me  to
    find that there was nothing wrong with the approach taken by the judge.
    With regard to materiality, he asked me to note that the appellant  had
    not been in the United Kingdom for long, only 5 years at  the  time  of
    the application and he was trying to found an Article 8 claim  on  that
    basis. The appellant put in documentary evidence which  was  considered
    by the judge and an issue arose from evidence provided  [10  -  13]  in
    that the press article produced by the appellant was different  to  the
    same item downloaded by the Presenting Officer.  The  judge  looked  at
    both and concluded  that  the  reference  to  the  age  of  21  in  the
    appellant's version was  an  alteration.  That  finding  had  not  been
    challenged.  If the appellant had been in a  position  to  contest  the
    finding as to deception, would  have  done  so.  It  was  poor  of  the
    appellant to rely on a fairness point when he has been providing  false
    documentation and it was hard to see how he could succeed now. Any oral
    evidence he could have given regarding returning to Saudi Arabia  would
    not make much difference, it was a question of fact and he put in false
    evidence and tried to deceive the tribunal.  If  he  had  attended  the
    hearing it would not have materially affected the outcome.

16. Mr Newaz added only that if the appellant had attended, he  might  have
    been able to persuade the tribunal  that  paragraph  276ADE(v)  of  the
    Rules might apply.

Decision on error of law

17. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the judge made no error  of
    law and that I would be upholding  his  decision.  My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

18. I have had regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  regarding  the  power  the
    First-tier Tribunal has to adjourn or postpone a hearing under its case
    management powers. Regard  should  have  been  had  to  the  overriding
    objective set out in Rule 2 requiring the Tribunal to deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly.

19. I have also  had  regard  to  the  decision  in  Nwaigwe  (Adjournment:
    Fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC). The crucial question  being  whether
    the refusal of an adjournment deprived the affected party of a right to
    a fair hearing. I have also taken into consideration  the  Presidential
    Guidance note no. 1 of 2014 and note that factors weighing in favour of
    adjourning an appeal, even at a late  stage,  include  whether  further
    time is needed because of  a  delay  in  obtaining  evidence  which  is
    outside the party's control, for example, where an expert witness fails
    to provide a report within the period expected.

20. That is to be balanced by factors weighing  against  the  grant  of  an
    adjournment, namely that the application was not made at  the  earliest
    opportunity or is speculative or that it does not  show  that  anything
    material would be achieved by the delay.

21. In SH (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1284 at [13],  it  was  held
    that when considering whether an adjournment should have been  granted,
    the test was not irrationality or whether  the  decision  was  properly
    open to the FTTJ; the sole test was whether it was unfair. As stated in
    Nwaigwe, supra, in practice, in most cases the question will be whether
    the refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair hearing.
    I find that the appellant has not been so deprived.

22. The judge's decision and reasons displays a most careful approach taken
    to the application for an  adjournment.  He  took  at  face  value  the
    argument that  the  appellant  had  attended  a  previous  hearing  and
    accepted that this indicated that he had wished to participate  in  the
    appeal in the past. The case file shows that the appeal  was  adjourned
    in advance of the previous hearing date. Over  five  paragraphs  [2-7],
    the judge sets out the arguments made on the appellant's behalf and his
    concerns as to the  medical  evidence,  dating  2  days  prior  to  the
    hearing, which purported to show that the  appellant  was  too  unwell,
    with acute gastroenteritis, to attend the hearing.

23. The judge noted that the medical  note  gave  no  indication  when  the
    appellant began  to  suffer  this  ailment,  the  certificate  did  not
    indicate whether this condition was a past or present matter, there was
    no indication that  the  doctor  was  treating  the  appellant  and  no
    explanation as to why the appellant would not be  able  to  attend  the
    hearing centre. The judge rightly noted that the  certificate  emanated
    from a surgery in West London  whereas  the  appellant  lived  in  East
    London.

24. There is no error in  the  judge  commenting  on  the  ability  of  the
    appellant to cross London to see a GP when he was claiming to be unable
    to undertake  a  shorter  journey  to  Taylor  House.  Further  reasons
    provided by the judge included the fact that  the  medical  certificate
    did not indicate whether the doctor examined the appellant or  how  the
    certificate was obtained.

25. At [5] of the decision, the judge records that he offered Mr Newaz  the
    opportunity to contact  the  appellant's  solicitors  as  well  as  the
    medical centre or doctor concerned but he declined to  do  so,  stating
    that this was unlikely to be productive. I should  add  that  Mr  Newaz
    told the judge that he knew nothing  about  the  circumstances  of  the
    inception of the claimed illness, the current state of the  illness  or
    the ability of the appellant to attend to give evidence.

26. At [5] and prior to recording  his  overall  conclusion  regarding  the
    application, the judge  directs  himself  appropriately  with  specific
    reference to the overriding objective and the  issue  of  fairness.  He
    referred to the evidence provided by the appellant in his bundle  which
    included his witness statements and the matters  raised  therein.  Only
    then did the judge proceed to conclude that he was satisfied  that  the
    appeal could be properly and fairly decided on the papers.

27. There was no unfairness with the judge's approach and I do  not  accept
    that the appellant was deprived of a fair hearing of his appeal.  While
    it is not necessary to say so, I would only add  that  the  appellant's
    claim concerned aspects of private life enjoyed since  his  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom as  a  student  in  2007.  The  appellant's  witness
    statement did not expand on a claimed family life, in that it  referred
    only to a network of friends.

28. Given the lack of compliance with the Rules and the lack of  compelling
    circumstances, the presence of the appellant was most unlikely to  have
    had a material impact on the outcome of  the  appeal.  In  his  witness
    statement, the appellant states that he used to live  in  Saudi  Arabia
    with his parents but that he would not be  permitted  to  return  there
    because he was aged 22.  To  support  that  contention,  the  appellant
    relied upon a  press  article  stating  "Dependent  over  21  can't  be
    sponsored by father." As the judge  records  at  [13],  the  presenting
    officer provided the same article which was headed "Dependent  over  25
    can't be  sponsored  by  father."  The  judge's  detailed  reasons  for
    concluding  that  the  article  submitted  by  the  appellant  was   an
    "unapproved alteration, manufactured because the Appellant was 22 years
    of age (ie under 25)" were  unchallenged  in  the  grounds.  The  judge
    found, on the evidence before him, that the appellant could  return  to
    Saudi Arabia and be dependent  upon  his  parents  as  he  had  before.
    Consequently, Mr Newaz's submission that the  appellant  could  succeed
    under paragraph 276ADE in relation to potential  removal  to  Pakistan,
    did begin to indicate that the  appellant's  presence  at  the  hearing
    would have resulted in a materially different outcome.



Conclusion

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error  of  law  and  his  decision  is
upheld.


Signed:  Date: 4 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


