
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/48447/2014
                                                               IA/50547/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2016                    |On 21 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ATTIQ UR REHMAN CHATHA (FIRST APPELLANT)
                       ELINA BUKINA (SECOND APPELLANT)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Eames  who  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 29 June 2015 allowed the appeal of Mr  Attiq  UR  Rehman
    Chatha, to whom I will refer as the appellant, against a decision  made
    on 1 December 2014 to refuse to issue him  with  a  residence  card  as
    confirmation of a right to reside in Britain, and  the  appeal  of  Mrs
    Elina Bukina, to whom I will refer as the second appellant, against the
    decision to remove her under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 1999 and Regulations 19(3)(a), 19(3)(c) and 21B(2) and 24(2) of the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.    Neither  appellant  attended  the  hearing  before  me.   Ms  Fijiwala
    produced a form showing that the appellant had absconded from temporary
    admission which had been granted to him in that he had failed to report
    as required since 3 July 2015.

3.   I am in some difficulty with regard to the  second  appellant's  appeal
    as although the decision against her is set out in the determination of
    the Judge of the First-tier and  indeed  there  were  detailed  grounds
    submitted on her behalf and  the respondent, in appealing  against  the
    decision  of  Judge  Eames  heads  the  notice  of  appeal  with   both
    appellants' names the respondent  has not put forward any arguments  as
    to why the second appellant should be removed other than that there  is
    an allegation that she had entered into a marriage of convenience.

4.   The application for  leave  to  remain  was  made  by  the  appellants'
    solicitors on 28 August 2014.  The appellants  were  thereafter  called
    for interview at the  UKBA  offices  in  Liverpool.   It  appears  that
    immediately after the interview they were served with  notices  of  the
    decisions made: the decision in respect of the first appellant being  a
    refusal to issue a residence card.   The  reason  given  was  that  his
    marriage was one of convenience.

5.   The interview comprised 140 questions ranging  over  such  subjects  as
    when the appellants had met, what they had eaten the day  before,  what
    had happened on the day they married, their work and when they had last
    drunk alcohol.  The grounds of appeal lodged on behalf of the appellant
    asserted that the appellants were genuinely married and  that  evidence
    submitted had been ignored and that the decision was inconsistent  with
    the guidelines  in  the  determination  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
    marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC).  It  was  also
    asserted that no  consideration  had  been  given  to  the  appellants'
    private life.

6.   The grounds of appeal in respect of the second  appellant  stated  that
    she and the appellant had been detained after the  interview  and  then
    granted temporary admission and the decision to remove her  was  unfair
    and contrary to the terms of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

7.   Judge Eames, having noted that neither of the appellants  had  appeared
    and that there was no reason as to why they had  not  appeared,  stated
    that he was taking into account all the documentary evidence before him
     and that he considered that there was sufficient evidence  before  him
    to decide the case in the appellants'  absence.   He  stated  that  the
    decision in IS (Marriages of convenience) Serbia [2008] UKAIT 00031 had
    held that the burden of proving that a marriage was not a "marriage  of
    convenience" for the purposes of the  EEA  Regulations  rested  on  the
    appellants but they were not required to discharge it in the absence of
    evidence of matters supporting a suspicion that the marriage was one of
    convenience.  He stated that there was therefore an  evidential  burden
    on the respondent.  He went on  to  state  that  he  was  applying  the
    standard of proof on the balance of probabilities.

8.   Having set out the relevant legal framework at considerable  length  in
    paragraph 21 of the determination the judge set out  a  number  of  the
    matters which had led the Secretary of State to conclude that this  was
    a marriage of convenience.  These included:-

         "...

           . the 2nd appellant did not know in which month her husband  had
             come to the UK;

           . there was  a  difference  in  their  answers  as  to  the  2nd
             appellant's working hours the day before;

           . there was a difference in their answers as to  when  they  had
             last drunk alcohol and what they had drunk;

           . there was a difference in  their  answers  about  whether  the
             first appellant  had  bought  the  2nd  appellant  a  birthday
             present;

           . they had differed as to going out on a date;

           . there were discrepancies as to their plans to get married  and
             have a family;

           . the first appellant said he had asked her to  marry;  she  had
             confirmed this;

           . they had had a ring  although  give  different  answers  about
             when;

           . there was a difference in their  answers  as  to  whether  the
             appellant had spoken to his wife's children;

           . he said they married on 27 July whereas she said they  married
             on 23rd of July, and they could not agree on the  day  of  the
             week; he had  later  corrected  his  own  answer  to  23  July
             unprompted;

           . their accounts of the length of the ceremony differed;

           . on the evening of the wedding he said they had dinner at  home
             and restaurant reception where is she said they had dinner  at
             home;

           . their answers differed  by  2  as  to  the  number  of  people
             present;

           . he named one of her friends who attended but she named 2;

           . there were differences  in  their  answers  as  to  what  time
             everyone had gone home after the wedding day meal;

           . as to what they had done later that day he said they had  gone
             home and she said they had had sex;

           . she did not know the  names  of  her  husband's  brothers  and
             sisters;

           . there were differences in their answers as to where the wife's
             sister lived and with whom;

           . he had said that her children rarely saw their father but  she
             had said they did not see him;

           . she did not know exactly what he had been  studying;  she  had
             said he was not studying whereas he had said he was  having  a
             break in his studies;

           . there was a difference of 2 months in the times they gave  for
             which Ms Bukina had been working in the Chinese restaurant;

           . she had said that when they met he had been  working  in  Papa
             Johns but he said he was not working;

           . they had given different answers as to when  she  had  started
             work in the UK and for which pizza company;

           . they had given different answers as to the number of hours and
             the number of days worked per week and the length of shifts;

           . they had respectively calculated his pay on monthly and weekly
             rates, producing different amounts of money  but  roughly  the
             same per annum figure;

           . she thought he was paid weekly whereas he  said  he  was  paid
             fortnightly;

           . they gave the names of 2 different people to  whom  they  paid
             rent;

           . they gave different answers as to how long the first appellant
             had been living in the property;

           . as to his attendance at mosque, he said he  did  not  and  she
             gave an unclear answer;

           . she had said Ramadan had been in June,  whereas  he  had  said
             July."

9.   The judge then went on to note the assertions made that the  appellants
    were in a genuine marriage and that the respondent had ignored evidence
    submitted with the application.

10.  In paragraph 25 the judge set out the documentary evidence  before  him
    which included the appellants' passports, their  marriage  certificate,
    wage slips, bank statements in relation to a joint account held by both
    the appellants showing that  they  both  lived  at  the  same  address,
    letters from the GP practice to testify that they  were  registered  at
    the same surgery, broadband, home phone and mobile bills in relation to
    the appellants from "EE and 3", a tenancy agreement showing they  lived
    at the same address and contracts of employment for each of them (these
    show the appellants living at  the  same  address)  and  the  interview
    record.

11.  In paragraphs 29 onwards he set out his findings of fact  stating  that
    the respondent had accepted that the  second  appellant  was  a  worker
    exercising EU Treaty rights.  He went on to say that he found that  the
    appellants had married on 23 July 2014 for genuine reasons.  And  then,
    having referred to  the  determination  in  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -
    marriage of  convenience)  Greece  which  referred  to  a  marriage  of
    convenience as being one contracted for the sole or decisive purpose of
    gaining admission to the host state, stated that "in the  EEA  context"
    there was no additional requirement that the marriage be  "genuine  and
    subsisting".

12.  He then referred to the guidance given in the determination  in  Goudey
    (Subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC)  and  in
    the guidance of the EU Commission. He noted that that guidance included
    the observation which stated:-

         "Artificial conduct

         Firstly, the conduct through  which  EU  law  is  abused,  must  be
         artificial in the sense that it is a feigned imitation, lacking  in
         naturalness, sincerity or spontaneity.

         When it comes to marriages of convenience the  abusive  conduct  is
         linked to the absence of intention of the married couple to  create
         a family as a married couple and to lead a genuine marital life.

         The abusive character of marriages of convenience is represented by
         mala fide of the spouses prior to and at the moment they enter into
         the marriage.

         The abusive conduct must be made with the purpose of obtaining  the
         right of free movement and residence under EU law."

13.  Having then referred to the notion of sole purpose he  stated  that  it
    was clear that the objective to obtain the right of entry and residence
    must be the predominant purpose of the abusive conduct.

14.  Finally he referred to case law from  the  European  Court  of  Justice
    before stating in paragraph 38 that he was applying  those  principles.
    He stated that he had to address whether the sole  predominant  purpose
    for which the parties had got married was to obtain a right  to  remain
    for the first appellant.

15.  In paragraphs 39 onwards he referred to the "alleged  discrepancies  or
    inconsistencies"  the  respondent  had  pointed  to  in  the   marriage
    interview.  He stated that these were largely inconsequential and  that
    the respondent alleged that 57 questions disclosed a difference in  the
    way the appellants answered points put to them about their marriage and
    therefore the respondent had left unchallenged the degree of  agreement
    between the appellants' answers in the other 83 questions.   He  stated
    that many of the alleged discrepancies were either debatable or  varied
    to such a small margin that it was not clear to him that there were any
    significant  difference   in  the  appellants'  understanding  of  each
    other's lives - he referred to the topics such as the  last  time  they
    had drunk alcohol and how much they had drunk, where they had been  out
    together, the exact number of hours they had  worked,  the  numbers  of
    people at the wedding and the way in  which  they  got  paid  by  their
    employers and the practice of Islam.  He  pointed  out  that  both  the
    answers given for when Ramadan was were correct as the first  appellant
    stated in July and the second appellant had stated  in  June  and  that
    Ramadan began on 29 June 2014.  He stated that to many of the questions
    one appellant had given an answer and the other had not given an answer
    and that was not in his view a discrepancy.  He referred to  the  issue
    of when the ring was purchased and stated  that  although  the  answers
    were different they were both correct.  He referred further to the  key
    question of the date of the wedding and stated that although the  first
    appellant  had  got  this  initially  wrong   he   corrected   himself,
    unprompted,  a  few  questions  later.   He  took  into   account   the
    documentary evidence including the  tenancy  agreement  and  the  phone
    bills which he stated he found reliable and persuasive.

16.  He then reached the conclusion that in his view  the  marriage  between
    the appellants was not one that was entered into  in  order  to  secure
    immigration status and was not a marriage of convenience and  therefore
    their residence card  should  not  have  been  refused.   Moreover  the
    respondent had erred by making a removal decision in  relation  to  the
    second appellant when there was no fraud or abuse.  He therefore stated
    that he allowed the appeals both under Directive 2004/38  and  the  EEA
    Regulations.

17.  The grounds of appeal allege that the letter of refusal had set  out  a
    compelling case for a marriage of convenience supported by  a  list  of
    significant discrepancies with regard to the relationship and that  the
    judge had taken into account that the appellants had failed  to  attend
    the appeal hearing to explain the discrepancies.  The grounds  went  on
    to state the judge had failed  adequately  to  reason  his  conclusions
    which were perverse and irrational.  The grounds stated:-

         "4.  The Judge finds  in  paragraph  39  that  the  respondent  has
             alleged that 57 questions at interview disclose differences in
             the  appellants'  answers,  but  that  it  'follows  that  the
             respondent leaves unchallenged the degree of agreement between
             the appellants' answers  in  the  other  83  questions'.   The
             implication that a success rate of 83 out of  140  answers  is
             acceptable is irrational."

    It was argued that  he  had  given  undue  weight  to  the  documentary
    evidence and the bank statements.

18.  Permission having been granted the appeal came before me.   Once  again
    there was no appearance by either appellant  but,  as  I  have  stated,
    there was evidence that the first appellant had absconded.

19.   Ms  Fijiwala  referred  to  the  notes  of  interview   and   to   the
    discrepancies therein.  She stated that it was clear that the  evidence
    in the interview was such that the respondent discharged the burden  of
    proof upon her.  She accepted that the allegation the marriage was  one
    of convenience had not been put to the appellants before  the  decision
    was made.

20.  She referred to the discrepancies as to the hours that the sponsor  had
    worked the previous day, the issue of the ring and details of what  had
    happened after the wedding, as  well  as  the  earnings  of  the  first
    appellant and the rent paid and the contact the appellant had with  the
    sponsor's children.

21.  She asked me to find that the decision of the judge  was  not  open  to
    him and to allow the respondent's appeals.   She  did  not  address  me
    specifically with regard to  the  factual  matrix  of  the  allegations
    against the sponsor.

Discussion

22.  The judge, as accepted by Ms Fijiwala, correctly set out  the  relevant
    law and referred at  length  to  the  appropriate  case  law.   He  was
    entitled to rely on the  decision  in  Papajorgji  notwithstanding,  of
    course, that the factual matrix in that case was entirely different  as
    Mrs Papajorgji had been married to her husband for fourteen  years  and
    they had two children and had lived in a common  household  and  indeed
    she had applied for a visa to come to Britain with her husband.   Those
    circumstances are clearly very different  from  those  in  the  present
    case.

23.  The issue before the judge was whether or not this was  a  marriage  of
    convenience and he correctly pointed out that the burden of  proof  lay
    on  the  respondent,  the  standard  of  proof  being  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  The fact that the appellants did not attend the  appeal
    is clearly, following the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Agho  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1198, an irrelevant factor as it is  not  for  the
    judge to consider all the evidence before him and then make a  decision
    as to whether or not this was a marriage of convenience, but rather  it
    is for him to decide first of all whether or not the Secretary of State
    has discharged the burden of proof upon her to prove that  this  was  a
    marriage of convenience and, if he finds that she has not, then that is
    the end of the matter.

25.  As I have said, this is a detailed determination.  The judge  did  take
    into account the documentary evidence and  he  was  fully  entitled  to
    place weight on the evidence shown in the tenancy agreement, the  joint
    bank account and the contracts of employment.  He also did consider the
    discrepancies which he clearly had in mind  as  he  set  these  out  in
    paragraph 21 of the determination, and was entitled to find  that  many
    of these were not in fact discrepancies but merely  a  situation  where
    two answers were given both of which were correct  or  on  occasion  no
    answer was given by one appellant.

26.  I consider that the judge  did  take  into  account  the  evidence  and
    applied the appropriate standard of  proof,  that  of  the  balance  of
    probabilities, and reached conclusions which were open to him.  While I
    accept that it might be that a different judge  might  have  reached  a
    different conclusion, I can only conclude  that  his  conclusions  were
    fully open to him and that, as is made clear in  the  judgment  of  the
    Court  of  Appeal  in  Mukarkar  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045  it  would  be
    inappropriate to set aside his decision.

27.  I therefore find that the judge was entitled to find that this was  not
    a marriage of convenience and that  the  decision  of  the  judge  with
    respect to both of the appellants shall stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy


