

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48718/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Wednesday 23 September 2015                |On Friday 25 September 2015  |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR NAZMUL ISLAM

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hossain, Legal representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background
    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.


    2. The Appellant appeals against the  Respondent's  decision  dated  18
       November 2014 refusing his application for further leave as a Tier 4
       student and giving directions for his removal  to  Bangladesh.   His
       appeal  was  allowed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  by  First-Tier
       Tribunal Judge Hands in a decision  promulgated  on  24  March  2015
       ("the Decision").


    3. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Pirotta on 27 May 2015.  She found that the Decision may  contain  a
       material error of law  by  failure  to  refer  to  evidence  in  the
       Respondent's supplementary letter  of  30  July  2014  and  evidence
       submitted by the Appellant  which  was  contradicted  by  his  later
       evidence and cast doubt on his credibility.  The matter comes before
       the Upper Tribunal to determine whether the  Decision  involved  the
       making of an error of law.

    Submissions
    4. Although the supplementary letter of 30 July 2014 is referred to  in
       the Respondent's grounds of appeal, neither Mr Jarvis nor Mr Hussain
       were able to provide a copy of it and it is not to be found  in  the
       Tribunal's file.  Mr Jarvis could not find reference to  it  on  his
       file.  He very fairly accepted therefore that he  could  not  pursue
       this ground of appeal.   He  also  very  fairly  accepted  that  the
       Respondent's decision of 18 November 2014 had failed to refer to the
       interview which the Appellant attended  on  16  July  2014  and  was
       therefore in error.  He apologised for the error in the Respondent's
       decision which he noted  was  due  to  the  fact  that  this  is  an
       Integrated  Casework  decision  which  means  that  there  are   two
       references and the caseworker making the  decision  of  18  November
       2014 had failed to note the second reference.


    5. In the circumstances, the Respondent's sole ground is to be found in
       the final sentence of [5] of the grounds, namely that the Judge gave
       inadequate reasons for the findings at [13] of the Decision that the
       Appellant is a genuine student.  Mr Jarvis drew my attention to what
       was said in the decision letter of 18 November 2014.  The Respondent
       noted the summary of what the Appellant needed to show in  order  to
       be assessed as a genuine student.  The decision letter  went  on  to
       note that in order to assess genuineness, an interview was required.
        The decision letter (wrongly) stated that the Appellant had  failed
       to attend interview but went on to refuse  the  application  on  the
       basis that the Appellant did not meet the genuineness test.

    6. The appeal before First-Tier Tribunal Judge Hands proceeded  on  the
       papers as the Appellant did not wish to avail himself of the  option
       of an oral hearing.   Accordingly,  the  Judge  was  constrained  to
       consider the appeal by reference to the documents  before  him.   At
       [13], Mr Jarvis submitted, the Judge has given no indication of  the
       basis on which he reaches the finding that he is satisfied that  the
       Appellant is  a  genuine  student.   The  fact  that  the  Appellant
       attended an interview as requested is not a reason to find that  the
       Appellant is a genuine student. Mr Jarvis submitted  therefore  that
       what the Judge should have done is to  find  that  the  Respondent's
       decision was not in accordance with the law and allow the appeal  on
       that basis, leaving it to the Respondent to make  a  further  lawful
       decision following reconsideration based also on the  notes  of  the
       interview.

    7. Mr Hossain sought to persuade me that there was in fact material  on
       which the Judge could allow the appeal outright.  He noted that  the
       course which the Appellant had already completed as referred  to  in
       [13] is in fact the very  course  which  the  Appellant  applied  to
       follow which led to the Respondent's refusal  under  appeal  in  the
       Decision.  He referred to the application form  to  make  good  that
       submission.  The sponsor for the application is  Cambridge  Regional
       College.  There is a letter dated 26 November  2014  from  Cambridge
       Regional College which confirms that the Appellant in fact completed
       that course on 30 October 2014 (the application refers to the course
       running from February 2014 to February 2015).  I pointed out  to  Mr
       Hossain however that this does not appear to have been understood by
       the Judge.  There is reference to the completion of that  course  at
       [4] and I would  have  expected  the  Judge  to  note  there  if  he
       understood that this is the very  course  for  which  the  Appellant
       applied leading to the refusal  under  challenge.   Furthermore,  at
       [13], the Judge concludes his findings as follows:-
           "I note however that the Appellant's course of study started  in
           February 2014 and was due to end on 05 February 2015 so  it  may
           be that he has already completed or had to defer his study for a
           year pending the outcome of this appeal."

    8. Mr Hossain submitted that,  even  if  the  Judge  had  not  properly
       understood this to be the position, any error was not material since
       the fact that the Appellant had completed his course as noted in the
       Cambridge Regional College letter was evidence enough to  find  that
       he was a genuine student.


    9. Mr Jarvis, in reply, pointed out that the Judge  had  not  made  his
       finding based on that letter.  The  error  remained  therefore  that
       there was insufficient reasoning for the finding that the  Appellant
       is a genuine student.   He  noted  also  that  it  might  have  been
       impermissible for the Judge to take account of the letter given that
       it post-dated the Respondent's decision  (section  85A  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).  He did not urge  that  submission
       strongly since he recognised that there might be an argument against
       him that genuineness was not part of the points allocation under the
       points-based system and therefore that section 85A might not  apply.
       However, he submitted that genuineness was part of the same decision
       and accordingly, in his submission it did preclude the  taking  into
       account of the letter.

   10. I indicated at the end of the hearing that I was satisfied that  the
       Decision contained a material error of law in relation to  the  lack
       of reasoning for the Judge's finding at [13] that the Appellant is a
       genuine student.  I therefore set aside the  Decision.  I  indicated
       that I would provide my reasons in writing which I now go on to  do.



      Decision and reasons
   11. The question whether the Appellant is a genuine student  is  put  at
       issue  in  the  Respondent's  decision  letter.   It  was  therefore
       incumbent on the Judge to make a finding on that  issue  if  he  was
       able to do so.  As the Judge noted at [13],  the  onus  was  on  the
       Appellant to establish that he  was  a  genuine  student.   However,
       there is no indication in that paragraph of the  evidence  on  which
       the Judge reached the finding  that  the  Appellant  was  a  genuine
       student nor does any basis emerge from a  reading  of  the  Decision
       overall.  The  Judge  was  quite  entitled  (as  Mr  Jarvis  rightly
       accepted) to find (as he did) that the Respondent's decision was not
       in accordance with the law, for failure to taken  into  account  the
       interview record (which was not before the Judge).  However, it  did
       not follow as the Judge appears  to  have  found  that  because  the
       Appellant had complied with the request to attend an interview  that
       he was a genuine student, absent the record of that interview.   Nor
       was the Judge able to conclude that  the  Appellant  was  a  genuine
       student from the fact that  he  had  completed  a  previous  course.
       Subject to the point in relation to section 85A, it might have  been
       different if the Judge had understood that the course which had been
       successfully completed  was  the  course  for  which  the  Appellant
       applied which led to the Respondent's decision under appeal, but  it
       is patently obvious from the last sentence of [13]  that  the  Judge
       did not understand that to be the position.  I find,  however,  that
       the Judge was not entitled to take account of the  letter  dated  26
       November 2014 in the  appeal  since  that  evidence  post-dated  the
       Respondent's  decision  and  did  not  fall  within  the   permitted
       exceptions to section 85A.


   12. Mr Jarvis rightly conceded that if I found a material error  of  law
       in the Decision, I  should  nonetheless  go  on  to  find  that  the
       Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law  and  allow
       the appeal on that basis.  I therefore  allow  the  appeal  on  that
       basis.  It will fall to the Respondent to make a further decision on
       a lawful basis taking into account the interview record and also the
       letter from Cambridge Regional College noting that the Appellant has
       already successfully completed the course for which he applied.


DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal decision did involve the making of  an  error  on  a
point of law.

I set aside the decision

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on the  basis  that  the
Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.

Signed      [pic]Date  23 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
