
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/48966/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 30th March 2016                     |On 14th April 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               mr waqar javid
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MET)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr R Rashid (Counsel)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the  Appellant  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  "the
    Secretary of State".  I shall refer to the Respondent before the  Upper
    Tribunal as "the Claimant".  This is the Secretary of State's appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal, brought with permission, against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Shimmin hereinafter  'the  judge')  allowing
    the Claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision of 19th
    November 2014 to remove him from the UK.

 2. By way of background, the Claimant was born on 26th April 1988 and is a
    national of Pakistan.  He entered the UK on 17th April 2011,  lawfully,
    as a Tier 4  Student  Migrant.   On  22nd  April  2013  his  leave  was
    curtailed  because  of  revocation  of   his   sponsoring   educational
    establishment's licence.  However, he made a fresh Tier  4  application
    and leave was granted until 7th September 2014.  On 12th  May  2014  he
    married a British citizen and, on 3rd  September  2014,  and  therefore
    within the currency of his existing leave,  he  applied  for  leave  to
    remain as a spouse.  It was that application which, in due course,  led
    to the decision of 19th November 2014 to remove him from the UK.

 3. The basis for the Secretary of State's removal decision was her  belief
    that the Claimant had used a proxy when taking an English language test
    on 17th July 2012 in relation to an earlier application for  leave  (so
    not the current application).   This  had  the  consequence,  said  the
    Secretary of State, that he did not meet the "suitability requirements"
    which are contained in the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary  of  State
    also refused the application on the basis that the Claimant had  failed
    to show that he had been in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    his partner for at least two years.

 4. The Appellant appealed and that led to a hearing before Judge  Shimmin.
    At the outset of the hearing, both parties  were  represented  but  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer sought to withdraw  the  decision  under
    appeal and when  the  judge  refused  to  accept  that  withdrawal,  he
    withdrew from the hearing.  The hearing, therefore,  proceeded  in  his
    absence.

 5. The judge received oral submissions from the Claimant's representative.
     He had before him witness statements of one Peter Millington  and  one
    Rebecca Collings which related to aspects of the mechanics  of  English
    language testing and the manner  in  which  fraud  might  be  detected.
    Those statements have been produced in a number  of  cases  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal  and,  indeed,  in  judicial
    review proceedings such that their  content  is  by  now,  I  am  sure,
    familiar to many judges.  There was an additional  statement,  in  this
    case, by Mr Sam Spence, which made reference  to  the  content  of  the
    statements of Mr Millington and Ms Collings.   The  judge  found,  with
    respect to the substance of the Claimant's relationship, that it was  a
    genuine  and  subsisting  one  and  correctly  pointed  out  that   the
    applicable Immigration Rules did not, in fact, require the relationship
    to have been so for a two year period.  The  Secretary  of  State  had,
    said the judge, conflated two different Rules.  The judge's finding  as
    to that has not been the subject of any further challenge.

 6. As to the question of the Claimant's alleged deception by using a proxy
    test taker, the judge, in a lengthy and thoughtful passage, said this;

         "22. The first issue  related  to  the  alleged  deception  by  the
             Appellant in an English language test in 2012.

         23.  The Appellant submitted that the Respondent had  not  met  the
             burden  upon  her  that  the  Appellant  had  personally  used
             deception.

         24.  In the alternative, I have considered  whether,  even  if  the
             Respondent established deception, that enables the application
             to be refused.  Appendix FM S-LTR.2.2 refers to,  'whether  or
             not to the applicant's knowledge ... false ... documents  have
             been  submitted  in  relation  to  the  application  ...'  (my
             emphasis).  The language certificate in question was submitted
             for the Appellant's application for leave to remain as a  Tier
             4  (General)  Student.   The  Appellant  then   made   another
             application for leave to remain as a spouse and  relied  on  a
             later language document and there is  no  dispute  as  to  its
             genuineness.

         25.  I find that the Secretary of State's evidence is  generic  and
             produced in relation to  other  legal  proceedings.   This  is
             patent from the headings on the witness  statements  of  Peter
             Millington and Rebecca Collings.  Those witness statements are
             incorporated into this appeal by the witness statement  of  Mr
             Sam Spence.  I find that this evidence does not show the exact
             reason  why  ETS  has  invalidated  the  certificate  of   the
             Appellant in particular and provides no evidence  relating  to
             the Appellant's personal circumstances.

         26.  To draw an analogy.  If an ECO asserted  that  a  false  birth
             certificate had been produced because its forensic  department
             had said that the  certificate  was  not  genuine  this  would
             require a verification report from that forensic department to
             explain in  clear  terms  the  basis  of  such  a  conclusion.
             Therefore, the Secretary of State cannot hide  behind  an  un-
             evidenced allegation by ETS to discharge the burden  of  proof
             upon her.

         27.  In the witness statement of Peter Millington it is stated that
             ETS is protecting itself by a confidentiality clause but  this
             is no reason to  change  the  burden  of  proof  although  the
             standard of proof required in the circumstances of the alleged
             deception.

         28.  Furthermore, in the witness statement of Peter Millington, ETS
             confirms that there are multiple reasons for  invalidation  of
             test certificate, some of  which  may  not  involve  fraud  or
             deception.  The Respondent has not made the Appellant aware of
             the precise reason why his certificate has been invalidated.

         29.  Similarly, in  the  witness  statements  of  Peter  Millington
             (paragraph  12)  and  Rebecca  Collings  (paragraph  11)  they
             confirmed there can be reasons for invalidation other than the
             use  of  proxy  test  takers.   They  state  that  a  person's
             certificate  could  be  invalidated  simply  because  of   the
             presence of a proxy test taker  during  the  same  sitting  or
             because of other procedural  unspecified  irregularities  with
             the particular examination taken by  the  Appellant.   Neither
             possibility  would  be  enough  to  show  that  the  Appellant
             knowingly used a proxy test  taker  or  committed  some  other
             dishonesty during the examination to make out  the  allegation
             of deception by the Appellant.

         30.  Rebecca Collings notes that the Secretary of State  is  acting
             on the basis that if a test score is  open  "cancelled"  this,
             and  of  itself,  purportedly  justifies  the   inference   of
             "deception" (paragraph 32).  I find that  this  is  irrational
             since ETS "cancelled" test results even  where  no  individual
             fraud was shown but where  there  was  some  evidence  that  a
             particular test centre had an irregularity (paragraph 29).

         31.  There is no detailed evidence  to  show  a  link  between  the
             Appellant's audio recordings and any alleged proxy taker.

         32.  At paragraph 47 Peter Millington confirms that the test  score
             may also be "invalidated" by ETS even where it is not shown to
             have been identified by the voice recognition but simply based
             on  another  irregularity  in  the  test  centre  running  the
             programme.  Peter Millington says that these are identified in
             ETS spreadsheets provided but there is no evidence of how this
             is indicated on the spreadsheets or whether it has  been  done
             in this  Appellant's  particular  case.   In  the  Appellant's
             refusal letter  (paragraph  8)  it  is  said  that,  '...  the
             validity  ...  (of  these)   test   results   could   not   be
             authenticated, ... (the) scores from the tests taken  on  17th
             July 2012 have been cancelled.'  Thus the cancellation of  the
             results can be viewed as an unspecified irregularity  relating
             to the specific hearing centre and not in relation to anything
             the Appellant has done.

         33.  There is no evidence that the general operation, as  described
             in  Peter   Millington's   statement,   has   been   correctly
             implemented  by  ETS  or  that  the  test  result   has   been
             invalidated due to a proxy test taker.  Peter  Millington  and
             Rebecca Collings are not experts  in  voice  recognition.   At
             best Peter Millington has been provided with assurances by ETS
             and his evidence is only hearsay.

         34.  I find there are several reasons to  be  sceptical  about  the
             evidence provided by ETS and  this  does  not  meet  the  '...
             critical, anxious and heightened  scrutiny'  required  by  the
             standard  of  proof  (NA  and  Others  (Cambridge  College  of
             Learning) Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00031).

         35.  ETS were one of six successful providers being  given  a  Home
             Office licence to provide English language  tests  was  a  big
             commercial gain for them.  This gave them access  to  hundreds
             of thousands of potential customers.

         36.  The bid that ETS made would have been on  the  basis  that  it
             would  be  capable  of  meeting  all  Home  Office  anti-fraud
             measures (Rebecca Collings paragraph 16).   There  was  a  BBC
             Panorama programme  broadcast  on  10th  February  2014  which
             showed that ETS had fundamental flaws in its system.  This was
             clearly commercially damaging and could  tarnish  its  claimed
             reputation as a 'world leader in  fraud  prevention'  (Rebecca
             Collings paragraph 10).

         37.  ETS, in an effort not to lose its licence and  to  please  the
             Home Office, implemented  voice  recognition  software  (VRS).
             This software was only in the  process  of  being  tested  and
             developed prior to the broadcast of  the  Panorama  programme.
             As  a  consequence  of  the  programme  ETS  implemented   the
             unspecified VRS to retrospectively test  all  UK  tests  going
             back to 2011.

         38.  I find the limitations of the VRS are evident from the witness
             statement of Peter Millington (paragraph 28).   ETS  have  not
             provided  the  statistical  models  showing  that   it   could
             accommodate the complexity of the task.  I  have  simply  been
             given Peter Millington's untested hearsay evidence of what ETS
             have assured him.

         39.  ETS will not tell the Home Office what software they are using
             because of a confidentiality agreement and I  find  that  this
             must be given little weight as it is not possible to know  the
             accuracy of the assurances given  by  ETS.   Peter  Millington
             acknowledges that he has no expert  experience  in  this  area
             (paragraph 29).  Even  ETS  accepts  that  VRS  is  'currently
             imperfect' (Peter Millingon paragraph 32).

         40.  The problem tests that VRS identified had to be  verified  and
             the ETS did so by using previously untrained individuals  with
             no expertise in voice recognition, some  of  whom  had  to  be
             redeployed because they did not have the aptitude for the task
             (Peter Millington paragraph 40).

         41.  The evidence of Peter Millington,  Rebecca  Collings  and  Sam
             Spence is by witness statement only.  It cannot be  tested  by
             cross-examination and therefore I find its eventual weight  is
             limited.

         42.  Against the  evidence  of  the  Respondent  I  note  that  the
             Appellant passed his two unchallenged tests, when  he  entered
             the UK as a student.

         43.  Taking into account all the evidence and bearing in  mind  the
             standard of proof when deception is alleged I  find  that  the
             Respondent has failed to meet the burden upon her."

 7. The judge then went on to identify an alternative  basis  for  allowing
    the appeal in connection with the English language issue which  was  to
    the effect that Immigration Rule S.LTR.2.2 requires  false  information
    or representations to have been submitted in relation  to  the  refused
    application (rather than an earlier separate application)  before  that
    can be used as a basis for refusal.

 8. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal contending that the judge's reasoning as to why  she  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof in demonstrating that the Appellant  had
    used deception was "entirely inadequate".  It was said, in effect, that
    the witness statements  relied  upon  contained  extensive  detail  and
    should have been accorded significant weight.  As to the  second  basis
    for allowing the appeal the Secretary of State  simply  said  that  she
    "maintains  that  the  Appellant  does   not   meet   the   suitability
    requirements  of  paragraph  S-LTR.2.2(a)  of  Appendix   FM   of   the
    Immigration Rules".

 9. Permission to appeal was granted, on 19th November 2015, by a Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal who took  the  view  that  there  was  "plainly
    cogent evidence of the use of deception by  the  Appellant  before  the
    Tribunal".

10. Permission having been granted there was a  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal (before  me)  so  that  the  matter  of  whether  the  judge's
    determination  contained  an  error  of  law   could   be   considered.
    Representation at that hearing was as stated above.   Mr  Diwnycz,  for
    the Secretary of  State,  relied  upon  the  grounds  as  drafted.   He
    recognised that the attack was directed at the adequacy of the  judge's
    reasoning.  He submitted that the witness statements demonstrated  that
    a decision to cancel test results would not be taken lightly though  he
    acknowledged he could not argue that the judge was  obliged  to  accept
    the evidence in the statements.  He also acknowledged that the  grounds
    "barely touched" on the judge's second reason for allowing  the  appeal
    with respect to  the  English  language  issue.   I  did  not  find  it
    necessary to hear from Mr Rashid.

11. I have decided that the judge's decision did not involve the making  or
    an error of law and that, in consequence, that decision shall stand.  I
    set out my reasoning below.

12. It seems to me that, contrary to the suggestion  in  the  grounds,  the
    judge gave extensive and thorough reasons as to why he  was  concluding
    that the Secretary of State had failed to demonstrate that the Claimant
    had used deception.  Indeed, I have set  out  those  extensive  reasons
    above.  The judge cogently  explained  why  he  did  not  consider  the
    evidence in the form of the witness statements to be persuasive on  the
    facts of the case.  He drew attention to a number  of  shortcomings  in
    that evidence and, in particular, pointed out that it did not  actually
    relate to the specific Claimant before him.  He also pointed  out  that
    the Claimant had, in fact, passed two unchallenged English tests in the
    past, the implication being that he did not have the need  of  a  proxy
    test taker.  In short, it seems to me  that  the  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to take the view he did about the quality and relevance of the
    evidence presented on behalf of the  Respondent  and  that  he  reached
    conclusions  very  clearly  open  to  him  on  the   evidence.    Those
    conclusions were, as a minimum, adequately explained. It also seems  to
    me to be significant that Mr Diwnycz expressly  acknowledged  he  could
    not go so far as to suggest that the judge was obliged to  accept  that
    the  evidence  supplied  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    sufficiently persuasive to mean that the Claimant's appeal to the judge
    had to be dismissed.  As a "reasons  challenge",  therefore,  which  is
    what this was, the Secretary of State's argument lacked merit.

13. Additionally, and in any event, it seems to me that the grounds did not
    make any serious attempt to challenge the judge's alternative basis for
    allowing the appeal in relation to the English  language  issue  as  Mr
    Diwnycz freely acknowledged.

14. I conclude, therefore, that the  judge  did  not  err  in  law  in  his
    consideration of the fraud issue.  Further, and as a separate matter, I
    conclude that the Secretary of State did  not  substantially  challenge
    the judge's alternative findings such that, even if I were to be  wrong
    on the first issue, any error that the judge might have made was not  a
    material one.

15. In the above circumstances the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and shall stand.



Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

