









UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48059/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On 29 February 2016               |On 13 April 2016                         |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Faheem Gul Malik
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    No attendance
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as "the secretary of state" and to  the
      respondent as "the claimant."


   2. On 26 February 2016 the claimant's solicitors, Marks & Marks  sent  an
      email to the Tribunal in  which  they  enclosed  "appellant's  medical
      record".  The solicitors stated as follows:


"The appellant informed us that he is unable to attend  the  appeal  hearing
due to his medical condition. The appellant  did  not  provide  any  further
statement/document due to his medical condition. In the absence  of  further
instruction/fee  from  the  client  we  are   unable   to   submit   further
statements/documents. Please note that no barrister is  instructed  in  this
matter as we did not get the fee from the appellant."


   3. The enclosed medical record stated  that  the  claimant  attended  the
      Wealdstone Centre, in Harrow, on 1 March 2016 for a blood test.  There
      is also a statement  of  fitness  for  work  for  Social  Security  or
      Statutory Sick Pay relating to him. A  doctor  has  recorded  that  he
      assessed his case on 26 February 2016 and advised that he is  not  fit
      for work because of "exacerbation of backache - left sciatica."


   4. There is however no assertion by the doctor  that  this  rendered  the
      claimant unfit to attend the hearing.


   5. I am satisfied that both the claimant and his solicitors were notified
      by first class post on 2 February 2016 that his appeal will  be  heard
      on 29 February 2016. It was noted that if he  or  his  representatives
      did not attend the hearing the Tribunal may determine  the  appeal  in
      the absence of that party.


   6. I am thus satisfied that the claimant is aware  of  the  date  of  the
      hearing of the secretary of state's appeal. He is attending a  medical
      unit for a blood test on 1 March 2016. It is not contended that he  is
      unable to attend the hearing on account of that procedure. Nor  is  it
      contended in  the  medical  letter  that  his  sciatica  prevents  his
      attendance at the hearing of the secretary of  state's  appeal  on  29
      February 2016.


   7. I am also satisfied that his solicitors have not received any  further
      instructions or any fee from the claimant; they have  stated  that  no
      barrister is instructed in the matter as they did not get any fee from
      him.


   8. In the circumstances  I  am  satisfied  that  the  claimant  has  been
      notified of the hearing and having regard  to  the  circumstances  set
      out, I consider that it is in the interests of justice to proceed with
      the hearing.


   9. The secretary of state appeals with permission against the decision of
      the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  promulgated  on  2  September  2015
      allowing  the  claimant's  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
      directing that the matter be remitted to the secretary of state for  a
      decision to be taken on the  claimant's  outstanding  application  for
      leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.


  10. On 14 January 2013,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes  granted  the
      secretary of state permission to appeal, stating incorrectly that this
      was against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  "whereby  the
      appellant's appeal against  the  secretary  of  state's  decision  was
      dismissed." That is clearly a typographical error.


  11. The grounds asserted that  the  Judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  the
      claimant had an in country right  of  appeal  as  the  decision  under
      appeal is covered by sections 82(2)(g)  and  92  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The Judge had arguably confused which
      decision is being challenged and on that basis permission to appeal is
      granted.


  12. In the Tribunal's decision it is  noted  that  the  claimant  appealed
      against the respondent's decision dated 27 November 2014 to remove him
      from the UK [1]. In the IS.1.51A  Notice  to  the  claimant  dated  27
      November 2014, the secretary of state was satisfied that the  claimant
      is a person in respect of whom removal  directions  may  be  given  in
      accordance with paragraphs 8 to 10A of Schedule 2 to  the  Immigration
      Act 1971 as an illegal entrant.


  13. In the "specified reasons" it  is  stated  that  he  is  "specifically
      considered a person who has sought  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  by
      deception".


  14. It is asserted that for the purpose of his application dated  25  June
      2014, he  submitted  a  TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational  Testing
      Service to the Home Office and  his  sponsor  in  order  for  them  to
      provide him with a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies. ETS  has  a
      record of his speaking test.


  15. It is further contended that ETS is  able  to  detect  when  a  single
      person is undertaking multiple tests. ETS undertook  a  check  of  his
      test  and  confirmed  to  the  secretary  of  state  that  there   was
      significant evidence to conclude that his certificate was fraudulently
      obtained by the use of a proxy test taker. His scores  from  the  test
      taken on 20 June 2012 at the Premier Language  Training  Centre  "have
      now been cancelled by ETS." There was accordingly substantial evidence
      to conclude that his certificate had been fraudulently obtained [2].


  16. On the same date, i.e. 27  November  2014,  a  Notice  of  Immigration
      Decision, IS.151A Part 2 was served on the claimant.  A  decision  was
      made to remove him from the UK pursuant to s.10 of the Immigration and
      Asylum Act 1999. It was contended that as a result of the  service  of
      this decision, he no longer had  any  leave  and  so  any  outstanding
      application he made for variation of his leave does  not  need  to  be
      determined as there is no existing leave to vary.


  17. He was informed that he was entitled to  appeal  this  decision  under
      s.82(1) of the 2002 Act "after you have left the UK."


  18. At the hearing of  his  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
      claimant was represented by counsel. There was no attendance on behalf
      of the respondent. The First-tier  Judge  referred  to  the  specified
      reasons for his removal as already set out in  the  "background".  The
      secretary of state wrote to his solicitors in May 2013  that  he  also
      had a Tier 4 application that was submitted in  November  2012,  which
      constituted another outstanding application awaiting a  decision.  The
      solicitors notified the secretary of state that in the  circumstances,
      the claimant was withdrawing his  application  for  further  leave  to
      remain that he had made on 26 April 2013. The secretary of  state  was
      asked to determine his outstanding Tier 4 application.


  19. On 29 September 2014 his application made  on  12  November  2012  was
      refused with no right of appeal. As noted, on 27 November 2014 he  was
      served with the IS 151A, Part 1 and Part 2 notices.


  20. At the appeal hearing, counsel at the outset contended that  following
      "a judicial review" it was now accepted that the claimant  had  an  in
      country right of appeal. The current appeal was  against  the  removal
      decision dated 27 November 2014 [11].


  21. The claimant attended the hearing and gave evidence. At [21] the Judge
      noted that on 18 September 2014 the  claimant  submitted  through  his
      solicitors a Tier 4 application for leave to remain. Having regard  to
      correspondence referred to, that was not a  "new"  application  but  a
      replacement for the application originally made on 12 June 2012 [21].


  22.  The  Judge  noted  that  the  claimant  has  an  outstanding  Tier  4
      application made whilst he has leave to remain in the UK. He  was  not
      satisfied that the secretary of state discharged the burden  of  proof
      regarding the use of deception in  obtaining  an  English  certificate
      [26].


  23. He also stated at [26] that "I was told by [counsel] that it had  been
      conceded, following a judicial review application, that the [claimant]
      does have an in country right of appeal and I have proceeded  on  that
      basis."


  24. Ms Isherwood submitted that the First-tier Judge properly  noted  that
      the claimant was appealing against the secretary of  state's  decision
      to remove him from the UK  dated  27  November  2014.  She  submitted,
      relying on the secretary of state's grounds,  that  the  claimant  had
      made an application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
      on 12 June 2012, two days before his leave expired. That was  rejected
      for non payment of a fee on 17 July 2012.  He  then  put  in  a  fresh
      application on 20 July 2012, which was  out  of  time  and  which  was
      refused with no right of appeal on 7 November 2012.


  25. On 12 November 2012, he appeared to have put in  a  third  application
      but also a request for reconsideration of the non appealable  decision
      of 7 November 2012. He submitted  an  application  outside  the  rules
      (FLR)(O) on 26 April 2013, and informed the secretary of state that he
      wanted the Tier 4 application  considered,  which  meant  the  Tier  4
      application of 12 November 2012. The application of 20 July  2012  had
      already been refused and the application dated 12 June 2012  had  been
      rejected.


  26. It is contended that the Tribunal could thus not infer from  the  Home
      Office letter mentioning the application of 12 November 2012  that  it
      was a reference to the earlier, rejected  application  dated  12  June
      2012 or the subsequent refused application of  20  July  2012.  It  is
      contended that the removal decision was  made  on  27  November  2014,
      against which the  appeal  was  lodged.  However,  that  decision  was
      withdrawn after the claimant lodged a judicial review "and the new one
      was not appealed against."


  27. I have had regard to a letter dated 2 December 2014 sent to the First-
      tier Tribunal in which it is contended that the claimant asserts  that
      his removal from the UK would breach his human rights and that  he  is
      therefore entitled to an in country right of appeal.  The  lodging  of
      the appeal confers jurisdiction  on  the  Tribunal  to  determine  the
      appeal, including the question of whether the claimant has a right  of
      appeal.


  28. Ms Isherwood referred to [26]  where  the  Judge  concluded  that  the
      claimant had an outstanding Tier 4 application which was  made  whilst
      he had leave to remain in the UK. She  submitted  that  there  was  no
      evidence, as contended by counsel at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,
      that "it had been conceded" following a  judicial  review  application
      that the claimant does have an in country right of appeal. It  was  on
      that basis that the Judge proceeded.


  29. The Judge was also not satisfied  that  the  secretary  of  state  had
      discharged the burden of proof relating to the  alleged  deception  as
      set out in the specific  statement  of  reasons.  He  found  that  the
      claimant "did not use deception." [25]


  30. I find that counsel before the  First-tier  tribunal  was  correct  in
      noting that the secretary of state had conceded following  a  judicial
      review application that the claimant did have an in country  right  of
      appeal.


  31. I have  had  regard  to  the  documentation  which  was  part  of  the
      claimant's bundle. At page 42 there is a form of consent order dated 4
      June 2015 in the judicial review before the  Upper  Tribunal,  to  the
      effect that the claimant has been  granted  an  in  country  right  of
      appeal and the appeal is listed  for  hearing  on  29  June  2015.  By
      consent, it was ordered that  the  claimant  therefore  had  leave  to
      withdraw his judicial review application.


  32. There is also a letter from the  claimant's  solicitors  sent  to  the
      government legal department as well as to the Upper Tribunal on 4 June
      2015 in which the claimant applied to  withdraw  the  judicial  review
      application "by mutual consent." The form of consent was enclosed. The
      solicitor stated that they understood  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      would now decide the matter in question appropriately.


  33. The appeal was in fact listed for hearing on 29 June 2015 which is the
      date the First-tier Tribunal Judge heard the appeal.


  34. It  was  on  that  basis  that  the  Judge  found  that  he  did  have
      jurisdiction to consider the appeal. He concluded  that  the  claimant
      did not use deception in obtaining the test certificate and  that  the
      removal notice was therefore not in accordance with the law.  There is
      no ground of appeal against the finding that he did not use deception.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law and shall accordingly stand.


      No anonymity direction is made.


      Signed                             Date 31 March 2016


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

