

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: IA/48844/2014

                                                           IA/48845/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                  |                  Decision & Reasons    |
|On: 14th October 2015                 |Promulgated                             |
|                                      |On: 14th October 2015                   |
|                                      |                                        |
|                                      |                                        |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MUHAMMAD NAEEM
                                 ASMA RAMZAN
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:        Mr Timson, Counsel instructed by Juris
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are both nationals of Pakistan. They are respectively a
    husband and wife, date of birth 10th September 1982 and 5th June  1982.
    On the 25th March  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  AJ  Parker)
    allowed their linked appeals against a decision to refuse them  further
    leave to remain as Tier 1 Entrepeneurs.  The Secretary of State now has
    permission to appeal against that decision[1].




    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The matter in issue on appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether
    the applications for further leave had been supported  by  all  of  the
    mandatory evidence,  in  particular  that  required  by  paragraph  41-
    SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A (as it then read):

         (iii) one or more of the following specified documents covering
         (either together or individually) a continuous period commencing
         before 11 July 2014), up to no earlier than three months before the
         date of his application:
           (1) advertising or marketing material, including printouts of
           online advertising, that has been published locally or
           nationally, showing the applicant's name (and the name of the
           business if applicable) together with the business activity; or,
           where his business is trading online, confirmation of his
           ownership of the domain name of the business's website,
           (2) article(s) or online links to article(s) in a newspaper or
           other publication showing the applicant's name (and the name of
           the business if applicable) together with the business activity,
           (3) information from a trade fair, at which the applicant has
           had a stand or given a presentation to market his business,
           showing the applicant's name (and the name of the business if
           applicable) together with the business activity, or
           (4) personal registration with a UK trade body linked to the
           applicant's occupation;

 3. Of these four alternatives the Respondents relied on (1).


 4. When the matter came before the Tribunal the parties had  narrowed  the
    issue even further: the determination notes at  paragraph  8  that  the
    question was whether there was any evidence of advertising  before  the
    11th July 2014.

 5. At paragraphs 12-13 of the determination the First-tier Tribunal  finds
    that a bundle of evidence, "including posters, pens calendars etc"  was
    all submitted with the application, and that these  materials  were  in
    existence before the 11th July 2014. It appears to be accepted that the
    Appellants took delivery of these materials on the 10th July  2014  and
    that some of them were given to a  client  with  whom  a  contract  was
    signed on the same day: the evidence set  out  at  paragraph  10  being
    accepted under the heading 'my findings of fact'.    Having  regard  to
    the precise wording of the Rule, the Tribunal could find no support for
    the Secretary of State's contention that the advertising  material  had
    to be dated prior to 11th July 2014: it  was  enough  that  it  existed
    prior to that time and that it had been submitted with the application.
    The appeals were accordingly allowed.


    The Grounds of Appeal and Response

 6. The Secretary of State now appeals on the following grounds:


        i) The advertising material was "not acceptable";


       ii) It did not cover the continuous period prescribed by the Rule;

      iii) There was "no evidence" that the pens, key-rings  and  calendars
           had been distributed prior to the 11th July 2014.


 7. Mr Timson opposed the appeal on all grounds, directing my attention  to
    an invoice in the bundle, dated 10th July 2014, which referred  to  the
    delivery of said advertising material to the Appellants.



    My Findings


 8. References herein to the grounds are as they are numbered above.


 9. Ground (i) is not an arguable error of law. It is a  disagreement  with
    the clear findings of fact made by the Tribunal.

10. Ground  (ii)  is  not  particularised.  The  advertising,  of  whatever
    description, must cover the relevant period. The  Judge  accepted  that
    the keyrings, calendars etc were in the Appellants' possession, and had
    indeed been distributed, on the 10th July 2014, when he gave them to  a
    client. It does not appear  to  be  in  issue  that  it  was  still  in
    existence when the application was made in October of that year.    The
    First-tier Tribunal inferred from those two facts that the material  in
    question had continued to exist between those points in time. That  was
    an entirely reasonable inference to draw.   There is no arguable  error
    of law in respect of whether the material existed  for  the  continuous
    period prescribed by the Rule. Although Mr Harrison  did  not  seek  to
    persuade me otherwise, I would note for the sake of  completeness  that
    the Rule cannot sensibly be requiring advertising material  to  all  be
    dated so as  so  show  continual  existence:  unless  an  advertisement
    appears in a newspaper on a given day, or for instance  makes  a  time-
    limited offer, it would be most unusual if it did.  A  keyring  is  not
    likely to bear the date upon  which  it  is  handed  to  a  prospective
    client.

11. As to whether there was "no evidence" that the key rings, calendars and
    other marketing material were distributed prior to 11th July 2014 it is
    perfectly clear from paragraph 10 that there was: that was the evidence
    of Mr Naeem, accepted in its entirety by the First-tier Tribunal.




      Decisions

12. The decision contains no error of law and it is upheld.


13. I was not asked for a direction as to anonymity, and on the facts I see
    no reason to make one.









                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           14th October 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page on the 27th May
2015

