
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48763/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 13th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR. MANSOOR ALI TARIQ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Khan, Counsel instructed by Lincolns Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a decision and reasons promulgated by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton on 27th May 2014, in which he allowed an
    appeal under  the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006,  against  the
    refusal of an application for a residence card.

 2. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department and the
    respondent to this appeal, is Mr. Mansoor Tariq.  However for  ease  of
    reference, in the course  of  this  determination  I  shall  adopt  the
    parties' status as it was before the First-tier Tribunal.  I  shall  in
    this determination, refer to Mr. Mansoor Tariq as the appellant and the
    Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who made an  application  dated
    25 August 2014 for a residence card.  The application  was  refused  by
    the respondent for the reasons set out in a reasons for refusal  letter
    dated 01 December 2014. The respondent reached her decision following a
    'marriage interview'  completed  on  01  December  2014.   During  that
    interview completed via an interpreter, various scenarios were  relayed
    to  the  appellant  and  his  wife.  A  number  of  discrepancies  were
    identified, and following that marriage interview in so far  as  it  is
    material, the respondent stated in her decision;

         "Due to the above, I have found that the couple cannot  communicate
         with each other in a way that would be reasonably expected.

         It  is  reasonable  to  expect  someone  that  is  in   a   genuine
         relationship would be able to communicate.

         In view of the fact that you are unable  to  do  so,  there  is  no
         satisfactory evidence that you are in a genuine  relationship  with
         Liana Ana Maria Popa or  that  your  marriage  was  contracted  for
         genuine reasons. The evidence provided at interview shows that  you
         do not know Liana Ana Maria Popa well and that you  are  not  in  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship with her, contrary to what  you
         claimed at interview.

         The Secretary of State is therefore satisfied  that  you  knowingly
         entered into a sham marriage which was contracted for  the  purpose
         of evading immigration control.

         In  view  of  the  above,  the  secretary  of  state  considers  it
         undesirable to permit you to remain in the United  Kingdom  in  the
         light of your character and conduct as you have been involved in an
         attempt to evade  immigration  control  by  entering  into  a  sham
         marriage."

 4. At the hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal,  both  the
    appellant and Miss Popa gave evidence.  They were  both  cross-examined
    about their domestic arrangements and specific questions  were  put  to
    them as to exactly what they had done, on particular days.   They  were
    asked about  how  they  communicate  and  the  decision  records  their
    evidence;

         "[15]     The appellant confirmed that his  wife  speaks  a  little
         English and that he is now able to speak a lot of Romanian.

         [17]  There was  brief  examination  of  Miss  Poppa....  She  gave
         evidence that the appellant is teaching her English and  that  they
         also make use of Google to communicate.

         [19]  The Tribunal then asked some questions of Miss Popa who  gave
         evidence that the appellant understands Romanian very well and that
         she speaks a little English."

 5. In his submissions to the First-tier Tribunal, Mr  Khan  accepted  that
    there was a communication problem between the appellant and Miss  Popa.
    He submitted that a mix of languages was used by the appellant and Miss
    Popa, to communicate with each other. [24]

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton

 6. The appeal was allowed.  The findings of fact and reasons are succinct;

         "[30]    The evidence provided to the Tribunal at the hearing  from
         the appellant and Miss Popa as to the nature of their  relationship
         and  the  detail  of  their  domestic  life  together  was  largely
         consistent. The Tribunal found that the accounts as to their shared
         life by both the appellant and Miss Popa were credible  because  of
         the consistency of their evidence in large part.

         [31] It was clearly the  case  that  Miss  Popa  was  not  able  to
         communicate in English given the need for a  Romanian  interpreter.
         The appellant was able to communicate fluently in English  and  had
         no difficulty understanding  questions  and  providing  answers  to
         those questions at the Tribunal. There was therefore no doubt as to
         the significant difficulty which the appellant and Miss Popa  would
         have in seeking to communicate in English. That cast doubt  on  the
         claim in the witness statement of the appellant that  he  and  Miss
         Popa communicate in English  and  that,  although  his  wife  could
         hardly speak a word of English when arriving in the UK, her English
         had improved considerably since then. The Tribunal found  that  the
         appellant and Miss Popa would not be able to communicate with  each
         other solely in English.

         [32] The appellant gave evidence that he was now able  to  speak  a
         lot of Romanian with his wife. The Tribunal did not have before  it
         evidence that the appellant was able to speak  a  lot  of  Romanian
         with his wife but found that it was credible that the appellant and
         Miss Popa would  communicate  using  a  mix  of  languages  (namely
         English and Romanian) given that Miss Popa had now been in  the  UK
         for 2 years and it was reasonable to assume  that  her  ability  to
         communicate in English would improve in time, particularly  as  the
         Tribunal was informed that she had not returned  to  Romania  since
         her arrival in the UK in May 2003.

         [33] I therefore find  that,  in  light  of  the  totality  of  the
         information before me, I am not satisfied  that  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities that the marriage of the appellant and Miss Popa is a
         marriage of convenience."

The grounds of appeal

 7. The respondent contends that in reaching the finding at paragraph  [32]
    that the Appellant and Miss Popa would be able to communicate  using  a
    mix of languages, namely English and Romanian;

          a. The Judge has failed to resolve the conflict of fact that Miss
             Popa is not able to communicate in English, and  there  is  no
             evidence that the appellant is able to speak Romanian; and

          b. The Judge has failed to resolve  the  conflict  of  fact  that
             after two years of  being  in  the  UK,  the  judge  found  at
             paragraph [31] that Miss Popa  is  unable  to  communicate  in
             English; and

 8. Furthermore, the respondent submits that there is a further conflict of
    fact identified in paragraph [32] of the  decision.   The  judge  found
    that it was credible that the appellant and Miss Popa would communicate
    using a mix of languages (namely English and Romanian) given that  Miss
    Popa had now been in the UK for two years  and  it  was  reasonable  to
    assume that her ability to communicate  in  English  would  improve  in
    time, particularly as the  Tribunal  was  informed  that  she  had  not
    returned to Romania since her arrival in the UK in  May  2003.   It  is
    therefore unclear whether the Judge proceeded  upon  the  premise  that
    Miss Popa had been in the UK for 2 years or 12 years.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holmes
    who commented that the judge's approach to the disputed issues of fact,
    is arguably muddled and inconsistent, so that there  is  a  failure  to
    engage adequately with the key  issue  of  whether  the  sponsor  spoke
    English when the couple met and agreed to marry.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Holmes also noted that there is an arguable inconsistency in  the
    approach to the question of how long the sponsor lived in the UK.

DISCUSSION

10. On behalf of the respondent, Ms Isherwood adopted the grounds of appeal
    and submitted that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses  a
    material error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the decision.
    She  submits  that  the  respondent,  in  her  decision  refusing   the
    application for a residence card, had set out the evidential basis upon
    which she had concluded that the appellant had knowingly entered into a
    sham marriage.   She submitted that contrary to what was  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant and recorded at paragraph [23] of the decision,
    the respondent had provided the record of the 'marriage interview', and
    thus satisfied the evidential burden upon the respondent.  Ms Isherwood
    submitted that there was no evidence of a common language and that  the
    Judge failed, in reaching his decision, to address the  point  made  in
    the respondent's refusal letter, that the appellant and Miss Popa are a
    couple that cannot communicate with each other in a way that  would  be
    reasonably expected, and that it is reasonable to expect  someone  that
    is in a genuine relationship would be able to  communicate.   She  also
    submits that at paragraph [32] the Judge appears to  proceed  upon  the
    premise that the appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom  since  May
    2003.

11. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Khan submits that the appellant and Miss
    Popa were cross-examined at some length during the hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  and  that  the  Judge  found  that  they  provided
    consistent and credible answers. He submits that the findings  made  by
    the Judge were properly open to him, and that insofar as there  is  any
    confusion as to the length of time that Miss Popa has lived in the  UK,
    it is to be noted  that  at  paragraph  [17],  the  Judge  records  the
    evidence that Miss Popa arrived in the UK in May 2013.  Mr Khan submits
    that at paragraph [32] the Judge refers to Miss Popa as having "been in
    the UK for 2 years", and so the reference to  2003  must  simply  be  a
    typing error.

12. I  remind  myself  that  there  is  a  clear  line  of  authority  that
    establishes that the Upper Tribunal should be slow to overturn  a  case
    where there was no clear legal error.  In R & ors (Iran) v SSHD  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982, the Court of Appeal held that before the Tribunal can set
    aside a decision of a Judge on the grounds of error of law, it  has  to
    be satisfied that the  correction  of  the  error  would  have  made  a
    material  difference  to  the  outcome,  or  to  the  fairness  of  the
    proceedings. A finding might only be set aside for error of law on  the
    grounds of perversity if it  was  irrational  or  unreasonable  in  the
    Wednesbury sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence. ?

13. I have carefully read through, and considered the findings and  reasons
    that are set out at paragraphs [30] to [33]  of  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I reject the submission made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that the judge  fails  to  take  into  account,  or  resolve
    conflicts of fact.   As to the way in which the appellant and Miss Popa
    communicate, the evidence of the appellant was that "his wife speaks  a
    little English and that he is now able  to  speak  lots  of  Romanian."
    [15].  Miss Popa gave evidence "that  the  appellant  is  teaching  her
    English and that they also make use of Google  to  communicate."  [17].
    At paragraph [19], the Judge records the evidence given  by  Miss  Popa
    that "the appellant understands Romanian very well and that she  speaks
    a little English.".  Read carefully, at paragraph [31] the Judge  noted
    the significant difficulty that the appellant and Miss Popa would  have
    in seeking to communicate in English.  The Judge went on, at  paragraph
    [31] to find that "the appellant and Miss Popa would  not  be  able  to
    communicate with each other solely in English".  The use  of  the  word
    "solely" in this context is important, because that was a finding  open
    to the Judge on the evidence.  The evidence was not that Miss  Popa  is
    not able to communicate in English at all, or  that  the  Appellant  is
    unable to speak Romanian.  On the evidence it was plainly open  to  the
    judge to find, as he did, that the appellant and Miss Popa would not be
    able to communicate with each other solely in English.

14. Whilst it is correct that there was no  evidence  before  the  Tribunal
    that the appellant was able to speak a lot of  Romanian,  at  paragraph
    [32], the Judge accepted as credible, that the appellant and Miss  Popa
    would communicate in a mix of languages (namely English and  Romanian).
     In my judgement, on the evidence available to the Tribunal, that was a
    conclusion open to the Tribunal that cannot be described  as  perverse,
    irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,  or  one  that  was
    wholly unsupported by the evidence.

15. At paragraph [32], the Judge goes on  to  set  out  his  reasoning  for
    concluding that it  is  credible  that  the  appellant  and  Miss  Popa
    communicate using a mix of languages.  The judge records that Miss Popa
    "had now been in the UK for 2 years".  The hearing took  place  in  May
    2015 and so the Judge appears to have had in mind that  Miss  Popa  had
    been in the UK since May 2013.  That is consistent  with  the  evidence
    recorded at paragraph [17] of the decision.  I  accept  the  submission
    made on behalf of the appellant that the reference in paragraph [32] to
    Miss Popa not having returned to Romania since her arrival in the UK in
    May 2003 is nothing more than a typing error.  The Judge plainly had in
    mind the fact that Miss Popa had arrived in the UK in May 2013.

16. In those circumstances in my view there is no material error of law and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

Notice of Decision

17. The appeal is dismissed.

18. No anonymity direction has been applied for.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    made no such direction and I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
