
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48855/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th January 2016                  |On 19th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

             DESIGNATED JUDGE OF THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               OMAR Bouherour
                          (NO anonymity ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Emezie of Dylan Conrad Creolle Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Omar Bouherour (whom I shall refer to as "the Claimant") had applied to
    the Secretary of State for the grant to him of  a  permanent  residence
    card under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006.
    His application was refused.  His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nolan in a decision promulgated on
    13th July 2015.

 2. Judge Nolan found that the Appellant had been in a durable relationship
    with an Italian national, although that  relationship  had  now  ended.
    The judge noted that the Appellant had been granted a residence  permit
    as the family member of the EEA national for the  period  21st  October
    2009 until 21st October 2014 and that before expiry  of  his  residence
    card issued in that regard he had made the application for the grant of
    a permanent residence card.  The judge found that  the  Claimant  could
    not succeed under Regulation 10 but did so under Regulation 15(1)(b) as
    "a family member of an EEA national who is not himself an EEA  national
    but who has resided in the United Kingdom  with  the  EEA  national  in
    accordance with these Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of  five
    years."

 3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal asserting  that  the
    Claimant's residence was subject to the Secretary of  State  exercising
    discretion under Regulation 17(4) and that the Appellant had never made
    an application and been documented as "an extended family  member"  and
    thus could not  qualify  under  Regulation  15(1)(b).   Permission  was
    granted.

 4. In a response under Upper Tribunal Procedure Rule 24  it  was  asserted
    that the Claimant did meet the requirements of Regulation  15(1)(b)  as
    he had indeed been residing as a family member of the EEA national  for
    the required period in accordance with the Regulations.

 5. At the commencement of the hearing before me I enquired of Miss Everett
    whether the Claimant had or had not been granted a residence card as an
    extended family member, as had been found by Judge Nolan.  She accepted
    that if the Claimant had been granted the residence card on that  basis
    he would be entitled to be treated as a family member (even though  not
    married to the EEA national) under the provisions of  Regulation  7(3).
    At this point Mr Emezie for the Claimant produced copy documents  which
    appeared to show that the Claimant had been granted a residence card on
    the basis claimed.  I put the matter back in the list for enquiries  to
    be made.

 6. When the hearing resumed Miss Everett confirmed that the Appellant  had
    indeed been granted the residence card for the  period  stated  by  the
    judge and in those circumstances there were no further submissions  she
    wished to make.

 7. On the basis of that evidence, which apparently had not been before the
    representative  of  the  Secretary  of  State  who  had   drafted   the
    application for permission to appeal, and on the  basis  of  the  other
    findings made by Judge Nolan I accepted  that  the  Claimant  had  been
    issued with a residence card as an extended family member  of  the  EEA
    national.  The judge found that he had resided in  the  United  Kingdom
    with the EEA national in accordance with the Regulations, as  a  family
    member, (having regard to Regulation 7(3)) for a continuous  period  of
    five years.  He had therefore been entitled to the grant of a permanent
    residence card and there was no material error of law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  I accordingly dismissed  the  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.



Notice of Decision

There was no material error of law in the decision made  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal and the appeal to this  Tribunal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  is
therefore dismissed.

No anonymity order was requested and none is made.


Signed   Date 17 January 2016

Judge French
Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal

