
[pic]
IAC-AH-co-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/48047/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th November 2014                            |On 14th November 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Bimbola Morolake Adefolaju
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wells of Maliks & Khan Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Thomas promulgated on 7th July 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the claimant.

 3. The claimant is a female Nigerian citizen born 7th January 1974 who  in
    December 2012 applied for a Derivative Residence Card on the basis that
    she is the primary carer of her daughter, who is a British citizen, and
    if the claimant was required to leave the United  Kingdom,  this  would
    mean that her daughter would be unable to reside in this country.   The
    claimant's daughter was born on 9th November 2010.

 4. The application was refused on 25th  October  2013  with  reference  to
    regulation 15A of The Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations
    2006 (the 2006 regulations).  The Secretary of  State  did  not  accept
    that the child currently lived with the claimant, nor that she  is  her
    primary carer, and it was not accepted that if the  claimant  left  the
    United Kingdom the child would also  have  to  leave,  as  the  child's
    father is a British citizen and no evidence had been  submitted  as  to
    why he would not be in a position to care for her.

 5. The claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Thomas  (the  judge)  on  26th
    June 2014.  The judge found, that the child lived  with  the  claimant,
    that the claimant is the primary carer of the child, and  that  if  the
    claimant was not allowed to live in the United Kingdom, then the  child
    would also have to leave  this  country.   The  claimant's  appeal  was
    therefore  allowed  with  reference  to  regulation  15A  of  the  2006
    regulations.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and relied upon two grounds.

 7.  Firstly  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  made  a   material
    misdirection of law in that she had not correctly addressed the meaning
    of the term "unable".  It was contended that the  judge  had  erred  by
    combining the two limbs of regulation 15A(4A) because even if the child
    was primarily cared for by the claimant,  there  was  a  separate  test
    which involved considering whether the child would be unable to  reside
    in the United Kingdom if the claimant had to leave.  The  Secretary  of
    State noted that the claimant last had contact with the child's  father
    in January  2014,  that  his  residential  address  was  known  to  the
    claimant, and the child's  father  had  contributed  financially.   The
    Secretary  of  State  submitted  that  the  provision   in   regulation
    15A(4A)(c) that the British child would be  unable  to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom, imposed a high threshold.

 8. The second ground submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons for her findings, and had failed to adequately explore
    the reasons for accepting the claimant had primary  responsibility  for
    the British child, and the judge had not examined whether the situation
    presented at appeal had been engineered for immigration purposes.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Ransley and I set out  below  paragraphs  4  and  5  of  the  grant  of
    permission;


         "4.  The 'Findings' section of the  determination  is  brief.   The
             judge did not  properly  consider  whether  the  two  distinct
             requirements of Reg 15A(4A) are both met.  The judge  appeared
             to have accepted all the evidence relied upon by the Appellant
             about her role as the child's carer and the  alleged  lack  of
             recent contact with the father without  proper  evaluation  of
             the veracity of the evidence.


         5.   The grounds have disclosed arguable errors of law  that  might
             have made a material difference to the outcome of the  appeal.
             Permission is granted; all grounds may be argued."

10. Following the grant  of  permission  the  claimant  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  It  was  contended,  in  summary,  the  grounds  amounted  to  a
    disagreement with the findings made by the judge, who had made findings
    open to her on the evidence,  and  given  adequate  reasons  for  those
    findings.

11. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal determination should be set aside.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

12. Mr Melvin relied upon the grounds contained within the application  for
    permission to appeal, and the grant of permission.  Mr Melvin submitted
    that the evidence was scarce, and I was asked to find  that  the  judge
    had erred in relying upon  that  scarce  evidence,  to  find  that  the
    claimant is a primary carer of a British child.

13. Mr  Melvin  submitted  Hines  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  660  and  relied  upon
    paragraphs 25 to 27 of that decision.

The Claimant's Submissions

14. Mr Wells relied upon the rule 24 response.  I  was  asked  to  conclude
    that the judge had not erred in law, and had made findings  which  were
    open to her on the evidence, and had given sustainable reasons.

15. Mr Wells pointed out that at the date of hearing the child was 3  years
    8 months of age, and the judge had made a finding that  the  child  was
    dependent upon the claimant.  The evidence given by  the  claimant  was
    that the relationship between herself and the child's  father  had  not
    continued.  Mr Wells submitted that although it could be said that  the
    judge had given brief reasons, they were adequate and did not  disclose
    an error of law.

The Secretary of State's Response

16. Mr Melvin submitted that the judge had not made findings in relation to
    the child's father, and that even if the claimant was the primary carer
    of the child, there needed to  be  findings  made  about  the  father's
    involvement in the child's upbringing.

17. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.



My Conclusions and Reasons

18. I firstly consider the Secretary of State's  first  ground  of  appeal,
    that being the contention that the judge made a  material  misdirection
    in law.  I do  not  find  that  the  judge  materially  erred  for  the
    following reasons.

19. I do not accept that the judge combined the two limbs of  the  test  in
    regulation 15A(4A).  The test referred to by the Secretary of State  is
    whether the claimant is the primary carer of  a  British  citizen,  and
    whether a British citizen would be  unable  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom or in another EEA state if the claimant were required to leave.



20. I find that the judge considered the issues raised in the Secretary  of
    State's refusal letter dated  25th  October  2013,  by  firstly  making
    findings as to whether the child lived with the claimant, which had not
    been accepted by the Secretary of State.

21. In paragraph 11 of the determination  the  judge  considered  that  the
    evidence proved, on a balance of probabilities, the  child  lived  with
    the claimant.  In making this finding, the judge stated  that  she  had
    considered  all  of  the  evidence,  which  would  have  included   the
    claimant's evidence, together with letters  from  Dr  Shaffi,  Michelle
    Richardson from the Victoria Pre-School Centre, and Michael Opoku.

22. The letter from Michael Opoku is undated and handwritten and  does  not
    add much, but states that the  author  of  the  letter  has  known  the
    claimant for over four years and her daughter since her  birth.   There
    was no specific statement in the  letter  that  the  claimant  and  her
    daughter lived together.

23. The letter from Dr Shaffi is dated 2nd November 2012, and confirms that
    the doctor is the general practitioner for both the  claimant  and  her
    daughter.  The letter confirms that they are  registered  at  the  same
    address and that the  claimant  always  brings  the  child  to  medical
    appointments.

24. The letter from Michelle Richardson is undated and explains that she is
    the team leader at Victoria Centre  Preschool  in  Wellingborough,  and
    confirms that the claimant is the  main  carer  for  her  daughter  who
    started at the centre on 10th September 2013.  The letter confirms that
    the claimant and her daughter have the same address.

25. I conclude that the finding made by the judge that the claimant and her
    daughter live together was open to her, and that she did not err in law
    by making such a finding.

26. The judge went on in paragraphs 12  and  13  to  consider  whether  the
    claimant is the primary carer of a British child.  There is no  dispute
    that the claimant is the mother of the child, and that the child  is  a
    British citizen.

27. Regulation 15A(7) states that an  individual  is  a  primary  carer  of
    another person if that individual is a direct  relative  of  the  other
    person, and is the person who has primary responsibility for the  other
    person's care or shares equally the responsibility  for  that  person's
    care, with one other person who is not an exempt person.

28. In my view the judge did not err in finding that the  claimant  is  the
    primary carer of her daughter.  The judge explained that she made  this
    finding having taken into account the letters of Dr Shaffi and Michelle
    Richardson, who both gave  their  opinion  that  the  claimant  is  her
    daughter's primary carer.  The judge noted that these conclusions  were
    based on the fact that  the  claimant  was  the  only  parent  who  had
    attended medical appointments and school  consultations  and  the  only
    parent named on the child's medical and school records.  The judge  was
    entitled to reach that conclusion.

29. The judge then  considered,  in  paragraph  14  of  her  determination,
    whether the child would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom  if
    the Appellant had to leave.  The judge has therefore not  combined  the
    tests in regulation 15A(4A) but has recognised that there is a separate
    test, which relates to the ability of the child to remain in the United
    Kingdom without the claimant.

30. The Secretary of State contends that there is a high threshold.  In  my
    view paragraph 23 of Hines sets out the correct position which  is  set
    out below;

    23.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  test  applicable  under  regulation
         15A(4A)(c) is clear and can be given effect without contravening EU
         law.  The reviewer has to  consider  the  welfare  of  the  British
         citizen child and the extent to which the quality  or  standard  of
         his life will be impaired if the  non-EU  citizen  is  required  to
         leave.  This is all for  the  purpose  of  answering  the  question
         whether the child would, as a matter of practicality, be unable  to
         remain in the UK.  This requires  a  consideration,  amongst  other
         things, of the impact which the removal of the primary carer  would
         have on the child, and  the  alternative  care  available  for  the
         child.

31. The claimant's evidence, which reading the determination  as  a  whole,
    appears to  have been accepted by the judge, is that the child's father
    played no part in her upbringing save to enable the claimant to  access
    the child benefit which was paid into the father's bank  account.   The
    relationship between the claimant and the child's father  commenced  in
    January 2010 and ended in April 2010, well before the child was born on
    9th November 2010.  The judge accepted the claimant's evidence that the
    claimant and her daughter had not seen the child's father since January
    2014.  The judge did make a finding as to the father's  involvement  in
    the child's upbringing, stating "that there is  no  evidence  that  her
    father plays a real role in her life".

32. In my view the judge was entitled to take into account the child's  age
    when assessing whether she would be unable  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom if her mother had to leave.  The judge in my view, was entitled
    to accept the evidence that the child had never lived with her  father,
    and overall was entitled to conclude that  if  the  claimant  left  the
    United Kingdom, then practically, the child would also have  to  leave.
    This is clearly a decision with which the Secretary of State disagrees,
    and it may be said that not every judge in considering this issue would
    have reached the same decision.  That however is not the point.  In  my
    view the judge has considered the evidence, and  reached  a  conclusion
    that was open to her on the evidence, and has not made an error of  law
    in reaching that decision.

33. Turning to the second ground relied upon by  the  Secretary  of  State,
    which  relates  to  adequacy  of  reasons,  I  do  not  find  that  the
    determination discloses an error of law.  The Upper Tribunal has  given
    some guidance on the issue of adequacy of reasons and I set  out  below
    the first paragraph of the headnote to Shizad (sufficiency of  reasons:
    set aside) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 85 (IAC);

      1) Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation  of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

34. I also set out below the headnote to Budhathoki (reasons for decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);

    It is generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal
    judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised  in  a  case.   This
    leads to judgments becoming overly long  and  confused  and  is  not  a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases.  It  is,  however,  necessary
    for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can
    understand why they have won or lost.

35. Mr Wells contended in his oral submissions, that the  judge  had  given
    brief but adequate reasons for the findings  that  had  been  made.   I
    agree.  The findings made were open to the judge on the  evidence,  and
    she has given adequate reasons explaining those findings.  It should be
    clear to both parties in this appeal, why the decision has been made in
    favour of the claimant.

36. In my view, the grounds contained within the application for permission
    to appeal amount to a disagreement with the findings made, but  do  not
    disclose an error law.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity, and the Upper Tribunal makes no anonymity order.



Signed                              Date 11th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                              Date 11th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


