
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: IA/48952/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London            |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3 December 2014                      |On 5 December 2014        |
|                                        |                          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                        Appellant
                                     and

                            SHAVIGNAN SANTHAKUMAR

                                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr P Turner, instructed by Advice Wise Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, for  convenience  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  in  the
    determination as they appeared before the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka. His application for leave  to
    remain in the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant was  refused  by
    the respondent on 5 November 2013. His appeal against that decision was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cohen  in  a  decision  dated  5
    September 2014. The Secretary of State now appeals with  permission  to
    this Tribunal.

 3. There are two grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Renton, who granted permission to appeal, decided that the second
    ground has no merit but granted permission on the basis that the  first
    ground is  arguable.  The  second  ground  relates  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's findings on the substantive issues. The Judge accepted
    that the third party sponsor is the appellant's mother. I am  satisfied
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  considered  all  of  the  oral  and
    documentary evidence and gave sufficient reasons for his  finding  that
    the sponsor is the appellant's mother and I agree that this ground  has
    no merit.

Error of Law

 4. The Secretary of State contends in the first ground of appeal that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge did not have jurisdiction  to  determine  the
    appeal because the appellant made his application after the  expiry  of
    his leave to remain and that the resulting decision did  not  therefore
    give rise to an  appeal  under  section  82  (2)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Judge was aware of this issue and
    noted;  'it  has  previously  been  accepted   that   the   appellant's
    application was submitted in time and I concur  with  that  conclusion'
    [5]. It appears to me that the Judge was referring to the fact that the
    Duty Judge admitted the appeal. However I note that  the  Duty  Judge's
    note simply says 'ok to proceed' and that no reasons are given for this
    decision. I also note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  said  at
    paragraph 2 of the determination that the appellant's leave  to  remain
    as a student  expired  on  30  September  2013  and  that  his  present
    application was submitted on 3 October 2013.

 5. Mr Shilliday submitted that paragraph  34G  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    provides, inter alia, that the date on which an application is made  is
    the date of posting or the date  an  online  application  is  made.  He
    submitted that the application form  submitted  by  the  appellant  was
    posted and was received by the Secretary of State  on  4  October  2013
    which means that the deemed date on which it was posted  is  3  October
    2013. He accepted that  it  appeared  that  the  fee  was  paid  on  26
    September 2013 but said that there was no evidence that the application
    was made online on that date. He submitted  that  the  application  was
    posted because the photographs were attached to it by sellotape and  it
    had  the  signatures  of  the  appellant  and  his  representative.  He
    submitted that the appellant completed the appellant on  the  computer,
    printed it out, signed it and posted it and that there  is  nothing  on
    the respondent's file  to  show  that  the  application  was  submitted
    online.

 6. Mr Turner submitted that there was evidence that, as  well  as  posting
    it, the appellant had also submitted the application online in the form
    of the letter from the appellant's then representative,  the  visa  and
    immigration adviser from the appellant's University. That letter, dated
    18 November 2013, confirms that the appellant completed the application
    online on 26 September 2013 and that, in  accordance  with  information
    from the Home Office to all student advisers, the appellant had 15 days
    to post the supporting documents. He  submitted  that  the  application
    form itself shows that the fee was paid on 26 September 2013  and  that
    the  online  form  was  submitted  then.  This  was  apparent,  in  his
    submission, from the WorldPay reference and notification number on  the
    form. He submitted that, in any event, the effect of  the  decision  in
    Anwar & Anor v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 1275 was that the appropriate forum
    for the determination of this issue was  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He
    submitted that the respondent did not appear at the First-tier Tribunal
    hearing to argue this issue.

 7. I accept that jurisdiction was a live issue before the Judge  and  that
    he  did  not  give  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the   appellant's
    application was submitted in time. This may amount to an error  of  law
    but I am satisfied that it was  not  a  material  error  as  there  was
    sufficient evidence before the Judge to make  this  finding.  The  Duty
    Judge had previously accepted that the appeal was valid and allowed  it
    to proceed. There was evidence from the student advisor,  who  was  the
    appellant's representative at the relevant time, that  the  application
    was submitted online on 26 September 2013 and that, in accordance  with
    normal practice, the application form was posted thereafter along  with
    supporting documents. The application  form  itself  gives  a  WorldPay
    payment notification number which was not simply typed  onto  the  form
    but which is printed on the top and bottom of the  first  page  of  the
    form and at the bottom of pages 11, 12 and 13 of the  form  (A  of  the
    respondent's bundle). As well as the  declarations  and  signatures  on
    page 12 there is a separate declaration at pages 9 and 10 which require
    confirmation at page 9. It appears that pages 1-9 were submitted online
    and pages 11-13 were added to the posted application. I  consider  that
    this evidence is sufficient to justify the finding made  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cohen that the application was made in time and that the
    tribunal  did  therefore  have  jurisdiction.  Any  error  he  made  is
    therefore not material.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

Signed
                            Date: 4 December 2014


A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








