
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/48544/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2016                           |On 8 April 2016            |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                         BENEDICTA ADEDAYO OMOLAYOLE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Adewusi of Crown Law Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.
3. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney promulgated on  19  June
   2015 which allowed the Appellants appeal against a  refusal  to  issue  a
   residence card .
4. On 30 November 2013 the Appellant had applied for  a  residence  card  as
   conformation of her right to reside in the UK. On 18  February  2014  the
   Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's  application.  The  refusal
   letter gave a number of reasons:
   (a)In order to qualify for a derivative residence card the Appellant  had
   to  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation  15A(2)  of  the  Immigration
   (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ('the  EEA  Rgulations')as  the
   parent of an EEA national child who claims to be exercising Treaty Rights
   as a self-sufficient person.
   (b)The Appellant had failed to provide sufficient evidence that  her  EEA
   national son was self-sufficient in defined by regulation 4 and 6 of  the
   EEA Regulations.
   The evidence provided showed that the Appellants child was  supported  by
   Manchester City Council and therefore could not be self-sufficient.
The Judge's Decision
5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge  De  Haney  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the   appeal   against   the
   Respondent's decision. The Judge :
   a) Set out the Law at paragraph 5 setting out Regulation 15A of  the  EEA
      Regulations.
   b) The Judge found that the Appellant had a child who was an  EU  citizen
      and if the Appellant were to be removed  her  6-year-old  child  would
      have to leave the UK.
   c) He concluded that 'On the Zambrano principle therefore the  appeal  is
      allowed.'
6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that:
   a) The Judge had not applied the correct law: the provision  he  applied,
      Regulation 15A(4A) applies to children who are  British  Citizens  and
      the Appellants child is a German national.
   b) There are no findings as to  the  employment  status  of  the  child's
      father or whether they have resided in the UK  at  the  same  time  as
      required by the relevant section.
7.  On 1 September 2015 Designated Immigration Judge Zucker gave  permission
   to appeal.

8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc  Vitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Respondent that :

   a) The issue was a narrow one and the Judge had applied the wrong law  to
      the facts.

   b) The matter should be re  heard  as  there  were  no  findings  on  the
      relevant facts.

9. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Adewusi submitted that:

   a) He relied on his Rule 24 response.

   b) The Zambrano principles had not been properly transposed into the  EEA
      Regulations as the principal f that case was that if a child was an EU
      citizen the parents should be allowed to live in the host country  and
      care for them.
Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard those  submissions,  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

11. The Appellant in this case made an  application  for  a  Residence  Card
   claiming a derivative right of residence  based  on  her  child  being  a
   German national. Her application was considered under Regulation 15(2) of
   the EEA Regulations and refused as there  was  insufficient  evidence  to
   show that the requirements were met.

12. The Judge in setting out  the  law  in  this  case  set  out  the  wrong
   provisions, those that applied to British Citizen  children  rather  than
   those that applied to non British citizens. Mr Adewusi, who  appeared  in
   the First-tier, argued that the EEA Regulations did not comply  with  the
   ruling in Zambrano.

13. It is unclear from the Judge's decision whether the Judge applied  those
   incorrect Regulations to the facts of the case as  there  is  no  finding
   whether he met the law as the Judge believed was applicable. The  failure
   of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine whether the Appellant
   met  the  requirements  of  Regulation  15A(2)  of  the  EEA  Regulations
   constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider  to  be  material
   since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise  the  outcome  could  have
   been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

14. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside in its entirety.
   All matters to be redetermined afresh.

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First  Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
   the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due  to  the  failure  to  make
   findings in relation to any of those matters that were  relevant  to  the
   provisions of the EEA Regulations that applied in the Appellants case. In
   this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the  matter  will
   be a complete re hearing.

17. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed.

   Signed                                                               Date
   21.3.2016

   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
