
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48286/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2016                     |On 8 March 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                          MR OMER AITMAD KHAN LODHI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K S Ehtesham-Khan (Britain Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of  law  hearing.   The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.  He applied for further leave to remain in the UK on 19  June
    2014 as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  He appeals a decision and  reasons
    by First-tier Tribunal (Judge J Macdonald) ("FTT")  promulgated  on  23
    June 2015.  The appeal was dismissed on the grounds of that  there  was
    no valid appeal and thus the FtT had no jurisdiction.

Background

2.   It was accepted that the appellant met  the  specific  requirements  of
    Tier 4 (General) Student  with  reference  to  paragraph  245ZX  having
    regard to maintenance/funds  and  points  awarded  for  the  CAS.   The
    respondent refused the application on the grounds  that  the  appellant
    failed to meet the requirements of paragraph  245ZX(a).  The  appellant
    failed to attend an interview and it could not be determined whether he
    was a genuine student. The respondent relied on  the   general  grounds
    for refusal in paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules.

FtT hearing and decision

3.   The FtT raised a preliminary issue at the hearing.  It queried  whether
    or not the appellant had a right of appeal. The application was made on
    19 June 2014.  The FtT determined that the law in force as at the  date
    of decision, namely 13 November 2014, applied and as a consequence  the
    appellant had no right of appeal  (  Section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  amended  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014).  There was no consideration by the FtT of the substantive issues
    under appeal.

Application for Permission to Appeal

4.   The appellant submitted grounds  for  permission  and  applied  for  an
    extension of time which was granted.

5.   The FtT  erred  in  law  by  failing  to  consider  that  the  date  of
    application  (19  June  2014)  was  the  relevant  date  and  that  the
    substantive changes came into effect on 20 October 2014.  The notice of
    refusal gave the appellant a right of appeal.

Permission to Appeal

6.   First-tier Tribunal Fisher found that there was an  arguable  error  of
    law. The FtT erred by failing to take into  account  that  applications
    made on or before 19 October 2014 had a right of appeal as confirmed by
    the notice of decision.  (Ajakaiye (visitor appeals - right of  appeal)
    Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00375 (IAC)).

Rule 24 Response

7.   The Secretary of State opposed the appeal and submitted that the First-
    tier Tribunal had directed itself appropriately.  The appellant did not
    have a right of appeal because his application for  Tier  4  leave  was
    made out of time, which is a separate reason for lack of  jurisdiction.



Error of Law Hearing

8.   At the hearing before me it was conceded by Mr  Bramble  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary  of  State  that  the  Rule  24  response  was  factually
    incorrect. The appellant  made an in time application (his leave having
    expired on 20 June 2014), and furthermore, it was accepted that the FtT
    failed to correctly and lawfully determine the appeal having regard  to
    the right of appeal given to the appellant in the notice  of  decision.
    Mr Bramble further observed that  the  FtT  failed  to  deal  with  the
    substantive issue, namely the non-attendance at the interview.  He  was
    unable to produce evidence confirming the appellant had been invited to
    attend for an interview and furthermore, any  reasons  why  there  were
    doubts that the appellant was a genuine student given that the CAS  had
    been accepted.

9.   Mr Ehtesham-Khan submitted that the appeal should be allowed  outright.
      The  appellant  had  never  received  any  invitation  to  attend  an
    interview.  He further submitted that the  respondent  needed  to  show
    that the appellant had been invited to attend  the interview.

Error of Law Decision

10.  There was no challenge to the error of law. I decided that there was  a
    material error of law in the decision and reasons.  The  FtT  erred  in
    concluding that the appellant had no right of appeal.  The  appellant's
    right of appeal was confirmed in the immigration decision and  the  FtT
    had jurisdiction to hear the substantive appeal.

11.  Accordingly I set aside the decision and reasons.

12.  I heard further submissions from both representatives.   I  decided  to
    deal with the substantive  issue  under  appeal.   The  appellant  gave
    evidence and adopted his witness statement  as  his  evidence-in-chief.
    There was no cross-examination.

13.  Mr Bramble relied on the Reasons for Refusal Letter dated  13  November
    2014.  Mr Ehtesham-Khan  relied  on  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for permission and on the principles  established  in  Syed
    (curtailment of leave - notice) [2013] UKUT 00144 (IAC).  The appellant
    had never received any notification of interview and the respondent was
    put  to  proof  that  the  notice  of  invitation  to   interview   had
    successfully  been  communicated  to  the  appellant.   The   appellant
    completed his previous course of study with good grades  and  commenced
    his new course of study and paid his fees in full.   Alternatively,  Mr
    Ehtesham-Khan relied on the principle of fairness  submitting  that  to
    refuse the appellant's application on  the  basis  of  his  failure  to
    attend an interview that he did not know of was unfair (Naveed (student
    - fairness) [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC) and Thakur (PBS decision - common  law
    fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC)).


14.   There  was  no  challenge  that  the  appellant   met   the   specific
    requirements  of  the  Rules  as  to  maintenance/funds  and  the   CAS
    requirements. Whilst accepting that the respondent raised the issue  of
    whether or not the appellant was  a  genuine  student,  there  were  no
    reasons provided in the refusal letter to indicate that there were  any
    concerns that the appellant was a genuine student.  Further  there  was
    no evidence before me to show that the appellant had  been  invited  to
    attend for interview and that he  had  received  the  details  thereof.
    Accordingly, I allowed the appeal on immigration grounds outright.

Notice of Decision

15.  There is a material error of law in  the  determination  which  is  set
    aside.  I substitute a decision to  allow  the  appeal  on  immigration
    grounds.


    No anonymity order is made.






Signed                                  Date 26.2.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I make a fee award. The respondent is  to  make
payment in full.






Signed                                  Date 26.2.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

