
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48923/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 June 2014                               |On 3 July 2014               |



                                   Before
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                                 NADIR DANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms C Lichfield, Counsel, instructed by E U Migration
                    Services, Solicitors.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing on 7 February 2014. However, for  ease  of  reference,
    the Appellant and Respondent are hereafter referred  to  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Therefore Mr Dani is  referred  to  as
    the Appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State  is  referred  to  as  the
    Respondent.


 2. The Respondent appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mahmood (the Judge) to allow the Appellant's appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent to refuse to  issue  him  with  a  permanent
    residence card pursuant to the provisions of Regulations 10 and 15  (f)
    of the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006,  as
    amended (the EEA Regulations). The Judge found that the  Appellant  had
    adduced sufficient evidence to establish that he met the provisions  of
    Regulations 10(5)(a) 10(5)(b), 10(6) and 15(f) of the EEA  Regulations.
    The date of application is 8 July 2013, the  date  of  decision  is  12
    November 2013 and the date of hearing was 25 March 2014.


 3. In the grounds of application the Respondent submits that the Judge:


        a. Made a  mistake  as  to  fact  which  could  be  established  by
           uncontentious  evidence  before  the  Judge.  The  date  of  the
           termination of the marriage was inconsistently recorded  in  the
           determination. He accepts the evidence of a decree  absolute  to
           establish that it ended on 25 July 2013 but also states that the
           decree nisi and decree absolute took taken place in  the  summer
           of 2012. The date of termination of the marriage is material  to
           the substantive issue because of the need to  establish  whether
           the EEA national was working at the date of the divorce for  the
           relevant five year period;


        b. Materially misdirected himself in  law  because,  in  concluding
           that the Appellant is entitled to a permanent residence card, he
           fails to engage with Regulation 15  (1)(f)  which  requires  the
           Appellant to have been residing in the UK  for  a  period  of  5
           years in accordance with the regulations. The  date  of  divorce
           was ambiguous and it was not possible to establish  if  the  EEA
           national was working at the date of divorce. The Judge relies on
           the Residence card that was issued to him in 2009  but  this  is
           only indicative of the Appellant having established that his EEA
           national spouse was exercising Treaty rights in the  UK  at  the
           date of grant of that residence card. The Judge failed  to  make
           findings as to how the EEA national was a  qualified  person  at
           the date of termination of  the  marriage  and  the  Appellant's
           evidence did not establish how the EEA national  was  exercising
           treaty rights; and


        c. Erred in failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  findings  on
           material matters because there was a lack of evidence  from  the
           Appellant as to his own self-employment in spite  of  which  the
           Judge found that he was self-employed up to  and  including  the
           date of hearing and adequate reasons were  not  given  for  this
           finding.


 4. In granting permission, Judge Hemmingway indicated the strength of  the
    grounds as follows:


 5. The Judge had clearly stated the date of the decree  absolute  at  [23]
    and was therefore not confused as to the date  of  termination  of  the
    marriage and gave adequate reasons at [31] for  his  finding  that  the
    Appellant was self-employed. However, it was arguable that:
        a. The Judge erred in concluding that the Appellant  had  lived  in
           the UK in  accordance  with  the  Regulations  at  the  time  of
           termination of the marriage merely because  the  Respondent  had
           issued him with a residence card [25]; and
        b. The Judge erred in failing to make a clear finding as to whether
           the Appellant had been residing in the UK in accordance with the
           Regulations for a five year period as required by Regulation 15.

The Hearing

 6. Mr Kandola submitted that although the Judge had  directed  himself  to
    the relevant provisions within the reasons for refusal letter at  [9  -
    10], he was required to consider whether  the  Appellant  had  provided
    sufficient evidence to establish that his wife, the EEA  national,  was
    exercising Treaty rights at the date of termination of the marriage and
    that the Appellant had a retained right of residence  from  that  date.
    The Judge had considered the evidence that  the  Appellant's  wife  had
    been employed as a nanny for the period 2011 - 2012 at [12]. The  Judge
    then asked if there were  any  documents  relating  to  her  employment
    subsequently but the  Appellant's  evidence  was  that  there  were  no
    payslips and she was paid cash in hand. There was no evidence that  the
    EEA national was exercising Treaty rights at the  date  of  termination
    and his appeal was bound to have failed.

 7. In the alternative, he submitted that insufficient  findings  had  been
    made  regarding  the  EEA  national's  employment  because:  the  Judge
    referred to the issue, in 2009, of the residence card for a  five  year
    period to the Appellant on the basis of an application  in  2008  [24].
    However, the card merely confirmed that  at  the  date  of  issue,  the
    Appellant's EEA national  Sponsor  was  exercising  Treaty  rights.  To
    establish a permanent right to reside, he would have to establish  that
    she had been exercising Treaty rights throughout the five year period.

 8. Mr Kandola also  submitted  that  it  was  raised  in  the  grounds  of
    application that the Judge referred to the limited documentary evidence
    provided by the Appellant as to his own  self-employment  and  that  no
    evidence of NI contributions was  provided  [31].  In  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence, the Judge failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the Appellant was self-employed.

 9. Ms Lichfield submitted that:

        a. The Judge had found that there was  sufficient  evidence  before
           him to establish that the EEA  national  was  exercising  Treaty
           rights to at the date of termination of the marriage.  The  date
           of termination was 25 June 2013. The Appellant was  required  to
           demonstrate that he had been residing  in  accordance  with  the
           Regulations from 25 June 2008 to 25  June  2013.  The  Appellant
           applied for a residence card in November 2008 [24]  and  it  was
           granted in 2009. At the date of grant, the Appellant  must  have
           satisfied the Respondent that the EEA  national  was  exercising
           Treaty rights otherwise the residence card would not  have  been
           issued.

        b. Then  there  was  evidence  for  the  period  2010-2013  in  the
           Appellant's bundle to which the Judge was referred, which was:

              i. at p 31, there was evidence  of  her  NI  records  for  the
                 period 2010 - 2011;

             ii. at p 33 there was a record of income  tax  for  the  period
                 2011-2012;

            iii. at p 27 there was a letter from HMRC dated 24 November 2013
                 establishing her liability to pay income tax for the period
                 8 April 2012 to 5 October 2013; and

             iv. at p 28 there is a letter  dated  20  December  2013  which
                 confirms that the EEA national's Sponsor asked her agent to
                 request a SA302 calculation which confirms the  amount  due
                 at 31 January 2014 and at p 30 there is the tax  assessment
                 for 2012 - 2013 .

        c. The Judge stated that  he  was  taken  through  the  documentary
           evidence [18] and this was referred to at [11 -  12]  as  having
           been put to the Appellant.  The Judge had these in mind when  he
           made his findings and there was sufficient evidence on which  to
           find that the Appellant's EEA Sponsor had been exercising Treaty
           rights up to the date of termination of the marriage. When asked
           whether there was evidence that the Appellant's EEA Sponsor  had
           been exercising Treaty rights between the grant of the residence
           card in 2009 and the start of the  documentary  evidence  as  to
           self-employment in 2010, Ms Lichfield stated that there  was  no
           documentary evidence but there was sufficient  evidence  on  the
           balance of probabilities  to  conclude  that  she  had  been  so
           employed from 2008 through to when the documentary  evidence  of
           employment in 2010 commenced.

        d. As to the Judge having made insufficient  findings  of  fact  in
           relation  to  the  Appellant's  self  employment,  Ms  Lichfield
           submitted that there was a substantial amount of evidence before
           the Judge; although there was no evidence from HMRC as to his NI
           contributions, he had provided evidence in 97 - 99 of AB,  which
           was referred to at [14]. Ms Lichfield handed up the original  of
           a document which was handed up to the Judge confirming  that  he
           had overpaid income tax for the period 2010 - 2011 and this  was
           repaid on 12 August 2011. There was further evidence that he had
           overpaid income tax which was returned to him in June 2012 at  p
           98 of AB and on 9 May 2013, at p 99  of  AB.  Therefore,  whilst
           there was no evidence from  HMRC,  there  was  sufficient  other
           evidence to confirm self-employment to the date of hearing, this
           being March 2014.

10. In reply, Mr Kandola submitted that the Judge stated at [34]  that  the
    Appellant was entitled to a permanent right of residence card. However,
    whilst there may be sufficient evidence to establish that the Appellant
    was entitled to a residence card on the basis of a  retained  right  of
    residence, there was little evidence that the Appellant's  EEA  Sponsor
    was exercising Treaty rights for a five year period from  the  evidence
    at p 27 of the Appellant's bundle.  The  liability  of  �17.20  may  be
    marginal and ancillary and  insufficient  to  establish  that  she  was
    exercising Treaty rights. He may have a good case to say that  his  EEA
    Sponsor was exercising treaty rights for  the  purposes  of  Regulation
    10(5) but insufficient to establish that he was entitled to a permanent
    right of residence card.


11. Miss Lichfield had with her the Appellant's HMRC  records,  which  were
    not before the Judge.  She  supplied  copies  to  Mr  Kandola,  and  he
    accepted that if an error of law were found,  these  records  confirmed
    that the Appellant had been in employment from the termination  of  the
    marriage to date.  I  indicated  to  the  parties  that  if  there  was
    insufficient evidence before the Judge that the Appellant was  entitled
    to a permanent residence card at the date of decision, it may  well  be
    that a period of residence in accordance with the Regulations prior  to
    the date of termination, coupled with a period of time with a  retained
    right of residence by the  date  of  this  hearing  would  qualify  the
    Appellant for a permanent residence card. Both parties accepted that if
    I found that there was a material error of law in the determination  of
    the Judge, I had sufficient evidence before me to remake  the  decision
    without the need for a resumed hearing. I reserved my decision.

Decision and Reasons


12. The provisions of Regulation 10(5)(c) were not in issue before me; that
    is, it was not disputed that the Appellant had been married to his  EEA
    national spouse for at least three  years,  and  that  they  had  lived
    together in the UK for at least one year before the termination of  the
    marriage.


13. Miss Lichfield's submission was that the Appellant's EEA  national  had
    in fact been exercising Treaty rights  from  November  2008,  when  the
    Appellant first submitted his application for a  residence  card  which
    was granted on 5 October 2009, and  from  that  date  to  the  date  of
    application on the basis of the documentary evidence supplied, and that
    this evidence was before the Judge when he made his findings of fact.


14. The problem, as I see it, is that whilst this may be the case, when the
    Judge gave reasons for his finding that the Appellant had  been  living
    in accordance with the Regulations for the five year period  between  5
    October 2009 and the date of hearing, he referred only to the residence
    card [24]. The Judge states:


         "...In my judgement it is clear that  the  Appellant  had  a  five
             years' residence card. He had applied for that on 27  November
             2008. He was then granted a five years' residence  card  as  a
             partner of an EEA national. That was valid from 5 October 2009
             until  5  October  2014.  It  is  referred   to   within   the
             Respondent's documents but also in the Appellant's bundle.  In
             my Judgement therefore Regulation 10(5)(b) is  also  satisfied
             because the Appellant has been residing in the United  Kingdom
             in  accordance  with  these  Regulations  at   the   date   of
             termination of the marriage. This is because in July 2013  the
             Appellant still had a valid residence card. That is not due to
             expire until October 2014'.


15. As submitted by Mr Kandola, a residence card is only evidence  that  at
    the point at which the residence card was issued,  the  Respondent  was
    satisfied that the  Appellant's  EEA  national  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights. The Judge made no reference to whether  he  accepted  that  the
    Appellant's EEA national was exercising Treaty  rights  throughout  the
    whole period of time between 2008 and  when  the  card  was  issued  in
    October 2009, and then between 2009 and the date of the  hearing.  This
    period between November 2008 and October 2009 would need to be examined
    particularly because the start date of the  Sponsor's  employment  with
    Paula Craft-Pegg is given as 1 September 2009 (p 31 of AB),  and  there
    was no evidence before the Judge as to how the Appellant's EEA  Sponsor
    was employed prior to that date. The Judge made no reference to  having
    accepted the detailed submissions made by Ms Lichfield on the  evidence
    before him as confirming that it was established that the EEA  national
    was exercising  Treaty  rights  for  the  whole  of  the  period  under
    examination.


16. I therefore find that adequate reasons were not given by the Judge  for
    his finding that the Appellant was exercising  Treaty  rights  for  the
    period  that  Miss  Lichfield  submitted  fell  to  be  considered  and
    therefore that adequate reasons were not given for his finding that the
    Appellant had lived in the UK in accordance with  the  Regulations  for
    the five year period required by Regulation 15.


17. The parties accepted that the date of termination of the  marriage  was
    25 June 2013. Although the Judge has referred to the decree absolute as
    being granted in the 'summer of 2012', this is, in my  view,  merely  a
    typographical error.


18. As to the remaking of the decision, on the basis of the evidence before
    me, I find as follows:


        a. There is little evidence before  me  that  the  Appellant's  EEA
           national was exercising Treaty rights for the  whole  of  the  1
           year period from 27 November 2008 to 5 October 2009,  which  was
           when the residence card was granted; the finding only finding  I
           can make is that at the  date  of  issue,  the  Appellant's  EEA
           national was exercising Treaty rights.


        b. I accept Miss Lichfield's submission that the start date for the
           employment of the Appellant's EEA national with Paula Craft-Pegg
           is 1 September 2009, as stated in the document at p 31 of AB.


        c. There is sufficient evidence before me,  as  submitted  by  Miss
           Lichfield and recorded  by  me  above,  to  establish  that  the
           Appellant's EEA national was exercising  treaty  rights  at  the
           date of termination of the marriage, this being 25 June 2013.  I
           have considered  the  documentary  evidence  that  Ms  Lichfield
           referred to as evidence before the Judge at 9(b) (i) - (vi)  and
           Mr Kandola's submission that the evidence at p27 did not confirm
           that the EEA national was exercising  Treaty  rights  between  8
           April 2012 and 5 October 2013 because the activity may be merely
           marginal or ancillary. However, the document at  p  30  confirms
           the income earned between 2012 and 2013, and this indicates  the
           low level of income tax payable. There has in recent years  been
           an increase in the level of pay on which no tax  is  paid  which
           would account for the low level of income tax referred to  at  p
           27. There was, therefore sufficient evidence before the Judge to
           confirm that the Appellant's EEA national was exercising  Treaty
           rights up to the date of termination of the marriage.


        d. As submitted by Miss Lichfield and accepted by Mr  Kandola,  the
           Appellant has adduced sufficient evidence to confirm that he has
           been  employed  both  before  the  date   of   termination   (as
           established  by  letters  from  HMRC  confirming  repayment   of
           overpaid tax for the periods 2010  to  May  2013  and  the  HMRC
           records provided at the hearing).

19.  The period of time for which it is established that the Appellant  has
    been living in the UK in accordance with the regulations is 1 September
    2009 to the date of hearing, this being 16 June 2014. This is a  period
    of four years and nine months. This entitles the Appellant to the grant
    of a residence card on the basis of retained rights  of  residence  but
    not to a permanent residence card under Regulation 15,  which  requires
    the Appellant to establish that he has been residing in accordance with
    the Regulations for a period of five years.


Decision

20. There is a material error of law in the determination of the  Judge.  I
    therefore set aside his decision. I remake the decision to dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal under Regulation 15, making  it  clear  that  he  is
    entitled to a residence card on the basis of  his  retained  rights  of
    residence and, if he remains working in the UK he will be  entitled  to
    make an application for a permanent residence card on 1 September 2014.




21. The Respondent's appeal is allowed.


Anonymity


22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum and immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and we  see
   no reason why an order should be made pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed                                  Date



Manjinder Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or is payable and no fee award is therefore made.





Signed                     Dated

M Robertson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
