
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/48211/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th January 2016                     |  On 4th March 2016                 |
|And 15th February 2016                   |                                    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                  mr o j a
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Cooke instructed by Chris & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant, a citizen of Nigeria, appealed with  permission  against
    the decision of the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on
    21st  July  2015,  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal   against   the
    respondent's  refusal  of  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis   of   his
    relationship with his partner, a British citizen.   The  appellant  and
    his partner have two children, both British citizens, born on 8th  June
    2011 and 21st December 2012.

 2. The Secretary of State in a decision dated 10th November  2014  refused
    the appellant leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 3. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 12th March 2005  with
    a visitor's visa valid from 5th October 2004 until 5th April  2005.  He
    claimed he then entered on 12th March 2005 but there is no copy of this
    entry in his passport.  On 27th May 2010 he was  encountered  following
    an enforcement visit to the address of his  partner,  Miss  S  who  was
    being investigated by the  Kingston  Police  and  Council  as  she  was
    suspected of benefit fraud.  Miss S had  been  granted  asylum  on  6th
    October 2003 after an appeal process and she had been naturalised as  a
    British citizen on 1st August 2009.

 4. The appellant claimed that his removal would be in breach of his  human
    rights as he had established a family and private life  in  the  United
    Kingdom with his partner and two  children.   The  respondent  asserted
    that the appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix R-LTRP  of
    Appendix FM because he was  not  classified  as  a  partner  which  was
    defined as a person who has been living together with the applicant  in
    a relationship akin to marriage or civil partnership for at  least  two
    years prior to the date of the application under Appendix FM.   It  was
    also asserted that the appellant had entered into a  marriage  ceremony
    which was not recognised in the United Kingdom.

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, evidence was given  that
    the appellant has two British citizen children aged 4 and 18 months and
    that he is involved in their care, picking them up and dropping them at
    nursery school and looking after them when they are not there.  Neither
    his wife nor his children had been to Nigeria and he left  Nigeria  ten
    years ago.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal stating at paragraph
    22 that the appellant did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules to remain in this country.

 7. The application for permission to appeal asserted that there  had  been
    no analysis under the Rules and the  judge  did  not  consider  whether
    paragraph EX.1 was applied.  It was the submission made by  Counsel  at
    the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant met the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Immigration Judge accepted that the appellant and his partner  were
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship and they had cohabited for  at
    least two years [paragraph  29].   The  judge  should  have  considered
    whether the other requirement of the Rules was  met  including  whether
    paragraph EX.1 was met.

 8. The judge  acknowledged  that  it  would  be  very  difficult  for  the
    appellant's partner to relocate to Nigeria and it  was  submitted  that
    the difficulties for the partner  relocating  because  of  her  refugee
    status were considered very significant difficulties and therefore  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules were met.

 9. Secondly, it was asserted, the judge erred in  her  assessment  of  the
    best interests of the children.  The judge accepted it  would  be  very
    difficult for the  appellant's  partner  to  relocate  to  Nigeria  and
    therefore that she might remain in the UK but found at paragraph 30  "I
    find that the best interests of the  children  is  to  live  with  both
    parents wherever they live".  The judge failed to consider  the  effect
    on the children in the event that their  mother  could  not  return  to
    Nigeria because of the difficulties she would face.  The judge did  not
    consider the effect on the children being separated from one  of  their
    parents or whether each parent would be able to cope with the  children
    without the other parent.  This was  particularly  relevant  given  the
    appellant's partner's mental health difficulties.  The contradiction in
    the judge's determination and the failure to consider the effect on the
    children of being separated from a parent constituted a material  error
    of law.

10. Thirdly, the judge,  it  was  alleged,  erred  in  her  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8.   The  finding  that  the  appellant  could
    return without his partner was not supported with any reasons as to why
    it would be proportionate for the family to be  separated.   The  judge
    failed to consider EB (Kosovo)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2008] UKHL 41, in particular at  paragraph  12  where  Lord
    Bingham stated "it would rarely be proportionate to uphold an order for
    removal of a spouse if there is a genuine and close bond with the other
    spouse and that spouse cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  follow  the
    removed spouse to the country of removal".  This was raised by  Counsel
    at paragraph  18  of  her  skeleton  argument.   The  judge  states  at
    paragraph 35

         "She [the appellant's partner] comes from the  Democratic  Republic
         of the Congo and having been granted refugee status I  accept  that
         she would find it very difficult to relocate to Nigeria  where  she
         said she does not feel safe.  It will therefore be for  Miss  S  to
         decide whether she wants to accompany the appellant to Nigeria".

11. The judge referred to the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ  874
    in support of her decision.  That case, however,  concerned  a  family,
    none of whom had any lawful leave in the UK and who would be  returning
    as a family unit to their country of origin.  In the  appellant's  case
    the family might be separated and the only person who  has  resided  in
    Nigeria before is the appellant.  The judge  did  not  acknowledge  the
    distinguishing features of the case.

12. The judge failed to consider relevant and very important  factors  when
    assessing proportionality and this constituted a material error of law.



13. In response the Secretary of State asserted it was submitted  that  the
    judge may not have expressly referred to EX.1 in the determination  but
    it was clear that the  judge  considered  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and whether it was reasonable to expect the children to  leave
    the UK.  This was set out at paragraph 34.

14. At the error of law hearing before me, Miss Cooke essentially relied on
    the written grounds for appeal but I pointed  out  that  the  appellant
    could not comply with the Immigration Rules because  the  date  of  the
    application was  6th  August  2010  and  the  supporting  documentation
    presented to the First-tier Tribunal  dated  from  2010,  certainly  no
    earlier than 2009.  Miss Cooke accepted that  the  appellant  therefore
    could  not  comply  with  the  requirements  of  a  partner  under  the
    Immigration Rules because the appellant had not evidenced that  he  and
    his partner had not been living  together  for  two  years  akin  to  a
    marriage by the date of the application.

15. She did however argue that the best interests of the children  had  not
    been fully analysed and certainly in the context of the mother  finding
    it extremely difficult to return to Nigeria as she came to  the  UK  in
    2003 as a refugee and was subsequently granted British citizenship.

16. Mr Avery resisted the application.

17. In conclusion, had the grounds rested  solely  on  the  premise  of  an
    inadequate assessment of the best interests of the  children  and  that
    the judge had not analysed the failure of the applicant to  fulfil  the
    Immigration Rules in depth, I would not be minded to find an  error  of
    law.

18. That said, it is very clear from the determination that the  judge  did
    not consider Section 117B(6) save to state at paragraph 37 "this  takes
    into  account  the  public  interest  question  into  account  and  the
    respondent's interest and is not readily upset".

19.  It  was  incumbent  upon  the  judge  in  an  otherwise  comprehensive
    determination to address the issue of paragraph 117B(6) which states:

         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the  child  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom".

    The judge at paragraph 34 considered the prospect despite the fact that
    the children were British citizens of them leaving to  go  to  Nigeria.
    There was no engagement with the fact that these children are  European
    Union citizens and the policy of the Secretary of State with regard  to
    Appendix FM would appear that it cannot be argued that it is reasonable
    for British citizen children to leave the United Kingdom  (as  part  of
    the European Union).  In this case it would  appear  that  the  judge's
    argument seemed to rely on parental choice.

20. Section 117B(6) is a factor which should be specifically  engaged  with
    when considering the public interest and should have  been  weighed  in
    the balance as to whether the appellant should be removed.  I therefore
    found there was insufficient reasoning on that point and  an  error  of
    law which is material.

21. I set aside the conclusions of assessment of Judge Chana in relation to
    Article 8 and directed that this matter should be relisted before me in
    the Upper Tribunal.

22. At the resumed hearing before me both the  appellant  and  his  partner
    attended  and  gave  oral  testimony  and  were  cross-examined  by  Ms
    Sreeraman.  A new supplementary bundle which  contained  statements  of
    the appellant and his partner, together with documentary evidence  from
    the children's school, was submitted together with a skeleton  argument
    for the appellant.

23. I indicated the findings of fact as made by the Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal were retained, that is that the judge found at paragraph 27 on
    the balance of probabilities the appellant and  his  partner  had  been
    living together  for  at  least  two  years.   The  table  of  evidence
    submitted on the basis that they had lived together began at 4th  March
    2010 until 24th March 2015.  It was also accepted  that  the  appellant
    had two children, one born in 2011 and the other in 2012, and  that  it
    was the partner's evidence that the appellant took care of the children
    when she was at college.  There was also evidence from the  appellant's
    children's nursery confirming that the appellant dropped and  collected
    the children and that they lived together since 2010.

24. As the First-tier Tribunal judge indicated, a decision as to what is in
    the best interests of the children will depend on a number  of  factors
    such as their age, the length of time they have been  in  the  UK,  how
    long they have been in education, the stage of their education  and  to
    what extent they had been distanced from the country  to  which  it  is
    proposed that they return and how renewable was their connection and to
    what extent they would have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties
    in adapting to that country and the extent to which the course proposed
    would interfere with their family life or their rights,  if  they  have
    any, as British citizens.

25. I made it clear that the decision to be revisited was  in  relation  to
    the Article 8 assessment and I find  that  because  of  the  particular
    circumstances of this appeal as submitted by Ms Cooke, not  least  that
    these are two British citizen children  and  the  partner  was  granted
    asylum from the Democratic Republic of Congo in 2003 and because of the
    delay in a final decision by the respondent, that not all the  relevant
    factors were taken into consideration when the appellant's  application
    was refused under the Immigration Rules further to Singh v SSHD  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74.

26. In line with Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, I accept that the  appellant
    has established a family and a private life in the UK and the threshold
    of that private life has been reached.  On the face of it the  decision
    is in accordance with the law.  The reasons for refusal letter set  out
    at paragraph 34 that the appellant  met  the  suitability  requirements
    detailed in S-LTR1.1 to 3.1 but  he  failed  to  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements because it was not concluded that the  appellant  and  his
    partner had a  genuine  relationship.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    accepted on the evidence, not least the documentary  evidence  and  the
    existence of the children that the appellant and his partner are  in  a
    genuine relationship. It is accepted that the appellant is not  married
    to his partner and under the Immigration Rules,  as  I  indicated,  the
    appellant cannot show that he was in a relationship for two years prior
    to his application.  He therefore would fail under the Rules.

27. Nor can the appellant meet the requirements for leave to  remain  as  a
    parent because he does not have sole responsibility  for  the  children
    with whom he lives and further under (b) of E-LTRPT the British citizen
    as the parent or carer with  whom  the  child  normally  lives  is  the
    partner of the applicant.  He may not have sole responsibility for  his
    children although as can be seen from below he is heavily  involved  in
    their care.  I have also had  regard  to  the  treatment  of  paragraph
    276ADE and note that the respondent stated  that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to his integration in the  country  to  which  he
    would have to go if required to leave the  UK.   When  considering  the
    applicant's application alone that indeed is the case.

28. Therefore, it would appear that the decision made by the  Secretary  of
    State on 10th  November  2014  was  in  accordance  with  the  law  and
    necessary for the protection of rights and freedoms of  others  through
    the pursuance of a legitimate aim.

29. I therefore turn  to  the  question  of  proportionality  and  the  key
    question in this is the best interests of the children.

30. Again, as found by the First-tier Tribunal Judge under  Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009, the best interest of
    the children is to live with  both  parents  in  a  stable  and  secure
    environment.  It was noted that the children are very young and  indeed
    one at present has just started school and one has just started nursery
    school.  The children were born in the UK,  are  British  citizens  and
    have only ever lived in the UK.  The older  child  has  entered  formal
    education whilst the younger one is at nursery  school.   I  also  note
    that the older child has  social  and  communication  difficulties  and
    documentation from the school, namely H  H  dated  1st  February  2016,
    confirms that the older child had specific  special  educational  needs
    and this learning difficulty was communication and interaction.  He was
    receiving support from a specialist teacher from Milton Keynes and  she
    confirmed that it would be "better for D and his learning  if  he  were
    able to remain at our school".  It should be remembered that this is  a
    British citizen child and Miss Cooke pointed out that the  standard  of
    education would be better in the UK but even if that were not the case,
    I find that for a child with special educational  needs  stability  and
    continuity of education which was referred to as an important factor in
    Azimi-Moayed and others (
    decisions affecting children;  onward  appeals)[2013]  UKUT  00197(IAC)
    will be even more important for this particular child.

31. Azimi-Moayed established the following;

        a. (1) The case law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the
           following principles to assist in the determination  of  appeals
           where children are affected by the appealed decisions:

           i) As a starting point it is in the best interests  of  children
           to be with both their parents and  if  both  parents  are  being
           removed from the United Kingdom then the starting point suggests
           that so  should  dependent  children  who  form  part  of  their
           household unless there are reasons to the contrary.

           ii) It is generally in the interests of children  to  have  both
           stability and continuity of social and educational provision and
           the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of  the  society
           to which they belong.

           iii) Lengthy residence in a country  other  than  the  state  of
           origin  can  lead  to  development  of   social   cultural   and
           educational ties that it would be inappropriate to  disrupt,  in
           the absence of compelling reason to the contrary.  What  amounts
           to lengthy residence is not  clear  cut  but  past  and  present
           policies have identified seven years as a relevant period.

           iv) Apart from the terms of published policies  and  rules,  the
           Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is  likely  to  be
           more significant to a child that the first seven years of  life.
           Very young children are focussed on their  parents  rather  than
           their peers and are adaptable.

           v) Short periods of residence, particularly ones  without  leave
           or the reasonable expectation of leave to enter or remain, while
           claims are promptly considered, are unlikely  to  give  rise  to
           private life deserving of respect in the absence of  exceptional
           factors. In any event, protection of the economic well-being  of
           society amply justifies removal in such cases.

32. Not only is it important  that  the  schooling  of  the  children,  and
    particularly the older child,  remains  stable  but  his  stability  of
    contact with his father is  important  as  well.   I  accept  that  the
    children are not over the age of seven but they are British citizens.

33. The evidence given  was  that  the  appellant  was  the  primary  carer
    delivering the children to school and nursery and collecting  them  and
    looking after them at weekends when the mother worked.  The appellant's
    partner confirmed that the children had a very good  relationship  with
    their father and would be very affected should he be removed.

34. A further factor was that the appellant's partner had obtained  refugee
    status having undertaken flight from the Democratic Republic  of  Congo
    and it would appear that the Secretary of State accepted that  she  had
    undergone  a  tumultuous  time  thereby  granting  her   asylum.    The
    appellant's partner became quite  tearful  and  distressed  during  the
    hearing when recounting her experiences in the Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo and was fearful of removal to a country with which  she  was  not
    familiar.  The appellant himself stated that she had heard things about
    Nigeria which she did not like.  There was reference in her evidence to
    mental health difficulties and  she  stated  that  she  had  been  near
    suicidal immediately prior to meeting the appellant who had helped  her
    greatly.  The appellant's partner produced detailed evidence dated 2010
    from a mental health  nurse  at  South  West  London  and  St  George's
    Hospital, which detailed her difficulties in relation  to  her  refugee
    status and her precarious mental health in 2010.  I realise  that  this
    evidence dates from 2010 but I find, from her oral evidence,  that this
    is an  enduring  and  ongoing  feature  of  the  appellant's  partner's
    presentation.

35. I recite these facts because I think that it may well be the case  that
    the appellant  alone could return to Nigeria but in the circumstances a
    separation would, because of the partner's potential to  mental  health
    difficulties  and  her  vulnerability,  as  evidenced  by  the  medical
    evidence, have a further impact on the children.  Not only would she be
    in difficulties as far as working is concerned and also her course, but
    should her mental health wellbeing  be  undermined  this  will  have  a
    further impact on the children.

36. I do appreciate that these children are young children but I find  that
    the fact that they have British citizenship and that they  have  always
    lived  in  the  UK  to  be  weighty  factors  in  the   proportionality
    assessment.

37. I have noted the case of EV (Philippines) and Others  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    874 and that the children's interests should be looked at  against  the
    reality  of  the  factors,  in  particular  the  parents'   immigration
    situation.  The fact is that the mother is a British  citizen  and  she
    was naturalised on 1st August 2009.   I  can  accept  that  the  mother
    engaged in a relationship with someone who was here unlawfully but  the
    fact is that the children should not be held responsible for the errors
    of their parents.  As was found, Miss S  was  born  in  the  Democratic
    Republic of Congo and  was  granted  refugee  status  in  2003  and  is
    studying in this country on a  degree  course  and  is  now  a  British
    citizen.  The judge at paragraph 35 accepted that the medical  services
    in this country are better than they might be in Nigeria and also  that
    she did not feel safe in leaving  the  United  Kingdom.   I  found  the
    appellant's partner to be a credible- indeed she was clearly distressed
    at the thought of uprooting the children or  any  separation  from  her
    partner.  The judge at paragraph 35 accepted, and I too accept that  it
    would be very difficult for her to relocate to Nigeria where  she  does
    not feel safe.  Although it might be for Miss S to decide  whether  she
    wants to accompany the appellant to Nigeria or to live in this  country
    in the circumstances I find that  she  has  a  choice  which  can  only
    severely affect the welfare of the children.

38. For the reasons given above I do  not  think  it  acceptable  that  the
    children should be expected to leave the UK, not least because it is in
    their best interests to remain here and secondly because  their  mother
    will clearly experience great  difficulties  in  leaving  for  Nigeria.
    There was detailed evidence given by a mental health nurse in  2010  to
    support the contention that the partner should stay in the UK in a safe
    environment together with the children.

39. It is in the best interests of the children to  stay  with  one  united
    family unit and for the appellant and his partner and children to  live
    together.  It has been accepted that they have a genuine relationship.

40. I also take into account the various factors under Section 117B of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that  is
                  established by a person at a time when the  person  is  in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

          (6)     In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation,
             the public interest does  not  require  the  person's  removal
             where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom".

    In particular I note that the interests of the children are  a  primary
    factor but not the primary factor and their interests may be outweighed
    by the public interest.  As can be seen from above, Section 117B states
    that it is in the interests of the economic  wellbeing  of  the  United
    Kingdom that the appellant  should  be  financially  independent.   The
    evidence was that the wife has a cleaning job and works  as  a  support
    worker for children with challenging behaviour.  She confirmed that she
    did not receive housing benefit and that on this basis, it would appear
    that with the gifts given by the occasional offering  from  the  church
    members of which the appellant  was  a  voluntary  pastor,  the  family
    survive independently.  There was no question that the appellant  could
    not speak English.

41. I note that under Section 117B(4) little weight should be  given  to  a
    private life and/or of a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,
    that is the appellant's partner as she is a British citizen.  She  knew
    when she forged the relationship with her partner that he  was  in  the
    country illegally.

42. I turn to Section 117B(6).  The President of the Upper Tribunal held in
    Treebhawon and Others (Section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 held that

         "(i) Section 117B(6) is  a  reflection  of  the  distinction  which
             Parliament has chosen to make between persons who are, and who
             are  not,  liable  to  deportation.  In  any  case  where  the
             conditions enshrined in section 117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  are  satisfied,  the  section
             117B(6) public interest prevails  over  the  public  interests
             identified in section 117B (1)-(3).

         (ii) Section 117B(4) and (5) are not parliamentary prescriptions of
             the public interest. Rather, they operate as  instructions  to
             courts  and  tribunals  to  be  applied  in  cases  where  the
             balancing exercise is being conducted in  order  to  determine
             proportionality under Article 8 ECHR, in cases where either of
             the factors which they identify arises."

43. The  appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
    qualifying child, and indeed two qualifying children, and I have  found
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the  children  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

44. Ms Sreeraman's position was that the public interest does  not  require
    the removal of a person where they have a genuine relationship  with  a
    qualifying child whom it would not be reasonable to expect to leave the
    UK,  but  equally  this  Section  does  not  necessarily  defeat  other
    considerations.

45. I do take into account the fact that  the  appellant  has  had  a  poor
    immigration history and that he could not have had an expectation  that
    he could live in this country unlawfully and build a family and private
    life to trump the respondent's interests.

46. I also take into account the delay that was a factor.  the  appellant's
    initial application on 24th August 2010 was refused with  no  right  of
    appeal but he requested a reconsideration on 18th October 2010  because
    of the medical treatment that his partner was receiving.  That  request
    was acknowledged on 25th October 2010 and  thereafter  the  appellant's
    representatives wrote to  the  Secretary  of  State  on  a  variety  of
    occasions which included a pre-action protocol letter to  the  judicial
    review unit on 14th March 2013 and representations by an MP.   On  12th
    March 2014 some four years later, Capita Contact Management Team  wrote
    to the appellant with a current circumstances  questionnaire  and  this
    was returned on 7th April 2014.  Further information was  requested  on
    23rd June and I acknowledge that there was a gap of information between
    28th August 2014 and 15th October 2014 but the final decision  was  not
    taken until 10th November 2014.  There has been some considerable delay
    EB Kosovo v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  41.   Indeed,  since  the  request  for
    reconsideration the appellant has had two  children  and  thus  further
    entrenched his rights to remain in the UK.

47. The appellant is unable to meet the Immigration Rules, not  least  that
    he would not be considered to be a  partner  and  could  not  meet  the
    financial requirements.  The Immigration Rules are an important  factor
    and do express the Secretary of State's position.  However in  all  the
    circumstances, I do find that the public interest is outweighed by  the
    appellant's  case.   This  case   can   be   differentiated   from   EV
    (Philippines) in that both of these children are British  citizens  and
    indeed the wife is a British citizen.  It is for  their  interests  and
    their  health  that  the  public  interest  is  outweighed.   In  these
    particular  circumstances  I  am  not  persuaded  that   a   short-term
    separation can be envisaged.  The appellant does not meet the Rules and
    cannot meet the financial requirements.  I was invited to consider that
    he would be refused under the suitability grounds but as I have pointed
    out, that was not the finding of the Secretary of State in the  reasons
    for refusal letter and I find it an unattractive argument that  such  a
    defect should be presented as a positive factor.  It is likely however,
    although I cannot predict the success or otherwise that  the  appellant
    would be caught by the financial  requirements.  Bearing  in  mind  the
    mental health of the appellant's partner, who takes care of  two  young
    children, and the fact that none of them  have  ever  experienced  life
    without the  existence  of  the  appellant,  I  reject  the  notion  of
    temporary separation. I do accept that visits would not be possible and
    because of  the  particular  circumstances,  not  least  the  financial
    constraints, of the appellant's children and his partner.

48. Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11  is still good law and confirms as follows

    'In an article 8 case where this  question  is  reached,  the  ultimate
    question for the appellate immigration authority is whether the refusal
    of leave to enter or remain, in circumstances where  the  life  of  the
    family cannot reasonably be expected to be  enjoyed  elsewhere,  taking
    full account of all considerations weighing in favour of  the  refusal,
    prejudices the family life of the applicant in  a  manner  sufficiently
    serious to amount to a breach of the  fundamental  right  protected  by
    article 8. If the answer to this question is affirmative,  the  refusal
    is unlawful and the authority must so decide. It is not necessary  that
    the appellate immigration authority, directing itself along  the  lines
    indicated in this opinion, need ask in addition whether the case  meets
    a test of exceptionality'.

49. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision  under  section
    12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007.  I find that  the  public  interest  is
    outweighed, in all the circumstances and the appeal is allowed.

Order

The appeal of Mr OJA is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 29th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
bearing in mind the issue involved some complexity.
Signed                                  Date 29th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

