
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48614/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 December 2016                   |On 10 January 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           THE HON. LORD MATTHEWS
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 manna begum
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms D Qureshi of Counsel, instructed by Shahriar
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Blake promulgated on 4 July 2006 allowing the appeal of Ms Manna Begum.

2.   Although before us the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant  and  Ms  Begum  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  we
    shall hereafter refer to Ms Begum as the Appellant and the Secretary of
    State as the Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh  born  on  14  February  1993.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 March 2012 with leave to  enter
    until 23 May 2014.  Her leave to enter had been granted consequent upon
    an appeal decided by First-tier Tribunal Judge Miles on 19 January 2012
    (ref OA/13398/2011).

4.   By way of background  to  the  case,  consideration  of  Judge  Miles's
    decision is useful. In paragraph 9 of his decision he  identifies  that
    the Appellant had sought entry clearance with a view to  settlement  in
    the United Kingdom as the daughter of  Mr  Md  Mumtaz  Ali  (d.o.b.  30
    October 1961).  The Entry Clearance Officer had accepted  that  Mr  Ali
    was indeed the Appellant's father and was a British citizen present and
    settled in the United Kingdom.

5.   The Appellant had earlier applied for  entry  clearance  together  with
    her mother, Ms Rupia Begum, and her brother, Mr Md Jakira.   All  three
    of those applications had  been  refused  by  the  Respondent  and  the
    Appellant, her mother and brother had all submitted appeals to the  IAC
    which had initially been listed to take place in February 2011.

6.   For reasons that are unclear to us, it appears  that  on  legal  advice
    the Appellant withdrew her own appeal but the appeals of her mother and
    brother proceeded.  In the first  instance  they  were  dismissed  with
    reference to accommodation requirements, but their appeals proceeded to
    the Upper Tribunal and in due course both the  Appellant's  mother  and
    brother secured entry clearance.

7.   It was in those circumstances that the Appellant had  come  to  make  a
    further application for entry clearance with a view to settlement at  a
    later time than the ultimately successful applications  of  her  mother
    and brother. The later application, as indicated, had been  refused  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer but was allowed on appeal by Judge Miles.

8.   At paragraph 10 of Judge Miles's decision he identifies that there  was
    an issue between the parties as to the applicable  Immigration  Rule  -
    whether that should be paragraph 297 of HC 395 or paragraph 301  of  HC
    395.  In the event Judge Miles concluded that the appropriate paragraph
    was paragraph 297.  He allowed the appeal, satisfied that the Appellant
    met the requirements  of  paragraph  297  -  as  may  be  seen  in  his
    penultimate paragraph (paragraph 19).

9.   It is also helpful to note what  is  said  at  paragraph  13  of  Judge
    Miles's decision, which is in these terms:

         "In my judgement it is  impossible  and,  indeed  would  be  simply
         wrong, not to take account of what has happened in relation to  the
         Appellant's mother and brother.  As I have  noted,  the  judge  who
         heard  their  initial  appeals  dismissed  them   simply   on   the
         accommodation issue and from the direction  notice  issued  by  the
         Upper Tribunal, that was on the basis that she found as a fact that
         the sponsor's landlord and his employer was the  same  person.  The
         Upper Tribunal has concluded that that finding is in error  and  on
         that basis the decision of  the  judge  was  set  aside  and  those
         appeals await final determination of the accommodation issue  alone
         in the Upper Tribunal. It is self-evident therefore that the  Judge
         of the First-tier Tribunal found that all the other requirements of
         the  respective  Immigration  Rules  had  been  met  by  both   the
         Appellant's mother and brother. It is clearly the intention of  the
         family as a whole to be reunited with the  sponsor  in  the  United
         Kingdom and the Respondent's  reasoning  for  the  refusal  of  the
         Appellant's application on the basis that her  mother  and  brother
         would not be permitted to enter the United Kingdom  and  she  could
         not demonstrate sole responsibility by her  father,  cannot  in  my
         judgement, stand given the fact that the appeals of her mother  and
         brother  are  now  limited  simply  to  the  establishment  of  the
         accommodation issue.  On that  basis  therefore  I  find  that  the
         refusal of the  application  under  rule  301(1)  HC395  cannot  be
         sustained. In the light of the above therefore and for the  record,
         I find that the Appellant's application does meet the  requirements
         of the rule 297(1) HC395 on the balance of probabilities standard."

10.  What we would particularly emphasise in that paragraph is not only  the
    Rule under which the appeal was allowed but the  fact  that  the  Judge
    found that at that time it had been the clear intention that the family
    unit remain together and join  the  sponsoring  British  citizen  pater
    familias in the United Kingdom.

11.  We should also of  course  note  in  this  context  that  although  the
    Appellant had reached the age of 19 when she entered the United Kingdom
    she had been under the age of 18 when she had made her application  for
    entry clearance.

12.  Noting that the appeal had been allowed  under  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules, it is to be observed that in the ordinary course  of
    events a person who satisfies paragraph 297 is to be granted indefinite
    leave to enter the United Kingdom.  Indeed the  heading  of  that  Rule
    states 'Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
    as the child of a parent or parents who are settled or  being  admitted
    for settlement in the United Kingdom'. It is  unclear  to  us,  and  Mr
    Bramble was not able to assist in this  regard,  as  to  why  -  having
    succeeded on her appeal under paragraph 297 - the Appellant was not  in
    due course granted by the Entry Clearance Officer indefinite  leave  to
    enter rather than limited leave to enter.

13.  Even if it were the case that the  leave  to  enter  had  been  granted
    pursuant to a satisfaction of paragraph 301, it is  to  be  noted  that
    that paragraph is concerned with  applications  for  limited  leave  to
    enter with a view to settlement as the child of  a  parent  or  parents
    given leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  with  a  view  to
    settlement (our emphasis).

14.  Whichever route the Appellant was admitted to the United Kingdom it  is
    absolutely clear that the purpose of her coming to the  United  Kingdom
    was either to settle or with a view to settlement, and in  that  regard
    we also note that her age once admitted is immaterial if it is the case
    that she is not living an independent life.  That  is  to  say  that  a
    person admitted with a view to settlement who reaches and passes  their
    majority subsequent to entry is not by the fact  of  having  become  an
    adult alone disbarred from  extending  leave  or  obtaining  indefinite
    leave to remain.

15.  Be that as it may,  the  Appellant  entered  the  United  Kingdom  with
    limited leave and on 21 May 2014 - just before the expiry of her  leave
    - she made an application for indefinite leave to  remain.  Whilst  her
    application was pending her mother also applied for  further  leave  to
    remain on 12 September 2014.  The Appellant's mother's application  was
    refused on 7 November 2014, and on 12 November 2014 the Respondent made
    a decision refusing to vary the Appellant's leave to remain and issuing
    removal directions pursuant to section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006.

16.  The Appellant's application was refused with  reference  to  paragraphs
    298(i)(a)-(d) of the Immigration Rules.  The Respondent's decision  was
    essentially premised on the refusal to extend the Appellant's  mother's
    leave in the United Kingdom.

17.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

18.  In due course her mother also made an appeal to the  IAC.  For  reasons
    that are unclear the appeals were not linked. The Appellant's  mother's
    appeal was considered before her appeal had been listed, and the mother
    succeeded before the First-tier Tribunal on 17  February  2015  to  the
    limited extent that  her  case  was  remitted  to  the  Respondent  for
    reconsideration. Subsequently, pursuant to  such  reconsideration,  the
    Appellant's mother was granted limited leave to remain from 14 May 2015
    to 14 May 2017.  (It would appear that she was granted a limited period
    of leave rather than indefinite leave  because  she  had  not  provided
    satisfactory evidence in respect of her English language abilities.)

19.  The Appellant's appeal was first heard on 23 June 2015 and  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lester in a decision promulgated  on  3  July
    2015. However the Respondent successfully  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal and on 15 January 2016 Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Chamberlain
    found an error of law and the appeal was  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

20.  Judge Chamberlain gave consideration to  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    appeal in front of Judge Lester had succeeded on the basis  that  Judge
    Lester was satisfied that the Appellant met  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  Judge Chamberlain found that that decision was in error of law,
    and indeed went on to conclude that the Appellant could not satisfy the
    requirements of paragraph 298(1) because of the status of  her  mother.
    Although her mother had been granted leave, it was  not  a  leave  that
    equated to settlement.

21.   Nonetheless  Judge  Chamberlain  observed  that   because   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lester had allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules he had not gone on to consider Article 8 outside the  Immigration
    Rules. In the circumstances Judge Chamberlain concluded that the appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for consideration of  the
    Appellant's rights under Article 8.

22.  It was in those circumstances that the appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blake.

23.   Notwithstanding  the  terms  of  the  remittal,   Judge   Blake   gave
    consideration to  certain  aspects  of  paragraph  298  and  reached  a
    conclusion - rather as had Judge Chamberlain - that the  Appellant  did
    not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.  Against that premise  Judge
    Blake went on to consider the case outside the Rules  by  reference  to
    the principles of Article 8 and concluded that the Appellant's  removal
    in  consequence  of  the  Respondent's  decision  would  constitute   a
    disproportionate interference with her family life.

24.  The Respondent sought  and  was  granted  permission  to  appeal.   The
    grounds essentially raise arguments that Judge Blake had undertaken  no
    analysis  in  respect  of  the  Appellant's  private  life,  had   made
    unwarranted assumptions in respect of her family life, and moreover had
    made no reference to the public interest considerations when evaluating
    proportionality.

25.  It seems to us that it is abundantly clear that  the  Appellant's  case
    was not premised on her private life but on the family  life  that  she
    enjoyed with her mother, siblings and father - indeed the  family  life
    that had been the basis of her entry to the  United  Kingdom.   In  the
    circumstances we do  not  think  there  is  anything  material  in  the
    criticism of the lack of analysis of the Appellant's private life.

26.  We accept that the decision of Judge Blake is  appropriately  described
    as being 'thin' on detail in terms of setting out the circumstances  of
    the Appellant's family life, but it seems to us that there  can  be  no
    real doubt that it was fully understood that the Appellant's  case  was
    premised on what she said was her family life as an adult  child  still
    living with her parents and not living an independent life.   Again  it
    seems to us that in such  circumstances  the  absence  of  any  further
    detailed analysis of her situation is not a material defect.

27.  In respect of the criticism that is made with regard  to  consideration
    of the public interest requirements pursuant to  section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  again  it  is  to  be
    acknowledged that Judge Blake does not expressly identify the statutory
    provisions that it is incumbent upon  a  decision-maker  to  take  into
    account in this area.

28.  However, having said that, it seems to us that with regard  to  section
    117B(1) it is clear from paragraphs 76 and  77  of  the  decision  that
    Judge Blake had  well  in  mind  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective immigration control through a fair and firm system, and  that
    that was a legitimate aim.

29.  As  regards  section  117B(2)  there  has  been  no  dispute  in  these
    proceedings that the Appellant  had  successfully  presented  with  her
    application evidence of her English language ability and her 'Knowledge
    of Life in the United Kingdom' test.  To that extent even if there  had
    been no express consideration given to section 117B(2) in the  decision
    it is not a matter that would have constituted an adverse  factor  that
    could  have been weighed against the Appellant's case.

30.  Similarly, in respect of section 117B(3), no issue  was  taken  in  the
    Secretary of  State's  decision  in  respect  of  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements of the Immigration Rules and we can  see  no
    adverse factors that might have made any difference to  the outcome  of
    this appeal.

31.  As regards section 117B(4), the Appellant has not been present  in  the
    United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   She  entered  with   appropriate   entry
    clearance secured after an appeal, and  she  made  an  application  for
    variation of leave within the period of that leave  and  prior  to  its
    expiry.

32.  As regards section 117B(5), whilst it is the case that the  Appellant's
    presence in the United Kingdom has been precarious in  the  sense  that
    she has only enjoyed limited leave to enter, section 117B(5) relates to
    private life rather than family life  and  as  observed  above,  it  is
    family life that is at the heart of this  application and appeal.

33.  Section 117B(6) is not applicable on the facts of this case.

34.  In all those circumstances it seems to us that there  are  no  material
    adverse matters omitted from  consideration  whether  by  reference  to
    section 117B or indeed otherwise. In those circumstances we reject that
    aspect of the Respondent's challenge.

35.  It is also to be noted that the Respondent has raised the  question  of
    the Appellant's age in the grounds of appeal, identifying that  by  the
    time of her application and  the  decision  which  is  the  subject  of
    appeal, that she was no longer a minor.  In that regard - as  indicated
    above  -  we  note  that  had  this  case  been  considered  under  the
    Immigration Rules or had the focus  of  consideration  been  under  the
    Immigration Rules, the fact that the Appellant was no  longer  a  minor
    would not have been  a  reason  to  defeat  the  application.  In  such
    circumstances, on the wider consideration under Article  8  we  see  no
    reason on the very particular facts of this case why the  Appellant  no
    longer being a minor should be accorded any significant adverse weight.
    In this context, again, we remind ourselves that the whole  purpose  of
    her entry into the United Kingdom  was  to  promote  and  maintain  and
    protect the family life that she had enjoyed with her mother,  brothers
    and father - and that the scheme of the Rules (and thereby  the  scheme
    of immigration  control  approved  by  Parliament)  does  not  seek  to
    terminate such family life simply by  reason  of  an  applicant  having
    transitioned from child to adult upon reaching 18.

38.  In all of those circumstances we can detect no material  error  of  law
    in the approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, notwithstanding
    the perhaps somewhat thin nature of the details set out in the Decision
    and Reasons.



Notice of Decision

39.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material errors  of
    law and stands.

40.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.



Signed:  Date: 21 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

