
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                  Appeal No's: IA/48810/2013
                                                               IA/50977/2013
                                                               Ia/50978/2013
                                                               IA/50979/2013
                                                               IA/50980/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 5 November 2014                            |On 13 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               M B SALAKO + 4
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain, of Legal & Legal, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellants appeal against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Balloch, promulgated  on  17  June  2014,  refusing  their  appeals
   related to Tier 1 of the Points Based System.   The other appeals  depend
   upon the first.

2) The SSHD refused the  applications  because  the  first  appellant  ("the
   appellant") did not provide any of the acceptable forms  of  evidence  to
   show that he had been paying Class 2 National Insurance contributions  on
   his self-employed earnings, as required by paragraph 245 CA(b),  Appendix
   A and paragraph 19-SD(b) of the Rules.  It  is  common  ground  that  the
   specific requirements are accurately set  out  at  (i)  to  (iv)  of  the
   respondent's decision of 6 November 2013.

3) The essential contention of the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
   appears to be that  the  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
   produced HMRC documentation relating to his  self-employment  was  wrong.
   Granting permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  8  July  2014,
   Designated Judge Campbell observed:

    It appears that the documentary evidence before the judge  did  include
    an item from HMRC regarding payment of class 2 contributions but it  is
    not at all clear that this  was,  as  claimed  by  the  author  of  the
    grounds, contained in the respondent's bundle.  If it was not, and  was
    only made available subsequently, then the  grounds  have  very  little
    merit indeed.  I grant permission ... on the basis that it is  arguable
    that the judge may have overlooked evidence ... which  accompanied  the
    application.

4) Mr Hussain acknowledged that the evidence  of  payment  of  self-employed
   National Insurance contributions contained at paragraphs 38 and 39 of the
   bundle of evidence for the appellants in the First-tier Tribunal was  not
   included with the applications, but was available only at  the  stage  of
   the hearing.

5) The documents provided with the  original  application  include  a  self-
   assessment statement from HMRC dated 26  June  2012,  documenting  a  tax
   repayment issued to the first appellant on 25 April 2012.

6) Mr Hussain argued on the basis of  paragraph  245AA  of  the  Rules.   He
   conceded that the HMRC statement could not be categorised as  a  document
   "in the wrong format" or as one which did "not contain all the  specified
   information".   He  relied  on  sub-paragraph   245AA(d)(iii)   for   the
   proposition that the appellant had submitted a "specified document" which
   did not contain all the  specified  information,  and  that  the  missing
   information was verifiable from the website  of  the  organisation  which
   issued the document.  He further relied upon the respondent's guidance on
   "evidential flexibility", version 6.O EXT,  valid  from  28  March  2014.
   This provides that if there are "minor errors or omissions  on  specified
   documents submitted  with  a  valid  application  that  there  is  enough
   evidence to show the application would otherwise  be  granted,  you  [the
   decision maker] may contact the  migrant  sponsor  or  representative  as
   appropriate for clarification or  to  request  missing  documents  and/or
   information".

7) Mr Hussain submitted that HMRC has a website which the  respondent  could
   have consulted, and that the document produced was sufficient  to  prompt
   such action.  The HMRC repayment statement showed that tax had been paid,
   which implied that National Insurance must  also  have  been  paid.   The
   appellant was therefore entitled to  have  further  evidence  taken  into
   account, being the item produced to the First-tier  Tribunal.   That  was
   sufficient to satisfy the Rules, and the determination of the  First-tier
   Tribunal should be reversed.

8) Mr Matthews submitted that the  HMRC  statement  did  not  show  that  it
   related to self-employed earnings, and  that  payment  of  tax  does  not
   necessarily mean that  National  Insurance  was  also  paid.   The  other
   documentation which the appellant produced with his application indicated
   that he was employed rather  than  self-employed.   An  obligation  under
   paragraph 245AA(b)(4) arose in relation to a document which did not carry
   all the specified information.  In order to trigger  further  enquiry,  a
   document must contain some of the required information, which was not the
   case here.  Even if enquiry had been triggered, the  missing  information
   was not verifiable from any of the other sources  suggested.   The  other
   documents submitted with the application did not support it.  HMRC has  a
   website but it is not generally  accessible  for  individual  details  of
   those who pay income tax or National Insurance contributions.  The  judge
   had made no error of law and the determination should stand.

9) Mr Hussain in reply maintained that there was sufficient  information  in
   the self-assessment statement to trigger the obligation on the  Secretary
   of State to ask the appellants for further information.

10) I reserved my determination.

11)  The  qualification  in  the  grant  of  permission  was   careful   and
   appropriate.  It was not apparent at that stage,  but  is  apparent  now,
   that the evidence which might have helped the appellants was not with the
   original  applications.   Consideration  has  to  begin  with  the  self-
   assessment statement.  It is not a document which shows  any  payment  of
   National Insurance contributions.  It does not approximate to any of  the
   documents required under paragraph 19-SD(b).  It was not  a  trigger  for
   any obligation on the Secretary of State  under  paragraph  245AA  or  in
   terms of policy.  (Mr Matthews submitted that the policy is  intended  to
   be explanatory of paragraph 245AA, not  an  expansion  upon  it;  but  in
   either event there is nothing in it to help the appellants.)   There  was
   no specified document to trigger any enquiry.

12) Even if the statement were to be treated as a specified  document,  this
   is not a question of missing information  verifiable  either  from  other
   documents submitted with the application  or  from  the  website  of  the
   organisation which issued the document.   HMRC  website  contains  public
   general information, not details of individual payers.  The  Home  Office
   and HMRC are both public bodies,  but  there  is  no  obligation  on  the
   Secretary of State to  seek  individual  payment  information  from  HMRC
   directly; if that were the intended scheme of the Rules, applicants would
   be excused from producing any more than their HMRC reference number,  and
   the Rules would be framed in a quite different way.

13) The appellants have not shown that the determination of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal errs in law, and that determination shall stand.



                                        [pic]

                                  12 November 2014
                                  Judge of the Upper Tribunal
