
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48977/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th April 2016                             |On 4th May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          MR OKWY KINGSLEY ORAEKWE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Rayner, promulgated on 20th August 2015, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 21st  July  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria,  who  was  born  on  8th
    January 1982.  He appeals against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of
    State dated 1st December 2014 to refuse his application for a permanent
    residence card, as confirmation of his right to reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom, following his marriage to an EEA national, namely, a Miss C.M.
    Ribeiro, a citizen of Portugal.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he relies upon Regulation 17 of  the  EEA
    Regulations, whereupon the Secretary of State must  issue  a  residence
    card to a person, where the person is a family member  of  a  qualified
    person or of an EEA national with a permanent right of residence  under
    Regulation 15.  The Appellant claims that he was a  family  member  who
    has retained a right of residence of an  EEA  national.   However,  the
    Respondent's refusal letter states that the  Appellant  had  not  shown
    that his wife was exercising treaty rights and that Regulation 15(1)(f)
    could not be satisfied, such that the Appellant's wife had not been  in
    the UK for five years exercising treaty rights, and nor was he a person
    who had retained a right of residence.  But, the Appellant responded to
    this with the suggestion that because the marriage  was  subsisting  at
    the time that the Respondent considered Mr Oraekwe's  application,  the
    Respondent should have considered the matter under Regulation  15(1)(b)
    rather than Regulation 15(1)(f), because in the  former  provision  all
    that the Appellant had to show was that  the  Appellant  was  a  family
    member of an EEA national  who  was  exercising  treaty  rights  for  a
    continuous period of five years.

 4. The judge went on to refer to Section 85(4) and  held  that  under  the
    determination of EA (Section  85(4)  explained)  Nigeria  [2007]  UKAIT
    00013 which was to the effect that  the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  by
    showing that he would be granted leave if he made an application on the
    date of the hearing: he can succeed only by showing  that  he  will  be
    granted leave if he  made,  on  the  date  of  the  hearing,  the  same
    application as that which resulted in the decision under appeal.

 5. This was important to the Appellant's circumstances because at the date
    of the hearing, the Appellant's argument  was  that  his  relationship,
    which had earlier broken down, had now led  to  a  reconciliation,  and
    that this being so he qualifies under Regulation 15(1)(b)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations, which refer only to his being able to show that  he  is  a
    "family member of an EEA national" who has been living in the UK for  a
    continuous period of five years.

 6. The judge, however, held that this was not the same application as that
    which resulted in the decision under appeal, because at that  time  the
    evidence was that his relationship had broken down.

 7. The appeal was dismissed.



Grounds of Application

 8. The  grounds  of  application  state  that  the  judge  ought  to  have
    considered Regulation 15(1)(b)  of  the  EEA  Regulations  because  the
    Appellant's marriage was not dissolved by a decree absolute.

 9. On 31st January 2016, permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that this was a case where the Appellant had made an application for  a
    residence card on the basis  that  he  and  his  Portuguese  wife  were
    getting divorced.  He claimed  a  retained  right  of  residence  under
    Regulation 15(1).  However, by the time of the hearing,  there  was  no
    divorce that had been obtained, and both parties had in  fact  remained
    in the UK.  The Appellant therefore relied upon Diatta  v  Land  Berlin
    (Case 267/83) [1985] ECR 567, which was to the effect that  he  remains
    the family member of an EEA national.  The Tribunal, however,  declined
    to make a finding on this new argument, because it had not been the way
    that the case had been advanced in the  original  application  and  was
    dependent upon new evidence.  This decision was arguably  an  error  of
    law.

10. On 28th February 2016, a Rule 24 response was  entered  to  the  effect
    that the grant of permission was on the basis that the judge failed  to
    consider the Appellant's claimed reconciliation with his wife and a new
    amended grounds under Regulation 15(1)(b), having failed  to  make  out
    his case under Regulation 15(1)(f), for a retained right  of  residence
    on the basis of his application and claim that he  and  his  wife  were
    getting divorced.  However, there was no material arguable error of law
    here.  The judge was fully aware that the Appellant  had  made  a  very
    clear application to the Respondent to be considered under  Regulations
    10 and 15(1)(f).

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me, Mr  Nwaekwu  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    failed to recognise that Section 85(4) has no  application  in  an  EEA
    case involving the marriage of an EEA national and referred to the case
    of Boodhoo [2013] UKUT 00340.  This was an  error,  because  the  judge
    failed to accept then the evidence that was before him at the  date  of
    the hearing.

12. Second, the Appellant's wife had exercised treaty rights for five years
    and the judge failed to engage with the evidence in the  appeal  bundle
    to this effect.  He should have considered whether the Appellant's wife
    was exercising treaty rights at the relevant time.  The fact  was  that
    the Appellant's wife had remained in the UK and  had  qualified  for  a
    permanent right of residence at the date of the application and at  the
    date of the hearing.  The  Appellant  also  would  be  deemed  to  have
    qualified  as  a  spouse:  see  Mulgeeci  (IA/08588/2013),  which   was
    authority for the proposition that if the EEA wife had exercised treaty
    rights for five years, then the partner would also be entitled to stay.



13. For her part, Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that the issue was  whether
    Section 85(4) had any relevance to the appeal.  It  is  true  that  the
    judge made no findings on the Appellant's evidence but that was because
    the new evidence was a different application from what  had  originally
    been submitted.

14. In his reply, Mr Nwaekwu went on to  say  that  for  the  avoidance  of
    doubt, he should make it clear that the divorce was filed on 10th March
    2014, and this was at a time when the Appellant's visa was running out,
    but that in between that period, and the hearing of the  appeal,  there
    was a reconciliation between the  parties,  which  reconciliation  then
    broke down at the date of the hearing.  However, the divorce decree was
    still not finalised at the date of the hearing, and under EEA  law  the
    position was that their marriage was a subsisting and valid one.

15. Both parties agreed that if I were to make a finding  of  an  error  of
    law,  given  how  much  evidence  there  was,  including  a  404   page
    Appellant's bundle, this matter should  properly  return  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Rayner on a de novo basis.  Mr Nwaekwu  pointed  out  that  the  decree
    absolute had now been announced on 17th December 2015.

Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of  law.   The  case  of  OA  (EEA  -
    retained right of residence) Nigeria  [2010]  UKAIT  00003  established
    that,  "under  Regulation  10(5)(a)  the  phrase  'termination  of  the
    marriage ...' can only mean the lawful ending of the marriage by  legal
    proceedings  (i.e.  divorce);  it  cannot  mean   'breakdown   of   the
    marriage'".

17. Under the Rule in Diatta v Land Berlin, the Appellant remained a family
    member of an EEA national in these  circumstances.   The  judge  should
    have considered the matter on that footing and Section  85(4)  was  not
    the appropriate authority for excluding consideration of these  matters
    at the date of the hearing before the judge.

18. In Ahmed (Amos; Zambrano; Regulation  15(A)(iii)(c)  [2006]  EEA  Regs)
    [2013] UKUT 00089, it was made clear that,

         "... our starting point must be the ruling of the Court of  Justice
         in Diatta v Land Berlin Case 6-267/83 [1985] (EUECJR), in which the
         court has continued to endorse in subsequent case law.   This  case
         establishes that a  spouse  continues  to  enjoy  an  EU  right  of
         residence as the family member of a Union  citizen  notwithstanding
         the fact that the couple may be living apart or their  relationship
         be problematic"

19. In the circumstances, the Appellant continued to benefit from the legal
    relationship between himself and his wife.  The question then was  that
    if his wife had obtained entitlement to permanent residence in  the  UK
    after five years as a qualifying person by 2014, or at the date of  the
    hearing in 2015, the Appellant would have obtained that right  as  well
    after five years of marriage to her from 2008 to 2015.

20. The fact that his wife was absent at the  hearing  at  that  point  had
    little bearing  on  his  entitlement.   The  two  were  still  married.
    Permanent residence, that they would have acquired, would require a two
    year absence to break.  The judge did not make any  finding  about  the
    Appellant's wife being a worker for five years and at  what  date  that
    had been achieved.

Re-making the Decision

21. I re-make the decision on the basis of the  findings  of  the  original
    judge, and the submissions that I have heard today.  I am allowing this
    appeal to the extent  that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Practice Statement 7.2(b) because the nature  or  extent
    or any judicial fact-finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for  the
    decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that, having regarding  to
    the already objective, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I re-make  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by
    a judge other than Judge Rayner, on a de novo basis.

23. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 28th April 2016


