
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal Number: IA/48070/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 4 September 2014          On 15 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                           Millicent Opoku Mensah
                          (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For  the  Appellant:      Mr.  O.  Oke  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Calices
                       Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Oakley promulgated on 27 June 2014, dismissing the Appellant's  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated 12  June  2013  to  refuse  to
      issue a residence card under the Immigration (European Economic  Area)
      Regulations 2006.


Background

   2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born  on  18  February  1979.  An
      application for a residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside
      in the United Kingdom was made based on a Ghanaian customary  marriage
      by proxy between the Appellant and Mr Justice Ampofo ('the  sponsor'),
      a Dutch national, said to have taken place in Ghana, in the absence of
      the parties to the marriage, on 24 November 2011.


   3. The Appellant's application  was  refused:  a  Notice  of  Immigration
      Decision dated 12 June 2013 made reference to Regulations 7, 8(5)  and
      17(1)(a) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.
      The Respondent did not accept that the Appellant had produced a  valid
      marriage certificate, was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  shown
      she was in a durable  relationship  with  the  sponsor,  and  was  not
      satisfied in respect of the sponsor's identity and nationality.



   4. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons  set  out   in   his
      determination. The  Judge  followed  the  decision  in  Kareem  (Proxy
      marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC) in respect of  recognition
      of the proxy marriage; in the  alternative,  although  the  Judge  was
      satisfied  that  there  was  a  'durable  relationship'  between   the
      Appellant and the sponsor, he was not satisfied as  to  the  sponsor's
      nationality and so the relationship  could  not  avail  the  Appellant
      under the Regulations.


   5. The Appellant sought permission to appeal; the grounds in  support  of
      the application for permission to appeal focused solely on the finding
      in respect of the sponsor's identity. Permission to appeal was granted
      by First-tier Tribunal Judge White on 16 July 2014 essentially on  the
      basis that it was arguable  that  the  Judge  had  given  no  adequate
      reasons  in  respect  of  the  adverse  assessment  of  the  sponsor's
      nationality.


   6. The Respondent has filed  a  Rule  24  response  dated  25  July  2014
      resisting the appeal, and also raising an  issue  in  respect  of  the
      Judge's favourable finding in respect of 'durable relationship'.


Consideration

   7. As noted above the Appellant has not raised any challenge  in  respect
      of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's consideration  and  application  of
      the principles set out in the case of Kareem  to  the  facts  of  this
      particular appeal. At no point has  any  relevant  material  has  been
      filed in respect of the validity of  the  Appellant's  marriage  under
      Dutch law. The appeal is now pursued on the basis of the challenge  to
      the assessment of the sponsor's identity, together with the favourable
      finding in respect of 'durable relationship'.


   8. The Respondent had raised concerns about the documentation produced in
      support of the claim  that  the  sponsor  was  a  Dutch  national.  In
      particular the identity card produced was said by  the  Respondent  to
      have been reported lost or stolen. On appeal, the sponsor  was  unable
      to produce his original current passport because, he said, it had been
      submitted to the Ghanaian embassy in Holland in order to obtain a visa
      to visit Ghana. He did, however, produce a new identity card dated May
      2014. Concerning the identity card the Judge said this: "There  was  a
      new identity card that was produced dated May  2014  but  the  Sponsor
      provided  an  unsatisfactory  explanation  of  how  he  obtained  that
      identity card from  the  Dutch  authorities  in  Amsterdam.  I  cannot
      therefore be certain that the Appellant's Sponsor is an  EEA  national
      exercising treaty rights in  the  United  Kingdom"  (determination  at
      paragraph 19).


   9. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr  Jarvis  appropriately
      and frankly acknowledged that it was not possible to discern from  the
      determination  either  what  the  sponsor's   explanation   had   been
      concerning obtaining the replacement identity  card,  or  why  it  was
      considered by the Judge to be unsatisfactory. Mr Jarvis conceded  that
      this deficiency of reasoning amounted to an error of law that required
      the issue to be reconsidered and the decision remade.


  10. In this context Mr Oke indicated that the sponsor's Dutch passport was
      now available, and produced it. Mr Oke directed my  attention  to  the
      visa for Ghana that was endorsed in the passport with an issue date of
      20 June 2014 - which it was noted was consistent  with  the  sponsor's
      explanation for not having his original passport available at the time
      of the appeal hearing. Mr  Jarvis  had  sight  of  the  passport,  and
      indicated that he accepted it as sufficient evidence of the  sponsor's
      nationality.


  11. As regards the issue raised in the  Respondent's  Rule  24  notice  in
      respect of durability of relationship, again very properly, Mr  Jarvis
      directed my attention to the decision  in  EG  and  NG  (UT  rule  17:
      withdrawal; rule 24: scope) [2013] UKUT 143 to the effect that a party
      cannot use a Rule 24 notice as a device to  raise  a  challenge  to  a
      decision where permission to appeal would  be  required.  Further,  he
      indicated that he did not now seek to  raise  a  cross-appeal  on  the
      Judge's finding in respect of durability of relationship.


  12. In the circumstances it was common ground between the  representatives
      that the appeal should be allowed on the basis that the Appellant  was
      the extended  family  member  of  a  qualified  person  by  reason  of
      regulation 8(5) of the 2006 Regulations.


  13. At the time I understood the common ground between the representatives
      to extend to an understanding  that  the  Appellant  was  consequently
      entitled to a residence card. However,  unfortunately,  neither  party
      drew my attention to regulation 17(4)  of  the  2006  Regulations,  in
      respect of which I have only reminded  myself  during  the  course  of
      preparing this determination.


  14. Because of the unchallenged adverse decision in respect of  the  issue
      of marriage taken pursuant to Kareem,  the  Appellant  cannot  benefit
      from regulation 17(1), and as such there is not an  obligation  ("must
      issue") on the Respondent  to  provide  her  with  a  residence  card.
      Rather, because the Appellant is an 'extended  family  member'  within
      the meaning of the Regulations by reason of the durable  relationship,
      the Respondent "may  issue  a  residence  card...  if...  in  all  the
      circumstances it appears to the Secretary of State  appropriate":  see
      regulation 17(4)(b).


  15. I note that the Respondent has never turned her mind to the assessment
      inherent in 17(4)(b) because of the basis of the initial  decision  on
      the Appellant's application. I also note the observations  in  Ihemedu
      (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340  (IAC):  see  headnote  at
      (iii): "Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a  residence  card  to  an
      OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion. Where the Secretary
      of State has not yet exercised that discretion the most an Immigration
      Judge is entitled to do is  to  allow  the  appeal  as  being  not  in
      accordance with the law leaving the matter of whether to exercise this
      discretion in the appellant's  favour  or  not  to the  Secretary  of
      State". See further at paragraph 12:

"Regulation 17(4) of the 2006  Regulations  confers  on  the  decision-maker
      discretion as to whether a person found to be an  OFM/extended  family
      member  is  to  be  granted  a  residence  card.  In  exercising  that
      discretion matters such as whether an applicant  has  entered  the  UK
      lawfully or otherwise are plainly relevant (although  not  necessarily
      determinative:  see  YB  (EEA  reg  17(4)  -  proper  approach)  Ivory
      Coast [2008] UKAIT 00062 and Aladeselu and Others (2006 Regs - reg 8)
      Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00253 (IAC)). But in this case the Secretary  of
      State had not yet exercised that discretion and so the most the IJ was
      entitled to do was allow the appeal as being not  in  accordance  with
      the law leaving the matter  of  whether  to  exercise  the  reg  17(4)
      discretion in his favour to the Secretary of State: see  Yau  Yak  Wah
      [1982] Imm AR 16; MO (reg 17(4) EEA Regs) Iraq [2008] UKAIT 00061."


  16. In my judgement it follows that the appeal herein can only succeed  to
      the  extent  that  the  matter  be  remitted  to  the  Respondent  for
      consideration of the  exercise  of  the  discretion  under  regulation
      17(4).


  17.  Because  I  did  not  hear  argument  on  this  point  I  have  given
      consideration to whether it would  be  appropriate  to  reconvene  the
      hearing. However, in light of the clear guidance in Ihemedu in respect
      of the limitations of the Tribunal's  jurisdiction,  in  my  judgement
      there is only one possible outcome and accordingly,  bearing  in  mind
      also the overriding objective inherent  in  the  Procedure  Rules,  no
      useful purpose would be served in reconvening the hearing.


  18. Accordingly, in all of  the  circumstances  I  allow  the  Appellant's
      appeal on  the  basis  that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in
      accordance with the law, and on the basis that the case is remitted to
      the Respondent to undertake the assessment and exercise the discretion
      inherent in  regulation  17(4)(b)  on  the  basis  of  the  favourable
      findings of fact made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  those
      matters indicated above.


Decision

  19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  20. I remake the decision in the appeal. The Respondent's decision was not
      in accordance with the law: the appeal is allowed to the  extent  that
      the  case  is  remitted  to  the  Respondent  to  consider  regulation
      17(4)(b).




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     11 September 2014

