
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP/DN-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48106/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Upper Tribunal   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th October 2015                  |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  mr yao lv
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holt, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of China born on  2nd  December  1992.   The
    Appellant first entered the United Kingdom on 3rd April 2013  with  the
    correct entry clearance conferring leave to  enter  until  6th  October
    2013 as a Tier  4  (General)  Student.   That  leave  was  subsequently
    extended on 11th October  2013  and  on  9th  January  2014.   On  19th
    November 2014 a decision was made to refuse to vary leave on the ground
    the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the Appellant  had  shown
    that he was genuinely able to communicate in English.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Parker sitting at Manchester on 4th  March  2015.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 20th May 2015 the Appellant's  appeal  was
    allowed.

 3. On 20th March 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds  contend  that  the  Judge  materially
    erred by failing to adequately reason the determination  and  that  the
    Judge made no findings on the Appellant's own admission that  he  could
    not answer the questions  posed  at  interview  because  he  could  not
    understood the  interviewer's  accent  and  that  he  was  tired.   The
    Secretary of State submits that this  should  have  been  the  starting
    point for the Judge not to concentrate on the number of questions.  The
    grounds go on to state that given that it is in the public domain  that
    there has been widespread cheating  on  IELTS  tests  and  there  is  a
    requirement through the Immigration Rules to  be  able  to  demonstrate
    English language ability  and  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision is irrational.

 4. On 13th May  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge  Wellesley-Cole  noted  that  the  Judge's
    findings and conclusions set out from paragraphs 12 to  14  were  brief
    and did not advance cogent reasons as to why he found the decision  was
    not in accordance with the law and that he could  only  communicate  in
    English and in that regard she  considered  that  the  Judge  may  have
    fallen into error.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant appears by his  instructed  Counsel
    Mr Holt.  Mr Holt is familiar with this matter having  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Ms Johnstone.  I note that this is an  appeal
    by the Secretary of State but for the purpose of continuity  throughout
    the appeal process Mr LV is referred to herein as the Appellant and the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Ms Johnstone takes me to the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  findings  and
    conclusions.  At paragraph 12 she points out that the Judge notes  that
    there has been an interview and takes into account that  interview  but
    that what the Judge fails to weigh up is the interview record and makes
    a clear finding at the hearing the Appellant did not speak in  English.
    Thereafter she takes  me  to  paragraph  13  to  the  findings  therein
    pointing out that the findings of the Judge do not reflect the  correct
    test that should be undertaken,  that  the  Rule  is  to  be  found  at
    paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules.   She  points  out  that  the
    interview record was available before the Judge and whilst  noting  the
    Judge's comment that
         "In this context we do not have a copy of the recorded interview."

    She is uncertain as to what the Judge means by this but such a  finding
    is inconsistent with his decision.

 7. She submits that the Judge has made no finding on  what  has  been  the
    Appellant's choice not to speak English and that he was  only  able  to
    answer questions on a very simple matter and that I should give  little
    weight to his decision not to speak English and that therefore there is
    a lack of reasoning as to why he cannot communicate  in  English.   She
    asked me to set aside the decision and  to  remake  it  dismissing  the
    Appellant's appeal.

 8. Mr Holt takes me to the Rule pointing out that it is quite specific and
    one of the factors to be considered whether or not an  Appellant  is  a
    genuine student.  It is necessary that an Appellant  must  speak  to  a
    standard of English  assessed  at  the  Common  European  Framework  of
    Reference for Languages (CEFR) equal to level B2 and  this  is  exactly
    what Coventry University has found.  Mr Holt submits that at  paragraph
    13 of his determination the Judge does not criticise the  Rules  merely
    pointing out that there is no objective evidence as to what standard is
    necessary to obtain CEFR B2 and that the Home Office have  consistently
    failed to say what CEFR-B2 actually means and that this point was never
    put before the Judge.  On the basis that the level was never before the
    Judge it is impossible for him to say with accuracy what that level is.



 9. The Secretary of State seeks to raise at this late stage that there  is
    an alleged discrepancy over the tape recording of  the  interview.   Mr
    Holt points out that that is not raised in the Grounds  of  Appeal  and
    that the conclusion with regard to the interview is  addressed  in  the
    conclusions reached in paragraph 13 of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's
    decision.  He emphasises that the ground is not raised in  the  Grounds
    of Appeal and that in any event it  should  therefore  be  refused  but
    points out that it is a "non-point" any way.

10. He submits that the  Home  Office  have  not  said  anywhere  that  the
    Appellant fails to meet standard B2 and indeed that they have failed to
    set out the standard required at the interview.  He  submits  that  the
    decision of the Secretary of State at first instance must in any  event
    therefore be flawed and that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was perfectly well-reasoned and that he reached a  decision  that
    he was entitled to and that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    discloses no material error of law.

The Rule

11. It is important in this appeal to take due account of the Rule and what
    I am asked to consider.  The relevant Rule  is  Rule  245ZX(da).   This
    states:
         'The applicant  must  if  required  to  do  so  on  examination  or
         interview, be able to demonstrate  without  the  assistance  of  an
         interpreter English  language  proficiency  of  a  standard  to  be
         expected from an individual who has reached the standard  specified
         in a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies assigned in  accordance
         with Appendix A paragraph 118(b) (for the avoidance of  doubt,  the
         applicant will not be subject to a test at the standard set out  in
         Appendix A, paragraph 118(b)).'

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. I start by reminding myself that the issue extant before me is  whether
    or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge.  The issue in this matter is  narrow.   The  Judge
    found the Appellant was genuinely able to communicate in English.   The
    Secretary of State contends  that  he  is  not.   To  that  extent  the
    arguments amount to little  more  than  disagreement.   It  has  to  be
    remembered that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  the  evidence.
    Where the Secretary of State seeks to challenge the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge's decision is the process he undertook.  I am satisfied that  the
    approach of the Judge does not disclose  any  material  error  of  law.
    Firstly it has to  be  noted  that  the  starting  point  is  that  the
    Appellant was studying accountancy, maths and business in a  foundation
    programme at Coventry University and that  the  course  was  taught  in
    English.  He passed the examination and thereafter began a course for a
    BA in accountancy and  finance  and  he  has  so  far  undertaken  four
    examinations.  If the  Appellant  did  not  understand  English  it  is
    difficult in any event to understand how he  could  have  passed  these
    examinations and it is noted that  Coventry  University  have  accepted
    that the Appellant has an English language ability equal to level B2 on
    the Common European Framework of  Reference  for  Languages.   All  the
    Judge has done is to acknowledge this and to comment that there  is  no
    objective evidence before him as to  what  standard  the  Appellant  is
    supposed to achieve at interview and that the satisfaction of  reaching
    level B2 does not break down the level  of  English  the  Appellant  is
    required to achieve thus making it difficult for the Judge to  make  an
    assessment in relation to the interview record.

15. I agree with the Judge as he is not  able  to  assess  the  Appellant's
    evidence he has no objective evidence to assess his  level  of  English
    and that whilst the Appellant could have assisted by  speaking  English
    at the hearing he chose not to do so and I agree  with  the  submission
    made initially by Mr Holt at first instance and  reiterated  before  me
    that this is not relevant.

16. I do not know whether the First-tier Tribunal Judge  opted  to  hold  a
    discussion with the Appellant in English.  It seemed to  me  that  this
    was a sensible  thing  to  do  and  we  had  a  chat  in  English.   My
    conclusions  are  that  the  Appellant  speaks   English   albeit   not
    brilliantly.  To a certain extent that does not help  because  it  does
    not show whether he meets the requirement.  However that assessment has
    been carried out by Coventry University.  They are  satisfied  that  he
    meets CEFR B2.  That level  is  not  a  requirement  to  speak  perfect
    English.  I  have  given  due  consideration  to  paragraph  118(b)  of
    Appendix  A.   Relevant  reference  therein  must   be   to   paragraph
    118(b)(i)(4) that states:
         'One of the requirements in (i) (ii) (iii) ... is met:
         (4)  the Confirmation of Acceptance for  Studies  Checking  Service
             entry confirms that the applicant has a knowledge  of  English
             equivalent to level B2  of  the  Council  of  Europe's  Common
             European  Framework  for  Language  Learning   in   all   four
             components (reading,  writing,  speaking  and  listening),  or
             above ,or that the sponsor is satisfied that on completion  of
             a pre-sessional course as provided for in paragraph  120(b)(i)
             of this Appendix, the  applicant  will  have  a  knowledge  of
             English as set out in this paragraph.'

17. That definition does not assist me (nor  would  it  have  assisted  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  much  further).    The   test   has   been
    administered by Coventry University.   They  have  been  satisfied  the
    Appellant meets the  Rules.   The  Judge  has  applied  a  logical  and
    constructive approach to his analysis.  If the Secretary of State has a
    complaint in this matter it is not with the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge it is with the assessment made by  Coventry  University.
    They assign the analysis of meeting level CEFR LB2 to  the  University.
    In such circumstances submissions by the Secretary of State  amount  to
    mere disagreement with the finding of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and
    his determination discloses no material error of law.  His decision  is
    reasoned and in such circumstances I uphold the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal and dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
