
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48923/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th January 2017                          |On 8th February 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                           miss aradhana aradhana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Layne (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a female, a citizen of India, who  was  born  on  21st
    April 1989.  She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent, taken on  30th  March  2014,  refusing  her
    leave to remain as a spouse of the Sponsor, Mr Bader Khan.  The  matter
    had been previously determined in a decision by Judge Tindal dated 30th
    March 2014, where upon his allowing the appeal, Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy in a decision dated  13th  January  2016,  reversed  the
    decision, and remitted it back to the First-tier Tribunal, whereupon it
    was determined by Judge M Robertson, in a decision promulgated on  11th
    August 2016, and thus the matter comes before me today.

 2. The Appellant's appeal, as  determined  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson at Birmingham, Sheldon Court,  included  a  consideration  of
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act, the application of  the  decision  in  AM
    (S.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260, and the application of the decision of
    the Court of Appeal in Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 (see paragraphs 29 to
    30 of the determination).  Judge Robertson  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR, after holding that  the  Appellant  could  not  succeed
    under the Immigration Rules, because the Appellant was pregnant with an
    estimated delivery date of 4th October 2016, and it was accepted by  Mr
    Layne appearing on her behalf that she could not satisfy the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules at the date of  the  application,
    and therefore had to fall back on Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal state that, since the  judge  had  already  ruled
    that the Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration  Rules,  she
    was wrong to then  have  gone  on  to  allow  the  appeal  outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis of Article 8.  The judge had not engaged
    with the question as to whether the Appellant could seek the  necessary
    entry clearance upon return to India and there was no reference to  the
    case of Chen [2015]  UKUT  00189.   That  case  established  that  Lord
    Brown's statement in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 was  not  laying  down  a
    legal test when he suggested that  requiring  a  Claimant  to  make  an
    application for entry clearance would only  "comparatively  rarely"  be
    proportionate in a case involving children.  This being so, even if the
    Appellant was pregnant, and a child was to  be  born  soon,  the  judge
    ought to have given consideration to whether the Appellant upon  return
    to India could obtain entry clearance.  Failure to do so was a material
    error of law.

 4. On 14th November 2016, permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal
    on the basis that the judge did not refer to the legitimate aim of  the
    maintenance of an effective immigration control and accordingly it  was
    arguable  that  she  failed  to  attach  sufficient  weight   to   this
    consideration.

 5. On  14th  December  2016,  a  Rule  24  response  was  entered  by  the
    Appellant's representatives who pointed out that the judge had found as
    a fact that it was not reasonable to expect the Appellant  to  make  an
    application from abroad claiming that she was pregnant and  she  needed
    the support of  her  husband,  who  was  permanently  settled  in  this
    country.  The judge was entitled  to  come  to  this  finding  and  was
    entitled to hold that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  the
    Appellant in those circumstances to return to  India.   The  judge  did
    refer to  the  legitimate  aim  of  the  maintenance  of  an  effective
    immigration control and this is adequately dealt with at  paragraph  29
    of the determination.  She also referred to Section 117B  of  the  2002
    Act which sets out the public interest considerations.   There  was  no
    error of law.

 6. At the hearing before me on 30th January 2017, Mr Jarvis submitted that
    the judge had fallen into error in other respects.  For example, as she
    had stated (at paragraph 27) that,

         "Whilst I accept that there would be hardships  faced  by  both  of
         them if they returned to India,  absent  any  risk  to  them,  such
         hardships are not insurmountable.  They are the same hardships  any
         couple would face on relocation to another country.  I cannot  find
         that there are insurmountable obstacles to their continuing  family
         life in India ...."

 7. Given this finding, it was difficult to see  how  the  judge  had  then
    concluded that it was disproportionate to expect the Appellant, or  the
    Appellant and her husband, to return to India in order for her to  make
    an application to re-enter as a spouse,  especially  given  the  public
    interest considerations in favour of immigration control.  Moreover, no
    child was as yet born to her, and  the  existing  position  before  the
    judge  was  that  the  Appellant  was  not  with  a  child.   In  these
    circumstances, the case of Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 governed  insofar
    as paragraph 50 in that case laid down three propositions.

 8. First, "That as persons only permitted to be  temporarily  in  the  UK,
    neither the applicant nor his wife had any legitimate expectation of  a
    right to remain."  The second consideration was, "That the family  life
    could continue ..., although the wife would  for  obvious  reasons  not
    wish to return".  There is also a  third  consideration,  namely,  that
    "Any period of separation would be short".  As the Court of Appeal  had
    stated in that case, "These were all proper considerations to weigh  in
    the balance when  considering  the  merits  of  the  Article  8  claim"
    (paragraph 51).  The judge had failed to do  so.   The  fact  that  the
    Appellant had tried to comply with the Immigration Rules was no  reason
    for allowing the appeal on the basis of Article 8 and of  the  intended
    need for the Appellant to return home and to apply for entry  clearance
    from there.

 9. In fact, on the basis of what had been said in Hayat by  the  Court  of
    Appeal, even if the child had been born, it would have  been  perfectly
    reasonable to expect the Appellant to return simply in order to make an
    entry clearance application from India.

10. Finally, as far as the case of Chen was concerned  this  was  authority
    for the proposition that Appendix FM does not include consideration  of
    the  question  whether  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  expect  an
    individual to return to his home country to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application to rejoin family members in the UK.  There may be cases  in
    which there are insurmountable obstacles to family life  being  enjoyed
    outside the UK but where temporary separation to enable  an  individual
    to make an application for entry clearance may be disproportionate.

11. For his part, Mr Layne  submitted  that  Judge  Gill  did  give  proper
    consideration to the Section 117B provision that referred to the public
    interest in favour of immigration control.  The fact was that there was
    a finding by the judge that the Appellant could not return to India  in
    her condition of imminently giving birth (see paragraphs 30 to 31).  If
    her husband went with her he would have to fold up his business and  he
    would not be able to  then  comply  with  the  financial  requirements.
    Finally the citation of Hayat by Mr Jarvis was selected  because  there
    were provisions in that judgment that wholly assisted the Appellant.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law such that it falls  to
    be set aside.  This is a case where the judge does reject the appeal on
    the basis of the Immigration  Rules,  and  of  that  there  can  be  no
    criticism, and none is made.  Insofar as there is a  criticism  of  the
    judge in having allowed the appeal under Article  8,  it  is  unfounded
    because  the  judge  does  refer  to  the  legitimate  public  aim   of
    immigration control at paragraph 29 of the  determination  setting  out
    very carefully the relevant public interest considerations in terms  of
    the economic interest of the UK, the fact that  financial  independence
    is a neutral consideration, and that little weight is to be given to  a
    private life or a  relationship  with  a  qualifying  partner  that  is
    established by a person at a time when they are in the UK unlawfully.

13. Where the judge does allow the appeal, however, is in relation  to  the
    Court of Appeal judgment in Hayat [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.  As she states,



         "The only factor that now weighed in the proportionality balance in
         favour  of  the  Respondent  was  a  public  policy   consideration
         requiring the Appellant to leave the UK  and  make  an  application
         from abroad, which was  an  aspect  of  immigration  control.   The
         question was, was there good reason  to  require  her  to  make  an
         application from abroad?"

14. The judge went on to say that, at the time  that  the  application  was
    made the Respondent could have been so justified  but  the  Appellant's
    current circumstances were different.  As the judge recorded, "She  was
    pregnant and that the delivery date given, it was not clear whether she
    would be permitted to fly" (paragraph 30) and the judge  accepted  this
    contention.

15. From thereon she proceeded to conclude that,

         "The Appellant is pregnant and it  is  a  time  when  she  and  her
         partner will want to be together for the birth of their child; and,
         were she to return to India at this time, to make an out of country
         application, she could not  return  to  her  family  and  would  be
         without support at a difficult time for her".

16. The judge did then also give consideration  to  the  Sponsor  returning
    with her, in order to enable her to make an out of country application,
    but then found that, "He is in fact employed in  the  UK  and,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, he is unlikely to be able to take between one
    and three months away from work or leave to  go  with  her"  (paragraph
    31).

17. These are considerations that the judge could reasonably have regard to
    in considering how the balance of considerations fell in the assessment
    of the proportionality of the decision.  In  the  case  of  Hayat,  the
    principles are summarised so as to point to the proposition that  where
    Article 8 is engaged, it will be a disproportionate  interference  with
    family or private life to enforce such  a  policy  unless  there  is  a
    sensible reason for doing so.  However,  "Whether  it  is  sensible  to
    enforce that policy will necessarily be fact sensitive."

18. In Chikwamba Lord Brown identified certain potentially relevant factors
    and, "They will include the prospective length and degree of disruption
    of family life whether other members of the family are settled  in  the
    UK" (see paragraph 30(b) to (c)) of Hayat.  For all these reasons,  the
    decision of Judge Robertson was entirely consistent  with  the  settled
    cases on this issue, and consistent with the Court of  Appeal  decision
    in Hayat.  The findings that she made were open to her and it cannot be
    said that she fell into error.

Notice of Decision

19. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 7th February 2017
