
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/48983/2014
                                                               IA/48976/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 August 2015                    |On 14 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                               NOUMAN RAFIQUE
                                YASIR ARAFAT
                                + dependents
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr Fripp (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   They  are  business
         partners  who  have  applied  for  leave  to  remain  as   Tier   1
         (Entrepreneur) Migrants under the Points Based System (PBS) on  the
         basis of a joint application.  Their appeals raise the same  issues
         and have been linked.



Procedural history

      2. In a decision promulgated on  27  March  2015  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Mathews dismissed the appellants' appeals on the  basis  that
         he was not satisfied that they met the requirements of the relevant
         Immigration Rule - para 245DD.

      3. In grounds seeking permission to appeal it was submitted  that  the
         Judge erred in law in  failing  to  grant  an  adjournment  and  in
         deciding certain issues  against  the  appellants,  which  had  not
         previously been raised in the SSHD's  decision  dated  19  November
         2014.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  P.  J.  M.
         Hollingworth in a decision dated 2 July 2015, on the basis of these
         grounds.

      4. The matter now comes before me to  determine  whether  or  not  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
         law.

Hearing

      5. At the beginning of the  hearing  Mr  Fripp  submitted  a  skeleton
         argument.  This focussed upon the Judge's failure  to  address  the
         appropriate question set out in 245DD(h).  Mr Fripp argued that the
         Judge misdirected himself in deciding that the decisive  issue  was
         whether the appellants had a credible business plan demonstrating a
         viable business.

      6. Mr McVeety was content not to take issue with the late amendment to
         the grounds of appeal.  In those circumstances Mr  Fripp  indicated
         that he no longer relied upon the ground of appeal challenging  the
         Judge's failure to grant an adjournment.  He was right  to  do  so.
         It is difficult to see how the failure to grant an adjournment  had
         any material bearing upon the outcome of the  case.   Both  parties
         accepted that the basis of the adjournment was to locate the  final
         page of an interview transcript  involving  the  second  appellant.
         That has still not been found and in the  premises  an  adjournment
         would not have achieved anything.  In addition, the Judge  accepted
         the credibility of the second appellant's aspirations [29]  and  it
         is difficult to see what the final page would have  added  to  this
         when the Judge  had  the  final  page  for  the  first  appellant's
         interview.

      7. Mr Fripp amplified upon his skeleton argument  and  made  it  clear
         that this is the document he relies upon to support his  submission
         that the decision contains an error of law.  I then  heard  briefly
         from Mr McVeety who asked me to find that the Judge was entitled to
         make his findings for the reasons provided.

      8. After the completion of submissions I reserved my decision, which I
         now provide with reasons.



Error of law discussion

      9. In order for the appellants to meet the requirements of 245DD,  the
         decision-maker must be satisfied that, inter alia:

             "(h)  the  applicant  genuinely...intends  and  is   able   to
             establish, take over or become  a  director  of  one  or  more
             businesses within the UK in the next six months ...".

         At (i) it is said:

             "in making the assessment in (h), the Secretary of State  will
             assess on the balance  of  probabilities.   The  Secretary  of
             State may take into account the following factors:

               i. the evidence the applicant has submitted;

              ii. the viability and credibility of the source of  the  money
                  referred to in Table 4 of Appendix A;

             iii. the viability and credibility of the applicant's  business
                  plans and  market  research  into  their  chosen  business
                  sector; ..."

      9. I entirely accept, as Mr Fripp submitted, that the decision  maker,
         in this case the First-tier Tribunal, must apply  the  language  of
         the relevant Immigration Rule.  I also accept, as observed in  Alam
         v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 960, that the  PBS  is  said  to  be  highly
         prescriptive and based upon objectively verifiable  criteria.   The
         PBS is intended to  be  based  upon  a  "hard-edged  point  scoring
         exercise", which emphasises "certainty in place of  discretion,  on
         detail rather than broad guidance" - see Miah v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
         Civ 1719.

     10. It is against this backdrop that Mr Fripp submitted that the  Judge
         erred in law in engaging in a  detailed  analysis  of  whether  the
         business was a viable one.  Mr Fripp submitted that the  Judge  was
         limited to  simply  considering  whether  or  not  the  appellant's
         genuinely intend and are able to establish a business.

     11. I accept that the Judge has clumsily described the issue in dispute
         as being whether or not the appellants' business  is  credible  and
         viable [18 and 19].  The real issue for him to  determine  is  that
         set out within the wording of 245DD(h)(i)(1).  He should have asked
         himself whether as at the date of decision,  there  was  sufficient
         evidence to satisfy him that the appellants intend and are able  to
         establish the business.   The  question  for  me  is  whether  this
         misdirection constitutes a material error of law.  I  have  decided
         that it is not for the reasons set out below.

     12. First,  the  Judge  expressly  accepted  that  the  appellants  had
         "genuine aspirations to establish  a  business"  [29].   The  Judge
         clearly decided in the appellants favour in relation to  the  first
         aspect  of  245DD(h)(i)(1)  i.e.  the  Judge  accepted   that   the
         appellants genuinely intend to  establish  the  business.   Such  a
         finding is consistent with the Judge's  others  findings  [18]  and
         seemingly with the SSHD's own views.

     13. Second, when the decision is read as a whole the Judge was  clearly
         more concerned about the question of whether  the  appellants'  are
         genuinely able to establish the business.  In order to answer  that
         question i.e. in order to answer the second part of  245DD(h)(i)(1)
         the Judge (who at this stage was standing in the shoes of the  SSHD
         in a full merits based appeal) was entitled to  take  into  account
         "the viability and credibility of the [appellants]  business  plans
         and market research into their chosen business sector" as  set  out
         at 245DD(i).  The Judge was entitled to regard this aspect  of  the
         evidence as particularly important on the facts of this  case,  and
         was entitled to consider the issue for himself.

     14. Third, as I set out above, I entirely accept that the PBS has  been
         re-designed with a view to  minimising  discretion  and  maximising
         predictable consistency (as observed more  recently  in  Hossain  v
         SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 207).   However  it  is  inevitable  that  the
         question of whether an applicant genuinely intends and is  able  to
         establish a business is one that involves the  use  of  discretion.
         This aspect  of  245DD  does  not  require  mere  hard-edged  point
         scoring.  Indeed the decision-maker has a discretion  as  to  which
         factors to take into account (see the use  of  the  word  "may"  at
         245DD(i)) when determining the issues at (h).   The  decision-maker
         is obliged to consider  the  credibility  of  both  intentions  and
         ability to establish the business.  It is  therefore  important  to
         consider the Judge's findings in light of the relevant  wording  of
         the Rule, which, as Mr Fripp acknowledged involves an assessment of
         credibility, which is bound to include the use  of  discretion  and
         subjective judgment.

     15. Fourth, by virtue of 245DD(i) the Judge was entitled to  take  into
         account evidence relevant to the viability of  business  plans  and
         market research when considering  (h).   The  Judge  was  therefore
         entitled to express his concerns about the market research into the
         business sector undertaken by the appellants [22 and  28]  and  the
         lack of projections and other deficits in the  business  plans  [23
         and 30].  These are factual findings, which were open to the Judge.

     16. Even assuming that the Judge misdirected himself  when  considering
         the  overall  question  to  be  determined  [18   and   19],   that
         misdirection is not a material error of law.  The findings of  fact
         are such that if the correct question was asked there could only be
         one answer: notwithstanding the positive aspects of the appellants'
         application (as outlined at [18,  20,  21,  26,  27  and  28])  the
         business plans and market  research  are  so  deficient  as  to  be
         unviable and in the circumstances the appellants cannot be said  to
         genuinely be able to establish the business.  For this reason,  any
         error of law is immaterial and I therefore exercise  my  discretion
         not to set the decision aside.

Decision

     17. I do not find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains
         a material error of law.

     18. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
26 August 2015
