

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA489362014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th May 2016                               |On 8th June 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             BEENA PRARIMAL VASA
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clark, senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hossain of London Law Associates


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1. Ms Vasa had applied for leave to remain as the  partner  of  a  person
      present and settled in  the  UK.  Her  application  was  refused.  Her
      appeal, which was heard by FtT Judge Joshi  on  17th  June  2015,  was
      allowed in a decision promulgated on 29th September 2015


   2. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  following
      grounds:


                      ......[the  application  for  leave  to  remain]  was
                      refused under Appendix FM (the 10 year route) as  the
                      appellant did not meet the requirements of E-LTRP and
                      EX.1 did not apply. It is apparent from Para. 25  [of
                      the decision] that the  judge  is  conflating  the  2
                      different rules and he has not set out which  one  he
                      is considering.


                      In considering if there are insurmountable  obstacles
                      to  the  appellant's  partner  relocating  with   the
                      appellant  the  judge  seeks   to   distinguish   the
                      appellant's situation from that in Agyarko.  He  does
                      this on the basis that he considers  the  appellant's
                      status is not precarious. This is a clear  error,  AM
                      (s117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC)  sets  out  the
                      definition of precarious and it  ca  be  anyone  with
                      leave to remain. His error in distinguishing  Agyarko
                      has led to him properly  the  correct  high  standard
                      required  in  the  "insurmountable  obstacle"   test.
                      Furthermore it is clear from para 33 "All the members
                      of the family would be harshly affected and there  is
                      no evidence before me that her family will be able to
                      relocate to India without  other  family  support,  a
                      home or work". That he has  reversed  the  burden  of
                      proof. His assessment of their potential difficulties
                      appears  to  be   based   entirely   on   unsupported
                      assertions by the appellant and her family.


   3. It was agreed between the parties that the appellant  fell  under  the
      transitional provisions and that although  the  application  had  been
      refused on adequacy of funds and the judge had not made a  finding  on
      that element of the decision, permission had not been sought  on  that
      ground. It was further agreed that the SSHD had not sought  to  appeal
      the decision on the grounds that paragraph EX.1 did not apply  and  Mr
      Clark accepted that under EX.1 there was no requirement for an English
      language certificate.


   4. It was a little difficult to  understand  why  Mr  Hossein  sought  to
      reiterate submissions he had apparently  made  to  the  FtT  that  the
      appellant did not require an English language certificate because  she
      fell within the transitional provisions (which is incorrect) or sought
      to reiterate submissions he had made before the FtT that she had  been
      unable to take a language test because  the  respondent  retained  her
      passport. These points were not at issue before me.


   5. Mr Clark submitted that although the FtT  judge  had  failed  to  make
      findings under paragraph 284 of the Immigration Rules,  being  one  of
      the reasons for refusal of leave to remain and although there appeared
      to be a conflating by the judge of consideration under  paragraph  284
      and Appendix FM the core ground of  appeal  was  that  the  judge  had
      simply failed to provide adequate reasoning for his finding that there
      were insurmountable obstacles to the family relocating to  India;  the
      Judge had sought to distinguish the appellant's position from that  in
      Agyarko [2015] EWCA Civ 440 but had made a clear error in  basing  his
      decision on the premise that her status in the UK was not  precarious.
      He referred to paragraph 33 of the FtT decision and submitted that  in
      stating "there is no evidence before me that the family will  be  able
      to relocate to India without other family support, a home or work" the
      judge had reversed the burden of proof.


   6. Mr Hossein submitted that the SSHD , in  the  decision,  had  asserted
      that there were no insurmountable obstacles to the  family  relocating
      to India but had not provided any evidence to that effect and had  not
      explained why there were no  insurmountable  obstacles.  He  submitted
      that when the decision was read as a whole it was 'obvious' that there
      were insurmountable obstacles because the husband had no work in India
      having sold his business and the son was in education here in the  UK.
      There was, he submitted no family in India.


   7. The FtT judge set out the evidence before him; there was no  challenge
      to the accuracy of that record. It is plain  from  a  reading  of  the
      decision that the judge has failed to make any findings whatsoever  on
      whether the appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 284  of  the
      Immigration Rules although he  records  that  the  respondent  in  the
      decision the subject of the appeal refers to the lack  of  a  language
      certificate. The judge ignores this, although as I have said this  was
      not a matter that was taken before me and therefore plays no  part  in
      my decision whether there was a material  error  of  law  in  the  FtT
      decision.


   8. In paragraph 25 of the decision the judge refers to EX.1. He then self
      directs himself in paragraph 26 to decide whether  or  not  there  are
      insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK.


   9. The facts that he considers are:
                  (I)Mrs Vasa's son is at an important stage of his  studies
                  (final  year  of  'A'  levels)  and  has  been  offered  a
                  scholarship to attend university;
                  (ii)Mrs Vasa and her husband  have  been  married  for  26
                  years and she arrived in the UK with valid leave to remain
                  and applied for an extension of her leave to remain during
                  the currency of an extant period of leave to remain;
                  (iii)Mrs Vasa's husband is 54  years  old,  is  a  British
                  Citizen by descent, has stable employment in the UK;  does
                  not have family or friends, work or home in India; on  the
                  balance of probabilities he is  unlikely  to  go  back  to
                  India with Mrs Vasa;
                  (iv)Mrs Vasa does not have family or friends or work or  a
                  home in India;
                  (v) Mrs Vasa's husband said that he would not be  able  to
                  manage financially in the UK without Mrs Vasa's earnings -
                  she works as a care worker;
                  (vi) Mr Vasa's evidence was that he would not be  able  to
                  support his son through education in the UK  if  Mrs  Vasa
                  were to return to India;
                  (vii) there was no evidence before  him  that  the  family
                  would be able to relocate to India without family  support
                  or work or a home and the  future  of  the  son  would  be
                  affected;
                  (viii) If Mrs Vasa remains in the UK she would be able  to
                  continue to contribute to the family finances enabling the
                  family to remain unsupported by public funds.


  10. Other evidence that was before the judge which was not challenged  was
      as follows:
                  (I) Mr Vasa's mother, father, brother and sister  are  all
                  British citizens and live in the UK. His parents have  now
                  died. He used to have a business in India  but  no  longer
                  owns that business and he no longer has a home  there.  He
                  arrived in the UK in 2009. Most of his friends are in  the
                  UK. Mr Vasa was 54 years  old  at  the  date  of  the  FtT
                  hearing.
                  (ii) Mr and Mrs Vasa were married for some 26 years. Their
                  son was born in India.
                  (iii) Mrs Vasa, who was born in 1962, and their  son  were
                  granted entry clearance on 25th April 2012.


  11. It appears  that  although  not  specifically  stated  the  judge  has
      accepted that Mrs Vasa has no relatives or friends in India  and  that
      Mr Vasa has sold his business there. There  is  no  reference  to  the
      evidence supporting the contention that having  spent  so  many  years
      living and being married in India she no longer has  any  friends  and
      there was no reference to any evidence what has happened to the family
      home or the funds from the sale of the business.  Mr  Vasa's  evidence
      was that most of his friends were in the UK  so  it  appears  that  he
      retains some friends in India - which would be logical given  that  he
      lived there until 2009 ie until he was  in  his  mid  40s  and  ran  a
      business there.  There was no recorded evidence what  contact  he  has
      with them or whether they would assist in relocation.


  12. The judge draws an analogy with Kaur in R(on the application of  Kaur)
      v SSHD [2015] EWHC 766 (Admin) where, the judge records, it  was  held
      that the SSHD had not properly considered the insurmountable obstacles
      that a middle aged wife and her husband  would  face  if  returned  to
      India as the husband had lived in the UK for 18 years, was  a  British
      Citizen and was unlikely because of his age  to  find  employment  and
      they had no accommodation ([32] FtT decision).  The  citation  in  the
      judge's decision does not appear to be correct and I have been  unable
      to find the case. From the limited  information  referred  to  by  the
      judge it appears in any event that this was a judicial review,  not  a
      statutory appeal and the issue at large was the extent  to  which  the
      SSHD had considered whether there were  insurmountable  obstacles.  As
      such the decision would have been quashed  for  the  SSHD  to  take  a
      decision considering the  evidence.  Further,  that  case  involved  a
      husband who had lived in  the  UK  in  excess  of  18  years  and  was
      apparently elderly  and  thus  unlikely  to  find  employment.  It  is
      difficult to understand on what basis a similarity could be drawn with
      Mrs Vasa who has been in the UK for about 4 years  and  whose  husband
      has only been in the UK for some 7 years. Although the FtT  judge  has
      accepted there is no employment by Mr Vasa etc in  India,  there  does
      not appear to have been any evidence before the judge as to the nature
      of the business sold, what funds became available, what  accommodation
      could be available, what employment prospects there were (particularly
      since Mr Vasa had  previously  owned  a  business  and  was  currently
      plainly able to work) or what support could be forthcoming even for  a
      limited period of time until the family re-established  itself.  There
      does not appear to have been any evidence that Mr and Mrs  Vasa  would
      be unable to work in India. It is not for the SSHD to provide evidence
      of these matters - it is for an applicant  to  produce  evidence  upon
      which she relies to assert a particular state of affairs.


  13. The judge also refers to Agyarko although his consideration of this is
      flawed. The judge draws from Agyarko the principle  issue  being  that
      the appellant (actually an applicant) in that case  had  entered  into
      her relationship when she was an overstayer and her immigration status
      was precarious ([33}). The FtT judge  then  refers  to  the  Mrs  Vasa
      having been married for 26 years and having arrived  in  the  UK  with
      valid  leave  to  enter.  Agyarko  was  also  a  judicial  review  but
      considered the phrase 'insurmountable obstacles' and was not merely  a
      fact specific judgment. In giving the lead judgment, Sales LJ referred
      to  the  high  threshold  required  to  be  crossed  when  considering
      'insurmountable obstacles' as referenced in  paragraph  EX.1.  of  the
      Immigration Rules; it is "significantly more  demanding  than  a  mere
      test of whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to  continue
      their family life outside the United Kingdom ([21] Agyarko). Sales  LJ
      continues
                  "[24] ...the "insurmountable obstacles" criterion is  used
                  in the Rules to define one of the preconditions set out in
                  EX.1(b) which need to be satisfied before an appellant can
                  claim to be entitled to be granted leave to  remain  under
                  the Rules. In that context it is not simply a  factors  to
                  be taken into account. However in the context of making  a
                  wider Article 8 assessment outside  the  Rules,  it  is  a
                  factor  to  be  taken  into  account,  not   an   absolute
                  requirement which has to be satisfied in every single case
                  across the whole range of cases covered by Article 8..."
                  ....
                  [30] Thus it is possible that a case might be found to  be
                  exceptional for the purposes of the  relevant  test  under
                  Article 8 in relation to precarious family life even where
                  there are no insurmountable obstacles to continuing family
                  life overseas....


  14. Mrs Vasa was not an overstayer but it is difficult  to  understand  on
      any basis how the findings of fact made and the  evidence  before  the
      FtT judge  could  lead  to  a  conclusion  there  were  insurmountable
      obstacles to  relocation  to  India.  Yes  it  may  be  difficult  and
      unpleasant but there was simply insufficient  evidence  to  reach  the
      high threshold demanded to reach the legitimate conclusion that  there
      were insurmountable obstacles and thus that she could meet  EX.1  (b).
      The judge has simply misinterpreted the relevant case law  and  failed
      to address the factual matrix based on the evidence before him in  the
      context of the relevant jurisprudence in reaching his  conclusions  on
      EX1.(b).


  15. The judge segues into what appears to be an assessment of  Mrs  Vasa's
      appeal on Article 8 grounds outside the Rules. In [34]  he  refers  to
      the close bond between her and her husband, that  he  is  unlikely  to
      return to India with her, in addition  to  meeting  EX.1(b).  He  does
      however also say in [36] that he does not need to undertake a separate
      examination of Article 8.


  16. Mrs Vasa's immigration status was precarious - see AM  (s117B)  Malawi
      [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC). The FtT judge has not factored this  into  his
      consideration at all.


  17. Even placing the highest gloss on the findings of fact  made  and  the
      evidence before the judge, and despite  the  judge  not  appearing  to
      address correctly the matters before him, not only is  it  plain  that
      the judge has failed properly  to  apply  the  jurisprudence  but  has
      reached  findings  that  are  simply  unreasoned;  has  required   the
      respondent to provide evidence which Mrs Vasa has failed to provide to
      support her claim and has reached conclusions that  cannot  reasonably
      be supported by the evidence before him.


  18. The FtT judge erred materially in law in failing to apply the  correct
      law and jurisprudence to the facts  found  (such  as  they  were)  and
      failed to provide a reasoned decision for the conclusions reached.


  19. It is not the role of the Upper Tribunal to make findings of fact.  In
      this case, where the findings of fact are unreasoned and evidence  has
      not been fully considered and there has  been  a  failure  to  make  a
      finding on Article 8, the proper course  is  for  this  appeal  to  be
      remitted to the FtT for remaking, no findings of fact preserved.

 Conclusions:
    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.
    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the  FtT  (not  before
    FtT  Judge  Joshi)  to  be  remade,  no  findings  of  fact  preserved.



                                    Date 8th May 2016
    [pic]
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
