
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/48457/2014
                                                               IA/48466/2014
                                                               IA/48474/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 March 2019                          |On 01 May 2019                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                       MUHAMMAD [S] (FIRST appellant)
                        AYESHA [A] (SECOND appellant)
                           [M A] (THIRD appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    In person assisted by Mr F Afzal as McKenzie Friend
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Application for Anonymity

 1. Subsequent to hearing the appeals, on 9 April 2019 an  application  for
    an anonymity order was made by the first and second appellants who  are
    the parents  of  the  third  appellant.  However,  although  the  third
    appellant is a child, the appeal and evidence relate exclusively to the
    position of the first appellant, as  a  Points-Based  System  applicant
    under Part 6A of the Immigration Rules.  No personal information of the
    third  appellant  is  disclosed  in  this  decision   and,   in   those
    circumstances, taking into account  the  public  interest,  the  public
    interest does not require the protection of the appellants' identities.
     Consequently, I do not make an anonymity order.

Introduction

 2. The first and second appellants, who are married, are  the  parents  of
    the third appellant.  They were born respectively on 31 January 1984, 5
    November 1983 and 1 January 2011.  They are all citizens of Pakistan.

 3. The first appellant entered the United Kingdom on 1 December 2009  with
    a student visa and with leave valid until 31 March  2011.   On  16  May
    2011, he was granted leave to remain as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    until 30 December 2011.  On 13 September 2012, he was granted leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant until 13 September 2014.

 4. On 12 September 2014, he made a combined application  for  leave  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under the Points-Based System  (PBS)  and
    for a Biometric Residence Permit.  The second and third appellants made
    equivalent applications as his dependants.

 5. On  14  November  2014,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  first
    appellant's application on the basis that he had failed  to  establish,
    on the basis of the evidence submitted, that he  was  entitled  to  the
    necessary 25 points under the 'Attributes' requirement in Appendix A of
    the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended).   Consequently,  the  first
    appellant failed to meet the requirements of para 245DD(b) for leave as
    a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  The applications of  the  second  and
    third appellants, which were wholly dependent upon the success  of  the
    first appellant's application, were also refused on that date.

The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 6. The appellants appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Lebasci
    dismissed the appellants' appeals on all grounds.  In relation  to  the
    first appellant's substantive claim under the PBS, the first  appellant
    could not succeed as he could not  establish  his  entitlement  to  the
    required points under Appendix A.  The reason for this was that he  had
    failed to provide the  required  specified  documents  under  para  41-
    SD(e)(v), namely a Current  Appointment  Report  for  his  company  and
    further, under  paragraph  41-SD(c)(iii),  advertising  material  since
    before 11 July 2014 and up to the date of his application in  order  to
    demonstrate that he had been continuously engaged in business activity.
     As regards the first document, that  was  simply  not  submitted.   As
    regards  the  latter  documents,  the  advertising  material  was   not
    relevantly dated.

 7. Instead, the focus of the argument before Judge Lebasci was that, given
    the deficit in the evidential material, the Secretary of  State  should
    have exercised his discretion under the 'evidential  flexibility  rule'
    in para 245AA to request from the first appellant the missing  document
    and information concerning the dates  which  the  advertising  material
    covered.

 8. As regards  the  missing  Current  Appointment  Report,  Judge  Lebasci
    rejected the first appellant's contention that  para  245AA(d)  applied
    and that the information was available but had been  submitted  in  the
    "wrong format".  She found that the absence of the Current  Appointment
    Report was a "missing document" rather than a document submitted in the
    "wrong format" and, applying para 245AA(c) the Secretary of  State  was
    not required to exercise discretion to request a "missing document".

 9. As regards the advertising material, Judge Lebasci accepted  that  para
    245AA(d)(iii) applied in principle, namely  that  the  absence  of  the
    dates meant that the specified  documents  did  not  "contain  all  the
    specified information" but  rejected  the  argument  that  the  missing
    information was, as required for the application  of  discretion  under
    para 245AA(d)(iii), verifiable from other documents submitted with  the
    application, the website of the organisation which issued the documents
    or the website of the appropriate regulatory body.

10. Judge Lebasci also dismissed the appellants' appeal  in  reliance  upon
    Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Further Appeal

11. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   In
    the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the appellants relied
    upon 'evidential flexibility', fairness and also that the  decision  in
    respect of Art 8 was in error.  Permission to appeal was refused by the
    First-tier Tribunal.

12. The appellants renewed their application for permission directly to the
    Upper Tribunal.  In these new grounds, it was asserted that  there  was
    "one ground"  of  appeal,  namely  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    materially erred in law in  applying  para  245AA  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

13. On 15  August  2016,  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  Hanson)  refused  the
    appellants permission to appeal.

14. Thereafter, the appellants brought a judicial review (Cart)  challenge.
    In the detailed grounds, settled by Counsel, paragraph  245AA  was  set
    out in full.  However, the grounds did not rely  upon  paragraph  245AA
    but rather asserted, relying upon the Court of Appeal's decision in  SH
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 426 that:

         "There was no assessment of the Secretary  of  State's  failure  to
         apply the evidential flexibility policy only paragraph 245AA of the
         Immigration Rules".

15. At para 16 of the grounds, it is made plain that the challenge  to  the
    High Court, based upon SH, rested  upon  a  "more  generous  evidential
    flexibility policy" beyond para 245AA.

16. On 14 October 2016,  Globe  J  granted  the  appellants  permission  to
    challenge the Upper Tribunal's refusal of  permission  to  appeal.   In
    granting permission Globe J said this:

         "1.  The sole ground  of  appeal  relates  to  the  application  of
             paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules,  by  virtue  of  the
             decision in SH (Pakistan) and Secretary of State for the  Home
             Department [2016] EWCA Civ 426, to the failure of the claimant
             to produce evidence that he was registered as the director  of
             a new or existing  business  in  circumstances  where  it  was
             accepted that he had provided a copy  of  the  certificate  of
             incorporation for the company Noor Technologies Ltd.

         2.   In turn, the issue is whether, by virtue of  the  decision  in
             SH, the Secretary of State should have applied the  evidential
             flexibility policy and requested the claimant to  provide  the
             company's current appointment report and further  evidence  in
             relation to the start of the advertising material.

         3.   The point was not considered by the Upper Tribunal.

         4.   It is arguable that there is a reasonable prospect of  success
             that the decision of the Upper Tribunal refusing permission to
             appeal and thereby the decision of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
             against which permission to appeal was sought are wrong in law
             and that the claim raises an important point of  principle  or
             practice  or  compelling  reasons  by  the  extremity  of  the
             consequences for the claimants".

17. Of course, the judicial review grounds did not seek  to  challenge  the
    Upper Tribunal's refusal of permission based upon the "sole ground"  in
    the grounds of appeal to the UT, namely that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had wrongly applied para 245AA.  The judicial  review  grounds  raised,
    for the  first  time,  an  argument  based  upon  a  wider  'evidential
    flexibility' policy beyond para 245AA.  Despite Globe J's reference  to
    para 245AA in para 1 of his observations, it seems plain that in para 2
    he was granting permission to challenge the UT's refusal of  permission
    to appeal on the basis of the pleaded ground  in  the  judicial  review
    proceedings relying upon that wider (asserted)  evidential  flexibility
    policy and SH.

18. Having granted permission to challenge the UT's refusal  of  permission
    to appeal, on 30 November 2016 Master Gidden made an order quashing the
    UT's refusal of permission to appeal.

19. Thereafter, the Upper Tribunal (C M G Ockelton, Vice-President)  on  29
    January 2019 granted permission to appeal on the following basis:

         "Permission is granted in the light of the  decision  of  the  High
         Court in these cases.  The parties  are  reminded  that  the  Upper
         Tribunal's task is that set out in s.12 of the 2007 Act".

20. The consequence of that grant of permission was  that  the  appeal  was
    listed before me on 29 March 2019 in order  to  determine  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an error  of  law
    and should be set aside and, if appropriate, the decision re-made.

The Relevant Legal Provisions

21. The requirements in the  Immigration  Rules  in  order  for  the  first
    appellant to succeed in obtaining leave  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant under the PBS were not a matter of dispute between the parties.

22. The requirements are set out in para 245DD and, so far as  relevant  to
    this appeal, Appendix  A.   By  virtue  of  para  245DD(b),  the  first
    appellant had to satisfy the requirements in Table 4 of Appendix A,  in
    particular provision (d).   The  first  requirement  relevant  to  this
    appeal is in Table 4 (d)(iii) that the applicant:

         "Since before 11 July 2014 and up to the date of  his  application,
         has been continuously engaged in business activity which  was  not,
         or did not amount to, activity pursuant to a  contract  of  service
         with a business other than his own and,  during  such  period,  has
         been continuously:

         (1)  registered with HM Revenue & Customs as self-employed, or

         (2)  registered with Companies House as a  director  of  a  new  or
             existing  business.   Directors  who  are  on  the   list   of
             disqualified directors provided by Companies House will not be
             awarded points, ..."

23. In order to establish that requirement, and as the first appellant  was
    claiming points as a director of a new business,  he  was  required  to
    provide certain  "specified  documents"  set  out  in  para  41-SD,  in
    particular, para 41-SD(e)(v)(2)(a):

         "If claiming points for being a director of a  UK  company  at  the
         time of the application, a printout of a Current Appointment Report
         from Companies House, dated no earlier than three months before the
         date of application, listing the  applicant  as  a  director  of  a
         company that is actively trading and not dormant, or struck-off, or
         dissolved  or  in  liquidation,  and  showing  the  date   of   his
         appointment as a director of that company; ..."

24. That was the  document  that  Judge  Lebasci  concluded  had  not  been
    submitted by the first appellant.

25. In addition, Table 4 (d)(iv) imposed another requirement, namely:

         "Since before 11 July 2014 and up to the date of  his  application,
         has continuously been working in an occupation which appears on the
         list  of  occupations  skilled  to  the   National   Qualifications
         Framework level 4 or above, as stated in the Codes of  Practice  in
         Appendix J, and provide the specified evidence in paragraph  41-SD.
         'Working' in this context means that the core services his business
         provides  to  its  customers  or  clients  involves  the   business
         delivering a service in an occupation at this level.   It  excludes
         any work involved in administration, marketing or website functions
         for the business ..."

26.  In  relation  to  that  requirement,  para  41-SD  (e)(iii)  sets  out
    "specified documents" which must be produced to demonstrate  the  first
    appellant's "working" in the form of advertising material as follows:

         "(iii)   one or more of the following specified documents  covering
             (either  together  or  individually)   a   continuous   period
             commencing before 11 July 2014 up to  no  earlier  than  three
             months before the application:

             (1)  advertising or marketing material, including printouts of
                  online advertising, that had  been  published  locally  or
                  nationally, showing the applicant's name (and the name  of
                  the business if applicable)  together  with  the  business
                  activity  or,  where  his  business  is  trading   online,
                  confirmation of his ownership of the domain  name  of  the
                  business's website.

             (2)  Article(s) or online links to article(s) in  a  newspaper
                  or other publication showing the applicant's name (and the
                  name of the business  if  applicable)  together  with  the
                  business activity,

             (3)  information from a trade fair, at which the applicant has
                  had  a  stand  or  given  a  presentation  to  market  his
                  business, showing the applicant's name (and  the  name  of
                  the business if applicable)  together  with  the  business
                  activity, or

             (4)  personal registration with a UK trade body linked to  the
                  applicant's occupation; ..."

27. In relation to this requirement, Judge Lebasci at [20] noted  that  the
    evidence relied upon,  namely  a  printout  of  the  first  appellant's
    company's website, an advert on Gumtree and a  Facebook  page  did  not
    contain dates showing "working" from before  11  July  2014  up  to  no
    earlier than three months before his application.

28. As regards the website, it showed a date of 8 September 2014  but  this
    was the date that  the  document  was  printed.   The  other  documents
    contained no dates.

29. Those, then, are the substantive provisions.

30. The focus before Judge Lebasci was the application of  para  245AA  and
    the "evidential  flexibility"  for  which  it  provided.   Para  245AA,
    relevant to this appeal, provides as follows:

         "(a) Where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in Part  6A  state
             that specified documents must be provided, the Entry Clearance
             Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary  of  State  will
             only consider documents that  have  been  submitted  with  the
             application, and will only consider documents submitted  after
             the application where they are submitted  in  accordance  with
             subparagraph (b).

         (b)  If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which:

             (i)  Some of the documents in a  sequence  have  been  omitted
                  (for example, if one  bank  statement  from  a  series  is
                  missing);

             (ii) A document is in the wrong  format  (for  example,  if  a
                  letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or

             (iii)    A document is a copy and not an original document; or

             (iv)  A  document  does  not  contain  all  of  the  specified
                  information;

             the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Immigration  Officer  or  the
             Secretary  of  State  may  contact  the   applicant   or   his
             representative in writing, and request the correct  documents.
             The requested  documents  must  be  received  at  the  address
             specified in the request within 7 working days of the date  of
             the request.

         (c)  Documents will not be requested where a specified document has
             not  been  submitted  (for   example   an   English   language
             certificate is missing), or where the Entry Clearance Officer,
             Immigration  Officer  or  the  Secretary  of  State  does  not
             anticipate that addressing the omission or error  referred  to
             in  subparagraph  (b)  will  lead  to  a  grant  because   the
             application will be refused for other reasons.

         (d)  If the applicant has submitted a specified document:

             (i)  in the wrong format; or

             (ii) which is a copy and not an original document; or

             (iii)     which  does  not  contain  all  of   the   specified
                  information, but the  missing  information  is  verifiable
                  from:

                  (1)  other documents submitted with the application,

                  (2)  the website of  the  organisation  which  issued  the
                      document, or

                  (3)  the website of the appropriate regulatory body;

             the application may be granted  exceptionally,  providing  the
             Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the  Secretary
             of State is satisfied that the specified documents are genuine
             and the applicant meets all the other requirements.  The Entry
             Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer  or  the  Secretary  of
             State reserves the right to  request  the  specified  original
             documents in  the  correct  format  in  all  cases  where  (b)
             applies, and to refuse applications if these documents are not
             provided as set out in (b) ."

31. The structure of para 245AA is as follows.  Subparagraph (a)  sets  out
    the starting point  that  applications  under  the  PBS  will  only  be
    considered on the basis  of  specified  documents  submitted  with  the
    application or which, if submitted after the application, are  done  so
    in accordance with para 245AA(b).

32. Subparagraph (b) creates a discretion  invested  in  the  Secretary  of
    State to request further documents in certain specified circumstances:

      i) where a document or documents is missing from a sequence;

     ii) where a document is in the wrong format; and

    iii) where a document is  submitted  as  a  copy  and  not  an  original
         document.

33. Subparagraph (c) states that the Secretary of State will not request  a
    document or documents where either a specified document  has  not  been
    submitted  or  where  a  successful  request  for  a   document   under
    subparagraph (b) would not lead to  a  grant  because  the  application
    would be refused for other reasons.

34. Subparagraph  (d)  permits  the  Secretary  of  State  to  grant  leave
    "exceptionally" where a specified document is in the wrong  format,  or
    it is a copy and not original document, or where it  does  not  contain
    all the specified information but the missing information is verifiable
    from other documents submitted with the application, the website of the
    organisation  which  issued  the  document,  or  the  website  of   the
    appropriate regulatory body.

35. Prior to the introduction of  para  245AA  on  6  September  2012,  the
    Secretary  of  State,  has,  since  2009,  put  in  place  a   'process
    instruction' that  permitted  evidential  flexibility.   That  'process
    instruction' which became "Guidance" in March  2013  has  maintained  a
    number  of  iterations  and  has  continued  in  existence  even  after
    paragraph 245AA entered the Immigration Rules in September 2012.  A pre-
    para 245AA version of the Secretary of State's  evidential  flexibility
    policy was considered by the Supreme Court in Mandalia  v  SSHD  [2015]
    UKSC 59.

36. The evolution of the iterations of the Guidance between Version 1 on 12
    March 2013  and  Version  8  on  24  November  2016  were  exhaustively
    considered by the Court of Appeal in R  (Mudiyanselage  and  Others)  v
    SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 65.

37. In Mudiyanselage, the Court of Appeal considered its  earlier  decision
    in  SA  (Pakistan)  which  was  relied  upon  in  the  judicial  review
    proceedings which led to the quashing of the UT's refusal of permission
    to appeal.  In SA the Court of  Appeal  accepted  that  the  evidential
    flexibility guidance in effect in  that  case  provided  for  a  "free-
    standing" policy wider than para 245AA.  The Guidance considered by the
    Court of Appeal in SA was Version 1 in effect from 12 March 2013.

38. However, in Mudiyanselage, the Court  of  Appeal  concluded  that  that
    wider free-standing policy of evidential flexibility  ceased  with  the
    introduction of Version 4 from 1 October 2013.  At [54], Underhill  LJ,
    with whom Sir Brian Leveson P and Sir Colin Rimer agreed, said this:

         "Accordingly in my view the correct construction of Versions 4-7 of
         the Guidance is that there is no longer a general policy  to  allow
         correction of minor errors: evidential flexibility will only  apply
         in the particular cases provided for by paragraph 245AA".

39. It was common ground between the parties  in  these  appeals  that  the
    relevant Guidance, "Points-Based  System:  Evidential  Flexibility"  in
    force was Version 7 valid from 12 August 2014.

40. As the Court of Appeal decided in Mudiyanselage  that  version  of  the
    Guidance does not contain a wider  policy  of  evidential  flexibility.
    The only evidential  flexibility  which  an  individual  can  rely  on,
    including the appellants in this appeal, is to be found in para  245AA.



The Scope of this Appeal

41. This analysis creates  a  difficulty  in  these  appeals.   In  seeking
    judicial review of the  UT's  refusal  of  permission  to  appeal,  the
    appellants only relied  upon  a  wider  evidential  flexibility  policy
    beyond para 245AA.  That is  absolutely  plain  from  the  grounds  for
    judicial review set out above and drafted by Counsel on behalf  of  the
    appellants.  Equally, in granting permission to appeal, Globe J clearly
    granted permission on the basis that, following  SA,  it  was  arguable
    that the UT had been wrong to refuse permission to appeal  against  the
    FtT's decision.  However, the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    rely exclusively upon para  245AA.   No  reference  is  made  in  those
    grounds to the wider policy identified, as then in existence, in SA.

42. If the appellants are restricted to relying upon the ground(s) on which
    their judicial review challenge to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  of
    permission to appeal was successful, then their appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal are bound to fail.  As  we  now  know,  as  a  result  of  the
    detailed analysis by the Court of Appeal in Mudiyanselage subsequent to
    Globe J's decision in the judicial  review  proceedings,  there  is  no
    wider evidential  flexibility  policy  beyond  para  245AA.   The  Cart
    grounds of challenge relied upon what is now an  unarguable  ground  of
    appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal could not conceivably  have  erred  in
    law by failing to consider a wider flexibility policy beyond para 245AA
    (even ignoring the fact that it was never argued before the  First-tier
    Tribunal) because no such wider policy  exists  in  Version  7  of  the
    Guidance which is the relevant one for the purposes of this appeal.

43. Only if the appellants can rely upon para 245AA, which was the basis of
    the original grounds seeking permission to appeal directly to  the  UT,
    is there any tenable argument to be made on their behalf.

44. A Cart judicial review challenge to the  Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  to
    grant permission to appeal against a First-tier Tribunal's decision is,
    as the Upper Tribunal  recognised  in  Shah  ('Cart'  judicial  review:
    nature and consequence) [2018] UKUT 51 (IAC) (Lane P and UTJ Blum):

         "emphatically not an opportunity for a party to raise  new  grounds
         of appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal"  (at
         [62]).

45. In granting permission subsequently, Ockelton V-P, adopting  the  usual
    formulation, granted permission in light of the High Court's  decision,
    namely to quash the earlier refusal of permission to appeal.

46. Where then does that leave the Upper Tribunal in respect of the grounds
    of appeal that an appellant may rely upon?

47. One view would be that, if the grant of permission by the UT  following
    the successful Cart challenge is general in nature and not limited, all
    of the grounds upon which the  individual  relied  in  his  grounds  of
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal are ones that he may now  rely  upon.   It
    may be that in practice the focus would  be  upon  the  merits  of  the
    ground(s) which led to the successful Cart challenge.  And, of  course,
    if the drafter of those successful grounds  complied  with  the  strong
    indication  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Shah,  there  would   be   no
    disconnection between the grounds upon which the High Court quashed the
    refusal of permission by the Upper Tribunal and the grounds  of  appeal
    made to the Upper Tribunal - leaving, of course, the possibility  of  a
    more limited grant of permission by the Upper  Tribunal  following  the
    Cart decision in the individual's favour.

48. Here, however, the Cart challenge was on a ground not raised before the
    UT.  Given that the High Court found that ground arguable, and  in  the
    result persuasive, leading to the quashing of the decision, I  have  no
    doubt that the appellants are entitled to rely on  that  ground  before
    the UT once permission has been granted subsequently.  It may be, and I
    express no concluded view on this as it  was  not  touched  on  in  the
    submissions, that he High Court's decision acts as an implied amendment
    or variation (by addition) of the  original  grounds  to  the  UT.   Of
    course, as I have already made clear, that new ground does  not  assist
    the  appellants  in  this  appeal  since,  subsequent   to   the   Cart
    proceedings, it is plain that that ground has no merit in it.

49. Mr Howells, on behalf of the Secretary of State submitted that was  the
    only ground of appeal which I could consider.  I  do  not  accept  that
    submission.  The grant of permission by the Upper  Tribunal  subsequent
    to the Cart challenge is general in  nature.   The  grounds  of  appeal
    originally rejected by the Upper Tribunal  are,  once  more,  potential
    grounds upon which the appellants are entitled to rely.  Permission has
    been granted "generally" on the grounds.  The position  might  well  be
    otherwise if the grant of permission by the  Upper  Tribunal  was  more
    limited in scope, for example restricted to the basis  upon  which  the
    Cart challenge had been successful.

50. Consequently, in these appeals I am satisfied that the  appellants  may
    rely upon the  original  grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  seeking  to
    challenge the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  Although  those  grounds
    were not precise in their focus,  they  undoubtedly  relied  upon  para
    245AA.

51. In the appeal before me, the first  appellant  developed  his  case  in
    respect of para 245AA.  Having indicated that I intended to reserve the
    question of whether that ground could be relied upon at the hearing, Mr
    Howells also addressed me de bene esse on para 245AA.

52. I now turn to consider para 245AA.

Paragraph 245AA

53. In his oral and written submissions,  the  first  appellant  sought  to
    argue that para 245AA(b)(ii) and (d)(i)  applied  since,  although  the
    Current Appointment Report had not been provided, all  the  information
    was available in the other documents  and  so  the  document  had  been
    provided in the "wrong format".

54. That contention is not sustainable.  A failure to provide a  "specified
    document" (namely, the Current  Appointment  Report)  is  simply  that:
    there is a "missing" document.  It is not a "specified document"  which
    has been provided but in the "wrong format".

55. Paragraph 245AA(c) deals with a "missing" document, i.e. where one  has
    not been  submitted.   That  is  a  situation  in  which  there  is  no
    discretion to request it.  By contrast, if a  "specified  document"  is
    submitted and it is in the "wrong format" (for example if a  letter  is
    not on a letterhead paper as specified), that document in  the  correct
    format may be requested.  The plain and simple fact in this  appeal  is
    that the first appellant did not provide the specified  document  in  a
    printout from Companies House of a "Current Appointment  Report".   The
    fact that information that would be contained within that document was,
    if this is the case, elsewhere in the documentation  did  not  overcome
    the need to provide that specified document.  It is simply non-sensical
    to consider that a non-submitted document  has  been  provided  in  the
    "wrong format" simply because information that would be contained  with
    it is contained in other documents submitted with the application.

56. For these reasons, the judge was correct to find that  para  245AA  did
    not assist the appellants, and provide for a discretion to request  the
    "missing"  document  in  the  form  of  a  Current  Appointment  Report
    concerning the first appellant's directorship of his company.

57. Turning now to the advertising material,  the  judge  found  that  this
    material did not, when read cumulatively, demonstrate  that  the  first
    appellant had been "working" for a period prior to 11 July  2014  until
    no earlier than three months  before  the  date  of  application.   The
    documents relied upon did not have any  relevant  dates  covering  that
    period.  The only date was that on the website but that related to when
    the document was printed rather than when the website was set up.

58. In his submissions, the first appellant drew my attention to  a  number
    of documents which he  submitted  'plugged  the  gap'.   He  set  these
    documents out at paragraph 12.30 of his written  submissions  which  he
    handed up at the hearing.  He relied upon  a  document  concerning  the
    setting up of his website, in particular the  registration  of  the  UK
    domain at page 250 of the bundle.  That is dated 29 May 2014.  He  also
    relied on the documentation  at  pages  192-211  which,  he  submitted,
    demonstrate business activity before and after 11 July 2014.

59. Whilst this material does, in some cases, predate 11 July 2014,  it  is
    noteworthy that the appellants' counsel (who  represented  them  before
    the First-tier Tribunal) placed reliance upon the documents relating to
    the website and advertising which the judge found deficient in para  22
    of her determination.  That deficiency is self-evident.   The  Facebook
    document does not appear  to  even  be  a  "specified  document"  under
    Appendix A.

60. I accept that the absence of  dates  on  the  relied  upon  advertising
    material fell, in principle, within para 245AA(b)(iv) and  (d)(iii)  as
    "specified  documents"  which  do  not  "contain  all   the   specified
    information"  (see  Mudiyanselage  at  [92]  per  Underhill  LJ).   The
    difficulty for the appellants in this appeal is  that  the  information
    contained within other documents in  the  bundle  did  not  supply  the
    "missing" information on the advertising material, namely the dates  on
    which  it  was  being  utilised  in  order  to  demonstrate  the  first
    appellant's period of "working".  Likewise, it is  not  suggested  that
    these documents could simply have been 'corrected' to  show  when  they
    were in use.  The documents were simply undated and there was no reason
    to believe that a fuller version of the documents  existed  (containing
    dates) or that information contained within  the  bundle  'plugged  the
    gap' by providing the dates  of  their  utilisation.   In  reality,  as
    presented  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal,   the   first   appellant's
    documentation  lacked  essential  information  to  be  a   satisfactory
    specified document under para 41-SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A and,  as  the
    respondent's decision notes  at  page  2,  "[no]  other  evidence  from
    paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) has been submitted".  I reiterate that no other
    documents appear to have been relied upon before Judge Lebasci.

61. The first appellant relied upon the very recent decision of  the  Court
    of Appeal in R(Islam) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 500 at [40]-[43] (judgment
    was handed down 3 days prior to the hearing).  I did not hear extensive
    argument on the decision.  The case, however, differed from the present
    one in that the Court took the view that the "missing  information"  in
    the documents submitted could, potentially, have been obtained from the
    claimant (see especially [40] and [41] - the claimant's  name).   Here,
    as I have made clear above, there is no reason to believe  the  missing
    information could have been provided.

62. In any event, even  if  the  Secretary  of  State  had  requested,  and
    received, documents and information so that  the  advertising  material
    satisfied the requirements of the  Rules,  the  first  appellant  would
    still not have succeeded in being granted leave because of the  absence
    of the Current Appointment Report.  Its absence, and as I have  already
    made plain para 245AA cannot assist the first appellant  in  regard  to
    that document, was  fatal  to  the  first  appellant  establishing  the
    required number of points under Appendix A.   In  those  circumstances,
    under para 245AA(c) even if the first appellant's omission or error  in
    that regard was corrected it would not "lead to  a  grant  because  the
    application will be refused for other reasons".  The  other  reason  is
    that the first appellant  failed  to  provide  the  required  specified
    document, namely a Current Appointment  Report  from  Companies  House.
    That omission could not be rectified under para 245AA.

63. For these reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that Judge Lebasci did not
    err in law in dismissing the  appellants'  appeals,  in  particular  in
    concluding that the Secretary of State had wrongly failed to apply  his
    evidential flexibility policy in para 245AA.

64.  Neither  the  grounds  of  appeal  in  the  original  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal nor those  in  the  judicial
    review Cart challenge sought to challenge Judge Lebasci's  decision  to
    dismiss the  appellants'  appeals  under  Art  8  of  the  ECHR.   That
    decision, therefore, stands unchallenged.   The  judge's  reasoning  at
    paras 25-31 fully supports her conclusion in respect  of  Art  8.   Her
    finding  that  the  appellants'  removal  would  be   a   proportionate
    interference with their private and family life under Art 8(2) was  one
    properly open to her as a reasonable and  rational  conclusion  on  the
    evidence.

Decision

65. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellants'
    appeals on all grounds did not involve the making of an error  of  law.
    The decision stands.

66.  Accordingly,  the  appellants'  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    dismissed.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               30 April 2019


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals have been dismissed, no fee award is payable.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               30 April 2019


