
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
IA/48216/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29th January 2016                     |   On 6th June 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                          MR. SABERULLA BAIG MIRZA
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas;  Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.  This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Malins promulgated on  8th  July  2015  in  which  he
       dismissed the appellant's appeal against  a  decision  made  by  the
       Secretary of State on 19th November 2014 to  refuse  an  application
       for leave to  remain  in  the  UK  as  a  Tier  5  Temporary  Worker
       (Religious Worker) Migrant.


 Background


    2. The appellant, is an Indian national who entered the UK having  been
       granted leave to enter the UK as a Tier 4 (General) Student  on  4th
       November 2009, valid  until  31st  December  2011.   His  leave  was
       subsequently extended, such that he was  granted  further  leave  to
       remain as a Tier 4 student until 26th November  2014.   However,  on
       12th August 2014 his leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  student  was
       curtailed so as to expire on 14th October 2014.


    3. On 8th October 2014, the appellant made a combined  application  for
       leave to remain in the UK as a Tier 5  Temporary  Worker  (Religious
       Worker) Migrant under the points based system and  for  a  biometric
       residence permit.  The application was refused on 19th November 2014
       and it was that decision that gave rise to  the  appeal  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.


    4. In the grounds of appeal, the appellant claimed  that  he  was  last
       granted leave as a student  and  lawfully  obtained  a  UK  master's
       degree and is undertaking postgraduate training and work  experience
       with his sponsor. He claimed that he  therefore  satisfied  all  the
       requirements to be granted  leave  as  a  Tier  5  Religious  Worker
       Migrant.  In addition, he claimed  that  the  refusal  breached  the
       appellant's right to  private  life  under  the  Article  8  of  the
       European  Convention  on   Human   Rights.    Without   any   useful
       elaboration, he claimed that during his period of stay in the UK, he
       has established a private life in the UK.


 The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Malins


    5. The appellant was neither represented, nor attended at the hearing of
       his appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  At  paragraph  6  of  his
       decision, the First-tier Tribunal Judge states:


             "6.  The appeal hearing  was  listed  for  15th  June,  before
             which, the appellant's solicitors Nasim  &  Co  of  East  Ham,
             London E6, wrote to the Tribunal stating:


                  We  have   been   instructed   by   the   appellant   that
                  unfortunately he will not be able to attend on the date of
                  hearing therefore kindly decide this appeal on  papers  in
                  accordance with law'


             Accordingly, it was right for a hearing to proceed under  Rule
             28 of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
             2006".


    6. The Judge sets out the appellant's immigration history  at  paragraph
       [2] of his decision and at  paragraphs  [3]  and  [4]  sets  out  the
       reasons for the refusal of the application by  the  respondent.   The
       Judge heard submissions from the Presenting Officer and set  out  his
       findings of fact at paragraph [9]  of  the  decision.   At  paragraph
       [9(d)] he found that the appellant's application must fail under  the
       immigration rules because the specific  requirement  under  paragraph
       245ZA(b) that "the applicant must have, or  have  last  been  granted
       entry clearance or leave to remain as a  Tier  5  (Temporary  Worker)
       Migrant" could not be met.


    7. At paragraph [10] of his decision, the Judge concludes:


         "10. Accordingly I find on the balance of  probabilities  that  the
         appellant's application  must  fail.  This  is  not  a  case  where
         discretion lies with the  decision  maker:  there  is  an  absolute
         requirement prescribed,  and  this  must  be  complied  with.    It
         follows from my findings above,  that  the  appellant  is  actually
         powerless to comply with the specific requirements in question.


         I therefore find that the respondent's decision was correct in  law
         and under the Immigration Rules."


    8. Although the appellant had raised Article 8 in his grounds of  appeal
       and the Judge noted at paragraph [5] of his decision that the  Notice
       of Appeal contained grounds of appeal under the Immigration Rules and
       Article 8, the Judge did not consider the Article 8 grounds.


 The  Appeal before me


    9. The appellant does not challenge  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge dismissing the appeal under  the  immigration  rules.
       The appellant appeals on the ground that the  Judge  's  failure  to
       properly consider the appellant's appeal under Human Rights  grounds
       (Article 8) was unreasonable and not in accordance with the law.


   10. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew
       on 4th November 2015. The matter comes before me to consider whether
       or  not  the  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malins
       involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to remake
       the decision.


   11. Directions were issued to the  parties  in  advance  of  the  hearing
       before me requiring the parties to prepare for  the  hearing  on  the
       basis  that,  if  the  Upper  Tribunal  decides  to  set  aside   the
       determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  any  further  evidence,
       including supplementary oral evidence, that the  Upper  Tribunal  may
       need to consider if it decides to re-make the  decision,  can  be  so
       considered at that hearing. No further evidence was  relied  upon  by
       the appellant and there was no  application  made  pursuant  to  rule
       15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


   12. The hearing  before  me  was  called  on  at  2:50pm.   Neither  the
       appellant nor his  representatives  were  present.   The  Notice  of
       Hearing had been sent to the appellant and  his  representatives  on
       6th January 2016 and there was no explanation for their absence.   I
       note that shortly before the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,
       the appellant's representatives had informed the First-tier Tribunal
       that the appellant would  not  be  attending  and  had  invited  the
       Tribunal to deal with the appeal on the papers.


   13. In  the  absence  of  any  application  for  an  adjournment  or  an
       explanation for the failure of the appellant and his representatives
       to attend the hearing, I consider it appropriate to proceed with the
       hearing, as I am permitted to do, under  Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I am satisfied that both the
       appellant and his representatives have been notified of the hearing,
       and that reasonable steps have been taken to notify the appellant of
       the hearing.  I also consider that it is in the interests of justice
       to proceed with the hearing.


   14. The respondent has filed a rule  24  response  dated  16th  November
       2014.  The respondent opposes the appeal, but submits that  even  if
       Article 8 had been considered by the Judge, the appeal would  remain
       dismissed.  The respondent submits that the grounds do not challenge
       the refusal under the substantive Immigration  Rules.   The  grounds
       fail to acknowledge the wealth  of  case  law  which  now  addresses
       Article 8, in that there has to be something compelling to remain in
       the UK outside the rules and nothing has been  put  forward  by  the
       appellant.  The rule 24 response was adopted by Mr Kovats on  behalf
       of the respondent.


 Discussion


   15. It is correct that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not consider the
       Article 8 claim either under Appendix FM or  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of
       the immigration rules.  The appellant  does  not  claim  that  either
       Appendix FM  or  the  requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the
       immigration rules can be met by him.  It is therefore useful  to  set
       out the general approach that has been taken by the courts  upon  the
       assessment of Article 8 claims outside the  immigration  rules  since
       the introduction of Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.


   16. In SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the Court of Appeal considered  the
       proper approach to applications for leave to enter the UK outside the
       Immigration Rules on the basis of Article 8 following  the  Court  of
       Appeal's decision in MM (Lebanon) & Others -v- SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ
       985.  Lord Justice Richards set out  the  basic  legal  framework  as
       follows;


         "11. Under the 1971 Act, the Secretary of State has a wide residual
         discretion to grant LTR or LTE outside the  Rules,  i.e.  where  an
         applicant cannot show that they satisfy the conditions in the Rules
         themselves: see R (Munir) -v- SSHD [2012] UKSC  32;  [2012]  1  WLR
         2192, at [44]. An applicant who does  not  satisfy  the  conditions
         stipulated in the Rules may nonetheless have a  good  claim  to  be
         entitled to enter the United Kingdom or to  be  allowed  to  remain
         here  by  reason  of  their  Convention  rights,  e.g.  Article   3
         (protection against torture and inhumane treatment) and Article 8 .
         Such a claim arises by virtue of the obligation of the Secretary of
         State under section 6(1) of the HRA to act in a  manner  compatible
         with an individual's Convention rights.


         ...


     17. However, the width of the gap between what  the  Immigration  Rules
         set out by way of entitlement to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom and  the  requirements  resulting  from  application  of  a
         relevant Convention right - in these appeals, we are concerned with
         rights under  Article  8  -  may  be  highly  relevant  in  certain
         contexts. This is because,  in  the  immigration  field,  the  fair
         balance required  to  be  struck  pursuant  to  Article  8  between
         individual interests protected by that provision  and  the  general
         public interest typically involves bringing  into  account  certain
         public interest considerations in relation to which  the  Secretary
         of State has a legitimate role to fulfil by formulating an approach
         which gives them proper value and weight. The Secretary of State is
         responsible for the overall operation of the immigration system  as
         a fair system which properly  reflects  and  balances  a  range  of
         interests, including important aspects of the public interest,  and
         she is accountable to Parliament for what she does.


         ...


         18.  If the gap between what Article 8 requires and the content  of
         the Immigration Rules is wide, then the part for the  Secretary  of
         State's residual discretion to play in satisfying the  requirements
         of Article 8 and section 6(1) of the HRA  will  be  correspondingly
         greater. In  such  circumstances,  the  practical  guidance  to  be
         derived from the content of the Rules as to relevant public  policy
         considerations for the purposes of the balance to be  struck  under
         Article 8 is also likely to  be  reduced:  to  use  the  expression
         employed by Aikens LJ in MM (Lebanon) in the Court  of  Appeal,  at
         [135], the proportionality balancing  exercise  "will  be  more  at
         large". If the Secretary of State  has  not  made  a  conscientious
         effort to strike a fair balance for the purposes of  Article  8  in
         making the Rules, a court or tribunal will naturally be disinclined
         to give significant weight to her view regarding the actual balance
         to be struck when the  court  or  tribunal  has  to  consider  that
         question for itself. On the other  hand,  where  the  Secretary  of
         State has sought to fashion the content  of  the  Rules  so  as  to
         strike what she regards as the appropriate balance under Article  8
         and any gap between the  Rules  and  what  Article  8  requires  is
         comparatively narrow, the Secretary of State's formulation  of  the
         Rules may allow the Court to be more confident that she has brought
         a focused assessment of considerations of the  public  interest  to
         bear on the matter. That will in turn allow the Court more  readily
         to give weight to that assessment  when  making  its  own  decision
         pursuant to Article 8. An issue arises on this appeal as to whether
         the Secretary of State has made a conscientious effort to  use  the
         new Immigration Rules to strike the fair balance  which  Article  8
         requires and whether there is a substantial gap,  or  not,  between
         the content of the LTE Rules and the requirements of Article 8.


   17.  Lord  Justice  Richards  considered  the  different  parts  of   the
       immigration  rules  and  the  tests  of  exceptional  and  compelling
       reasons.  He held:


          "29.     It is clear, therefore, that it cannot be maintained as a
         general proposition that LTR or LTE outside the  Immigration  Rules
         should only be granted in exceptional cases.  However,  in  certain
         specific contexts, a proper application of  Article  8  may  itself
         make it clear that the legal test for grant of LTR or  LTE  outside
         the Rules should indeed be a test of exceptionality. This  has  now
         been identified to be the  case,  on  the  basis  of  the  constant
         jurisprudence of the ECtHR itself, in relation to applications  for
         LTR outside the Rules  on  the  basis  of  family  life  (where  no
         children are involved) established in the United Kingdom at a  time
         when the presence of one or other of the partners was known  to  be
         precarious: see Nagre , paras. [38]-[43], approved by this court in
         MF (Nigeria) at [41]-[42].


          ...


          31. In other contexts, it cannot simply be assumed that  a  strict
         legal test of exceptional circumstances  will  be  applicable  when
         examining the application of  Article  8  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules (or within the Rules themselves, where particular  paragraphs
         are formulated so as fully to cover the applicability of Article 8,
         as in paragraphs 399 and 399A as interpreted in MF (Nigeria)).  The
         relevant general balance  of  public  interest  considerations  and
         individual interests will  vary  between  different  parts  of  the
         Rules. It is only if the normal balance of  interests  relevant  to
         the general area in question is such  as  to  require  particularly
         great weight to be given to the public interest  as  compared  with
         the individual interests at  stake  (as  in  the  precarious  cases
         considered in Nagre and  the  foreign  criminal  deportation  cases
         considered in MF (Nigeria)) that a strict  test  of  exceptionality
         will apply.


          32. However, even away from those contexts, if  the  Secretary  of
         State has sought to formulate Immigration Rules to reflect  a  fair
         balance of interests under Article 8 in the general  run  of  cases
         falling within their scope, then, as  explained  above,  the  Rules
         themselves will provide significant  evidence  about  the  relevant
         public interest considerations which should be brought into account
         when a court or tribunal seeks to  strike  the  proper  balance  of
         interests under Article 8 in making its own decision. As Beatson LJ
         observed in Haleemudeen -v- SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558, at [40],  the
         new Rules in Appendix FM:


                "... are a  central  part  of  the  legislative  and  policy
                context in which the interests of  immigration  control  are
                balanced against the interests and rights of people who have
                come to this country and wish to settle in it. Overall,  the
                Secretary of State's policy as to when an interference  with
                an Article 8 right will be regarded as  disproportionate  is
                more particularised in the new Rules than it had  previously
                been."


          Accordingly, a court or tribunal is required to give the new Rules
         "greater  weight  than  as  merely  a  starting   point   for   the
         consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
         Article 8 rights" (para. [47]).


          33. In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ.


  18. Thus under section 6(1) of the HRA, a grant of leave outside the Rules
      is appropriate if, notwithstanding that the case  is  not  within  the
      Rules, a person has a good claim to be entitled to remain by virtue of
      Article 8 or any other Convention  right.  The  authorities  establish
      that  there  is  always  a  second  stage,  but  where  all   relevant
      considerations have been weighed under the immigration rules and there
      are no compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the
      rules it will be enough for the decision maker simply to say that.  In
      this kind of case, the  issue  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  the
      lawfulness of the refusal to vary the appellant's leave to remain. The
      duty involves giving proper weight to the public interest as expressed
      by the respondent  in  lawfully  made  rules  and  guidance  (and  now
      applying also sections 117A-D of the 2002 Act). The failure to qualify
      under the rules will be tend  to  suggest  that  the  public  interest
      requires refusal of leave to vary, unless some countervailing  factors
      are present which are not already taken into account under the Rules.


  19. The appellant has failed either before the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      or before me to identify what factors exist which are relevant to  the
      proportionality assessment which are not fully reflected in the  rules
      which are designed to cover the generality of cases.


  20. Having considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  I  am
      satisfied that the Judge erred in law in failing to have any regard to
      the Article 8 claim that was relied upon by the  appellant.   Whatever
      the merits of that ground,  the  appellant  was  entitled  to  have  a
      decision from the Judge upon his appeal on Article 8 grounds.


  21. However the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of  Appendix  FM
      and paragraph 276ADE(1) of the immigration rules and in  my  judgement
      there are no compelling or exceptional circumstances advanced  by  the
      appellant, to justify allowing the appeal on Article 8  grounds  where
      the substantive requirements of the immigration rules are not met.


  22. In my judgment, in the absence of any other identifiable features of a
      compelling nature, the appellant has  failed  to  establish  that  his
      removal is disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of  immigration
      control.  The appeal on Article 8 grounds is therefore dismissed.


Notice of Decision


  23. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Malins  promulgated  on  8th
      July 2015 discloses an error of law in that  he  failed  to  make  any
      decision upon the appellant's Article 8 appeal, and  the  decision  is
      set aside.


  24. I remake the decision, dismissing the appeal  by  the  appellant  both
      under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds.


  25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 6 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal by the appellant but in remaking the  decision,  I
have dismissed the appeal by the appellant and therefore  there  can  be  no
fee award.



Signed                                  Date 6 June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
