
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48614/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2016                            |On 8 November 2016            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            ESTHER SARFO GAMBRAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Siaw, solicitor instructed by R Spio & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. By my decision promulgated on 4 April 2016 (appended to this decision),
   I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Aujla that
   was promulgated on 30 July 2015. I hereby remake that decision.


2. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is a citizen of Ghana born
   on 8 August 1984. On 21 May 2013 she applied for a residence card as
   confirmation of a right of residence as the wife of a French national
   under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations"). On
   18 July 2013 her application was refused because the respondent did not
   accept she was either married or in a durable relationship with an EEA
   national.


3. Judge Aujla allowed the claimant's appeal on the basis that her marriage
   to the sponsor (which was by proxy in Ghana on 30 November 2011) was
   valid in both France and Ghana. I found that the judge made a material
   error of law by finding the marriage was valid in France as there was
   insufficient evidence before him to do so. However, I accepted - and
   explicitly preserved - the judge's finding that the marriage was in
   accordance with the law in Ghana.

Relevant Law

4. Under Regulation 17(1) of the 2006 Regulations a residence card must be
   issued to the spouse of a qualified person.


5. In order to succeed under Regulation 17(1), the claimant must establish,
   on the balance of probabilities, both that (a) the person she married by
   proxy in Ghana is her lawful spouse; i.e. that she underwent a valid
   marriage; and (b) that he is a qualified person as defined in Regulation
   6 of the 2006 Regulations.


6. This Tribunal's case law makes clear that whether a marriage is valid
   for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations depends on the law of the Member
   State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality as well as that of
   the country in which the marriage took place. The claimant therefore
   needs to establish that the marriage is valid in both Ghana and France.
   See, for example, Kareem (proxy marriage - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24
   and Cudjoe (Proxy marriages: burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 180.


7. Establishing that a marriage by proxy is valid requires reliable
   evidence - mere assertions or production of legal materials will normally
   be insufficient. As explained at paragraph 68(g) of Kareem:

         "It should be assumed that, without independent and reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the laws of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage took place,
         the Tribunal is likely to be unable to find that sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof. Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because they
         will rarely show how such law is understood or applied in those
         countries. Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
         similar reasons, carry no weight."

The Hearing and Evidence

8. The claimant adduced a report from a French lawyer Barbara Boamah. The
   report discussed various provisions of the French Civil Code which
   concern marriage of French persons abroad. The report sets out a number
   of propositions as to French law. These, in sum, are:
     a. A marriage concluded outside of France will be regarded as valid if
        it was concluded in accordance with the law of the state where it
        took place and it is not regarded as contrary to public policy.
     b. A French national must be present at his or her marriage. However,
        a non-French national partner does not need to be present.
     c. Marriage by proxy is contrary to public policy and is not
        recognised when conducted abroad with a French national. Marriage
        by proxy of a French national citizen is forbidden and will be
        considered void in France regarding the French national.


9. The report stated that:

         "As far as French law is concerned, a marriage by proxy can only be
         established or result from the mention of the absence of one or
         both spouses at the ceremony. However, no element on the claimant's
         marriage certificate leads [sic] to think that both parties
         remained abroad and were not present. On the contrary, the evidence
         of their presence results from their signature on the register and
         I have thus no hesitation in finding that the marriage that
         occurred between the claimant and the French national is a
         customary marriage and not a marriage by proxy"

10. The Secretary of State submitted, on the day of the hearing, a document
   produced by the European Migration Network dated 16 May 2012 ("the EMN
   document"). The EMN document sets out responses from various countries,
   including France, to questions about how a marriage is proved between a
   national of their member state and a third country national. The French
   response was as follows:

         "For a marriage between a French citizen and a third country
         national to be valid in France it must be registered in the French
         Civil Registry, as this constitutes proof that the marriage exists
         according to French law. Therefore, for the purposes of applying
         for a residence card of a family member of a Union citizen, the
         marriage must be accredited by means of the full marriage
         certificate issued by the French Civil Registry."

11. On the front page of the EMN document is a disclaimer which states,
   inter alia, that "the information provided does not necessarily represent
   the official policy of an EMN NCP's Member State".


12. The claimant gave evidence at the hearing. She stated that the sponsor
   was present at her marriage in Ghana but she was not. She said the
   marriage had not been registered in France. She stated that the reason
   the sponsor was not present at the hearing was that he was working. When
   asked about his employment, she claimed he was a cleaner and an employee
   of a company called London Cleaning Services. She stated that he works
   full time but was not sure as to his salary, saying it depended on the
   hours he worked.


13. No documentary evidence was submitted to confirm the sponsor's
   employment.


Findings and Conclusion

14. The first question to address is whether the sponsor is a qualified
   person who has been exercising his Treaty rights in the United Kingdom.
   Although no documentary evidence was submitted to substantiate his
   employment, I found the evidence of the claimant as to the sponsor's
   employment as a cleaner to be entirely credible. I also accept, having
   heard Mr Siaw's comments, that the claimant did not realise she should
   have submitted documentary evidence about her husband's employment.
   Having considered the evidence, I find it more likely than not that the
   sponsor is in the UK as a worker and therefore is a qualified person for
   the purposes of the 2006 Regulations.


15. The second question is whether the marriage between the claimant and
   her sponsor which took place in Ghana in November 2011 was valid
   according to Ghanaian law. As explained previously, the finding of the
   First-tier Tribunal that the marriage is valid in Ghana has been
   preserved.


16. The third question is whether the marriage is valid according to French
   law. Mr Norton argued that the EMN document gives a succinct and clear
   answer: it is not. The document explains that for a marriage to be valid
   it must be registered with the French Civil Registry. As this marriage
   was not registered it was not valid.


17. I consider the EMN document to have minimal probative value. It was
   drafted over four years ago. No reference is made to Articles of the
   French Code. No information is given about the author of the comments
   about French law. Moreover, the document itself includes a prominent
   disclaimer. I therefore attach little weight to it and consider it to be
   of little assistance in determining this appeal.


18. I now turn to consider the report of Ms Boamah. The report is by a
   suitably qualified expert and addresses the relevant issues. It sets out,
   citing articles in the Civil Code, how French law treats proxy marriages.
   However, there is a fundamental problem with the report, which is that it
   is based on a mistaken assumption about the claimant and the sponsor. Ms
   Boamah states that both parties were present at the marriage and
   therefore this was not a proxy marriage. That is incorrect. The
   claimant's evidence - which I accept and find as fact - is that the
   sponsor was present at the marriage but she was not.


19. In one part of the report Ms Boamah indicates that a marriage will be
   valid so long as the French national is present even if the foreign
   national is not. However, in another part of the report she states
   categorically that marriage by proxy is totally forbidden. I therefore
   remain in doubt as to the correct position under French law in respect of
   this particular case where, contrary to Ms Boamah's understanding, only
   one party to the marriage (the French national) was present. Given that
   the report is premised on a fundamental mistake as to the underlying
   factual matrix, I am unable to give it weight.

20. I am satisfied that the claimant has discharged the burden to show (a)
   the sponsor is a qualified person and (b) her marriage is valid in Ghana.
   However, for the reasons I have given, insufficient evidence has been
   provided to substantiate that the marriage is valid in France. The
   claimant is therefore not entitled to the issuance of a residence card
   under Regulation 17(1) of the 2006 Regulations.


21. No submissions were made or evidence adduced to argue that the
   Secretary of State should have exercised discretion under Regulation
   17(4) on the basis that the claimant is an extended family member of the
   sponsor as a consequence of being in a durable relationship with him
   (Regulation 8(5)). However, having heard oral evidence from the claimant,
   I am satisfied that, on the balance of probabilities, she and her partner
   are in a durable relationship. Consequently, although the claimant is not
   a family member of a qualified person, she is an extended family member.

22. Under Regulation 17(4) the Secretary of State may issue a residence
   card to an extended family member. As clarified in Ihemedu (OFM's -
   meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC):

         Regulation 17(4) makes the issue of a residence card to an
         OFM/extended family member a matter of discretion. Where the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion the most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow the appeal as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of whether
         to exercise this discretion in the appellant's favour or not to
         the Secretary of State.

23. Accordingly, I allow the claimant's appeal on the basis that the
   Secretary of State's decision was not in accordance with the law and it
   remains for the Secretary of State to exercise her discretion.

Notice of decision

  24. I allow the claimant's appeal to the extent that her application for a
      residence card as an extended family member remains outstanding before
      the Secretary of State to exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4)
      of the 2006 Regulations.

|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 6 November 2016               |


