

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48740/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 2 September 2014                           |on 4 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                         AYODEJI SEGUN DIRE-ODUKALE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr R Molyneux, of Global Immigration Solutions
For the Respondent:    Mr K Young, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant appeals against a determination by First-tier Tribunal
       Judge Morrison, promulgated on 9 April 2014, dismissing  his  appeal
       against refusal of leave to remain outside the requirements  of  the
       Rules under Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR, based on health  treatment
       he receives in the UK, the equivalent of which he may not receive in
       Nigeria.


    2. The appellant's first ground is that the judge did  not  address  KK
       and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 415, distinguishing the appellants  in  D
       and N as  "health  tourists",  which  this  appellant  is  not,  and
       suggesting that there is scope for clarification of the criterion of
       exceptionality.   The  ground  further   says   that   the   judge's
       consideration of the threshold in N is "fairly cursory" and that  in
       light of the grant of permission in KK any further  decision  should
       be deferred until clarification is available.

    3. The second  ground  is  failure  to  give  proper  consideration  or
       adequate weight to relevant matters, in particular evidence of  high
       risk of further stroke if regular  transfusions  are  stopped.   The
       ground further says that the  judge  thus  failed  to  realise  that
       anything less than optimal treatment would be  ineffective  for  the
       appellant and so the conclusion that other forms  of  treatment  are
       unavailable in Nigeria has no basis in evidence.

    4. Further to the grounds, Mr Molyneux said that the  judge's  findings
       were to the effect that the  appellant  is  not  a  health  tourist.
       Although he had his sickle-cell diagnosis before coming to  the  UK,
       it is his subsequent stroke which takes him out of the "normal  run"
       of sickle-cell cases.  The  judge  made  only  cursory  findings  on
       Article 3.  His finding of good reason to look outside the Rules  on
       Article 8 showed lack of proper consideration at the earlier  stage.
       On Article 3, the determination should be set  aside  and  the  case
       remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing after the  Court  of
       Appeal decides KK.  (Mr Molyneux has made  some  enquiries  but  has
       been unable to find out when it is to be heard.)

    5. Turning to the second ground and to Article 8, Mr Molyneux said that
       although  the  judge  purported  to  carry  out  a   proportionality
       assessment, his conclusions were brief and  inadequate.   The  judge
       appeared to think that even on the worst outcome for the  appellant,
       an entire absence of treatment in Nigeria, that  was  outweighed  by
       considerations of immigration control and expense to the  UK.   That
       failed to give due weight to the  evidence  for  the  appellant,  as
       cited in the grounds, so the determination was flawed.

    6. Mr Young said that KK had not been before the judge, so there was no
       error of not taking it into  account.   In  any  case,  it  was  not
       authority for finding error of law in the determination.  Article  3
       was properly decided at paragraph 28 on the ruling  cases,  and  the
       judge needed to say nothing more.  As to Article 8, far from failing
       to consider the relevant medical evidence, the judge set out all its
       salient terms at paragraphs 24 - 27.    Having found there to  be  a
       good arguable case for looking outside the Rules, he  correctly  and
       crucially found at paragraph 42 that while treatments  available  in
       Nigeria were said to  be  sub-optimal  they  were  not  said  to  be
       ineffective.  The determination was detailed and thorough, reached a
       conclusion properly open to the judge, and  disclosed  no  error  of
       law.

    7. I reserved my determination.

    8. On Article 3, I do not think that applying the cases to which he was
       referred, and which remain authoritative, the judge made any  error.
       Further, I doubt whether he could properly, in line with  authority,
       have come to any other conclusion.

    9. The judge was  not  referred  to  KK,  decided  shortly  before  the
       hearing.  As a grant of permission, it could not go very far to move
       him to another decision.  It is not surprising  that  the  appellant
       now prays it in aid, it may herald some change of direction, and the
       outcome is awaited, but I think it is over-optimistic to  read  into
       the terms of the grant that the tests for entitlement to remain  for
       better medical treatment are likely to be clarified so as to benefit
       a case like this.

   10. The Presenting Officer's point about the  judge's  conclusions  from
       the medical evidence was well taken.  While on the factual  findings
       this case has sympathetic features, it does not disclose  a  drastic
       difference of likely medical outcome.  Paragraphs 42 and 43  are  to
       the effect  that  the  balance  is  therefore  clearly  against  the
       appellant,  an  impeccable  and  decisive   conclusion,   but   that
       alternatively even at worst the balance is  against  him  -  a  more
       finely balanced issue, but on which the outcome is also not shown to
       be wrong in law.

   11. The appellant's case has been pressed as  strongly  as  it  properly
       could be, both in the First-tier Tribunal and in the Upper Tribunal,
       but in the end it is now only disagreement with conclusions properly
       reached.


   12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                2 September 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal


