

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: IA 48402-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   26.06.2014|
|on    23.06.2014                              |sent out: 16.07.2014         |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                            Sivasankar KARUPPANAN
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  no appearance
For the respondent: Mr Nigel Bramble


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Pathma Lingam), sitting at Taylor House on 18 March, to
     a tier 1 (post-study work migrant) appeal by a citizen of India,  born
    11 May 1983. The judge, who was not helped by  the  fact  that  neither
    side appeared before her, allowed the appeal on the  basis  of  Khatel;
    but that decision had already been overruled in Raju  &  others  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 754.

 2. This appellant's post-study work migrant application, though  dated  28
    February 2012, was received by the Home Office on 4 April; no doubt  he
    was trying to get in ahead of the  abolition  of  the  post-study  work
    migrant route in the Rules which were to come into force  on  6  April,
    since it had been announced some time before that, when the  new  Rules
    came into force, applications submitted by the 5th would be  considered
    under the old ones. The difficulty with this was that he  had  not  yet
    been awarded the degree he needed for his application to succeed, which
    he was not given till 22 June.

 3. This was permissible under Khatel, as there the Tribunal had held that,
    if the necessary evidence in a points-based application  were  supplied
    before the date of the decision, then it was admissible  under  s.  85A
    (4) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002,  since  the
    application was to be regarded as continuing till then. If that was the
    case, then someone in the appellant's position  could  succeed  on  the
    basis that his application had been "made within 12 months of obtaining
    the appropriate qualification" [see appendix A, table 10].

 4. However, the Court of Appeal in Raju & others   (one  of  whom  was  Mr
    Khatel) said quite clearly at paragraph 24 that

       An application is made when paragraph 34G says it is made  [in  other
       words, when posted, delivered in person or by courier,  or  submitted
       on line] ... these applicants could not score [the necessary] points,
       because they had made their applications before they  obtained  their
       qualifications.

 5. That was this appellant's situation,  and  so  the  judge  should  have
    dismissed his appeal. It is a pity she was left to decide the  case  on
    her own, though Raju & others had been out since 25 June 2013.

Home Office appeal
First-tier decision reversed



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



