

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number: IA/48796/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 5th March 2015                            |On 11th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                          Victoria Mojisola Stephen
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Timson, Counsel instructed by Adonai Beulah
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria  date  of  birth  10th  December
    1965.  She appeals with  permission  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge  DN  Harris)  to  dismiss  her  appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse to issue  her  with  a  residence  card
    confirming her right of residence as a family member (spouse) of an EEA
    national exercising treaty rights[1].


 2. The Appellant claimed to  be  the  wife  of  Mr  Rafael  Abey  Davidson
    Davidson, a Portuguese national exercising treaty rights. The Appellant
    relied upon a marriage certificate issued in Nigeria  showing  that  Mr
    Davidson had been present but the Appellant  had  been  represented  by
    proxy.  The Respondent accepted that a proxy marriage can  be  regarded
    as valid in UK law as long as it is legally recognised in  the  country
    in which it is contracted. In this case the  registration  requirements
    of Nigerian law had not been complied with  and  for  that  reason  the
    marriage could not be recognised as valid.  The  Respondent  considered
    whether the Appellant could nevertheless be given a residence permit as
    the unmarried partner of Mr Davidson. To this  end  both  parties  were
    interviewed and as a result of  discrepancies  that  emerged  in  their
    evidence the application was refused on the ground that this is  not  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship.

 3. When the  matter  came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  parties
    submitted that their marriage was valid, and in  the  alternative  that
    this was a genuine relationship. As to  the  first  submission  it  was
    rejected for lack of evidence. As to the  second  Judge  Harris  agreed
    with the Respondent  that  the  evidence  of  the  parties  contains  a
    considerable number of discrepancies, including the eight  or  so  that
    are identified in the refusal notice  as  arising  from  the  interview
    record. On that basis he was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had
    discharged the burden of proof and dismissed the appeal.



    Error of Law

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the  17th  October  2014  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Grubb on the sole ground that the determination had  not
    been promulgated until 4 months after  the  hearing  and  as  such  the
    credibility findings therein may be regarded as unsafe.    For  reasons
    which shall become apparent, I need not now deal with that matter.


 5. At a hearing before me on the 9th December 2014 Mr Harrison,  who  that
    day appeared for the Respondent, and Mr Timson were in  agreement  that
    this decision is one affected by the Presidential guidance  offered  in
    Miah (interviewer's comments: disclosure: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00515
    (IAC). The Respondent had relied on selective reading of the  interview
    notes, and it was on the basis of those notes  that  Judge  Harris  had
    agreed there to be discrepancies. In Miah  the  President  McCloskey  J
    found  that  fairness  required  that  parties  criticised  for   their
    performance in such interviews are provided not only  with  a  complete
    transcript  of  any  interview,  but  with  the  notes  taken  by   the
    interviewer, and subsequently conveyed to the  decision-maker.    Those
    notes are contained in a document entitled ICV.4605 and an  appellant's
    right to a fair  hearing  dictates  that  this  form,  and  the  entire
    interview must be disclosed "as a  matter  of  course".    Mr  Harrison
    agreed that in this case neither the interview notes  or  the  ICV.4605
    had never been disclosed and in those circumstances the decision  could
    not stand.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was accordingly set
    aside.








    The Re-Making


 6. Following the hearing on the 9th December 2014 the matter was set  down
    for a case management review to enable the Home Office to  produce  the
    relevant documents.  At that case management review hearing, before  me
    today, Mr McVeety was able to produce the interview notes but  not  the
    ICD.4605. That's because at the date that this interview was conducted,
    these forms did not exist and so were never  used.  The  parties  agree
    that now that the Appellant has had full disclosure  of  her  interview
    record there is nothing to prevent the matter being listed for full re-
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.



      Decisions


 7. The decision contains an error of law and is set aside.


 8. The matter is to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     5th
                                 March 2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Decision dated 4th November 2014

