
                                                                   [pic]
Upper Tribunal    Appeal Numbers: IA/48051/2014
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    IA/48052/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                  |   Decision and Reasons          |
|                                           |Promulgated                      |
|On:  25 September 2015                     |   On: 28 September 2015         |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                             1) Umar Nisar Khan
                               2) Mehwish Umar
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                             NOTICE OF DECISION

 1. The appellants are citizens of Pakistan and are husband and  wife.  Each
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary
    of State refusing them leave to remain.


 2. The first named appellant withdrew  his  appeal  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal - notice of such being given on 6 January 2015 and acknowledged
    by the First-tier Tribunal in a Notice of the 14 January. Despite  this,
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer granted this appellant permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal in a decision sent to the parties on the 27
    July 2015. This grant of permission is clearly a  nullity,  DUTJ  Archer
    having no jurisdiction to grant permission  in  relation  to  an  appeal
    which was, at that  time,  no  longer  before  the  Tribunal.  There  is
    therefore no appeal by  the  first  named  appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal. If I am wrong in this  then  I  nevertheless  consent  to  the
    application to withdraw such appeal.

 3. As to the second appellant,  her  appeal  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Row in a decision promulgated on the 10 March 2015.  Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was thereafter granted by DUTJ Archer on
    the 27 July 2015.

 4. By way of an email to the Upper Tribunal dated  18  September  2015  the
    second appellant requests permission to withdraw her appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 5. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as  a  whole,
    and observing that the Secretary of  State  was  successful  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, I give consent to the  appellant  to  withdraw  her
    case.

 6. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal".  This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the parties that the  appellant's  case
    is withdrawn.

 7. The effect of the  appellant's  case  being  withdrawn  from  the  Upper
    Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper  Tribunal  are  at  an
    end. There is no appeal before the Upper  Tribunal  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 25 September 2015

































