
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48948/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 September 2016                          |On 5th October 2016           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY



                                   Between

                                     S Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss G Loughran, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Bangladesh, has  permission  to  challenge
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge Cameron sent on 22 June
    2016 dismissing the appellant's appeal. The  appellant's  grounds  were
    three fold. First, it was argued that the  judge  erred  in  concluding
    that the appellant would continue to be discreet in his practice of the
    Christian faith.  Second, the judge was said to have erred  by  failing
    to analyse the posited discreet behaviour of the appellant on return in
    accordance with HJ (Iran) [2012] UKSC 31 principles, which required the
    decision-maker to ask whether one of the  reasons  for  such  behaviour
    would be fear of persecution.  Third, it was contended that  the  judge
    had  erred  in  failing  to  consider  whether  the  proposed  internal
    relocation of the appellant would be reasonable as well as safe.

2.   I am grateful to both representatives for their succinct submissions.

3.   I do not find  the  first  two  grounds  to  the  point.  Despite  some
    equivocal passages in the judge's decision he made a clear finding that
    the appellant would face a real risk of persecution in his home area by
    virtue of likely hostile treatment in his home area by his  family  and
    surrounding community on account  of  his  conversion  to  Christianity
    (whilst in the UK): see [123] - [124].

4.   If there is any material error in the judge's decision it can  only  be
    in relation to his treatment of the issue of internal relocation.    In
    this regard I find no such error.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge  was
    satisfied first for all that the appellant would  be  able  to  achieve
    safety (= not face a real risk of persecution) in one of the "number of
    areas [in Bangladesh] which  are  most  predominantly  Christian".   In
    reaching this conclusion the judge not only had  regard  to  background
    country  evidence  pertaining  to  the  situation  of   Christians   in
    Bangladesh; he also undertook a  specific  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant's family might track  the  appellant  down  in  one  for  the
    predominantly Christian areas. From [129] and [131] it is clear that on
    both counts the judge was satisfied  relocation  to  such  areas  would
    achieve safety for the appellant.

5.   The third ground contends that the judge failed to address  the  second
    limb of  the  internal  relocation  (or  protection)  analysis,  namely
    whether it was reasonable to expect the appellant to  relocate  in  his
    particular  circumstances.   Whilst  it  is  true  the  judge  did  not
    structure his assessment in such a way  as  to  identify  two  separate
    stages to his treatment of internal relocation, it  is  equally  clear:
    (i) that he addressed reasonableness (noting in [134] that he  did  not
    accept that "it would be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate to a more  Christian  dominated  area  away  from
    Dhaka!");  (ii) that his assessment took into account  the  appellant's
    particular circumstances in this context, finding at [126]  that  there
    was no evidence he would not be accepted by the  Christian  communities
    in such areas; (iii)  that at [127] and [130] the judge found that  the
    appellant had good educational qualifications and that as a  result  he
    would be able to find work and support himself; and (iv) that at  [132]
    the judge found that the appellant had ties  of  language  and  culture
    with  Bangladesh  which  would  aid   him   in   finding   work.   Such
    considerations were  properly  treated  as  central  to  the  issue  of
    reasonableness.

6.   As already intimated, there  are  several  equivocal  passages  in  the
    determination dealing with the issue of the appellant's conversion  and
    whether that would be known to people in Bangladesh and it is difficult
    to disagree with Miss Loughran's observation that these convey a flawed
    treatment of the discretion issues. But such  passages  simply  had  no
    material impact on the judge's  essential  reason  for  dismissing  the
    appeal which was that the appellant had a  viable  internal  relocation
    alternative that was both safe and reasonable.

Notice of Decision

7.   For the above reasons, the FtT Judge did not materially err in law  and
    his decision to dismiss the appeal must stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed        [pic]                     Date 4th October 2016

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


