
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/48551/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On January 18, 2016                  |On February 9, 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                            MS JASTINDER PAL KAUR
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Charlton (Legal Representative)
Respondent  Mr Stanton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India. The appellant came to  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 General student on January 19, 2010 and  was  given
    leave to remain until March 2, 2011. She was  subsequently  allowed  to
    extend her leave as a Tier 4 student until June 7,  2014.  On  June  6,
    2014 she  applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules. The respondent considered  her  application  and  on
    November 9, 2014 refused her application.

 2. The appellant appealed this decision on December 1, 2014, under section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Swinnerton  on
    June 19 2015 and in a decision promulgated on July 9,  2015  the  Judge
    refused the appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

 4. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on July 24, 2015 submitting:

          a. The Judge's approach to credibility was flawed.

          b.  The Judge had erred in the approach to Article 3 ECHR.

          c. The Judge failed in proportionality assessment under Article 8
             ECHR.

 5. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes gave permission  to  appeal  on
    basis the Judge's approach  to  credibility  may  have  undermined  the
    approach to Article 3 ECHR. Permission was also given  in  relation  to
    Article  8  ECHR  although  this   was   qualified   with   appellant's
    representative's signed note of the evidence to be provided.

 6. The matter came before me on the above date  and  I  heard  submissions
    from both representatives.

PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 7. Ms Charlton had not provided a signed copy of her record of proceedings
    and when challenged to submit it at the hearing she did not have it  to
    produce. I handed down to both parties a copy of the court  record  and
    indicated that there was no record of  the  appellant  raising  in  her
    evidence that she had become  increasingly  depressed  and  planned  to
    return to her sisters. Whilst  I  did  not  prevent  Ms  Charlton  from
    pursuing an Article 8 appeal I made it clear that the court record  did
    not support the one area where Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Landes
    felt there could be an arguable error in the Article 8 assessment.

SUBMISSIONS

 8. Ms Charlton relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted the Judge, in
    considering the appellant's account, had failed to have regard  to  the
    content  of  the  medical  reports  and  the  objective  evidence  when
    assessing credibility. The findings on credibility and  the  effect  on
    her Article 3 claim meant there was an error in  law.  With  regard  to
    Article 8 she submitted that if the credibility findings were defective
    then this must impact on the proportionality approach on the Article  8
    claim. She invited me to find there had been a material error in law.

 9. Mr Stanton adopted the rule 24 response dated  November  12,  2015.  He
    submitted the Judge had considered the appellant's evidence  and  found
    she lacked credibility. The assessment of credibility was contained  in
    paragraphs [39] to [44] of the decision. The Judge was not  obliged  to
    comment on each piece of evidence and was  entitled  to  attach  little
    weight to the expert reports. Nether  sister  attended  the  First-tier
    hearing and the Judge carefully assessed  the  claim  on  the  evidence
    before him. The application was nothing more than a  disagreement  with
    the Judge's decision.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

10. Permission to appeal has been granted both in respect of the Article  3
    and 8 claims. However, in granting permission Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Landes made it clear  that  the  appellant  faced  significant
    difficulties succeeding under Article 3 ECHR even if her  full  account
    were accepted and in granting permission on the Article  8  claim  this
    was on the basis Ms Charlton's record of the earlier proceedings  would
    support the appellant's claims.

11. Dealing with the record of proceedings I am satisfied that  the  issues
    raised about her becoming increasingly depressed and  intending  to  go
    and live with her sisters was not raised  at  the  hearing.  The  court
    record is detailed and no challenge is made to it. Ms Charlton did  not
    produce her record of proceedings and in the circumstances I will  deal
    with this appeal on the basis of the court record.

12. Ms Charlton has argued that the Judge did  not  deal  with  credibility
    properly and I am referred to paragraph [41] of the decision.

13. The decision must be read as a whole and individual passages should not
    be taken out of context. It is clear that in assessing credibility  the
    Judge had regard to  the  two  reports.  The  judge  says  as  much  in
    paragraph [37] before considering the account. At paragraphs  [35]  and
    [36] the Judge set out the account and then at paragraphs [38] and [39]
    the Judge considers the report of Dr Ballard.  Whilst  the  finding  at
    paragraph [41] is made before reference is made to Dr Persaud's  report
    the Judge attaches little or no weight to this report for  the  reasons
    given in paragraph [43] of the decision. Those  findings  were  clearly
    open to the Judge.

14. The objective evidence does not state that this appellant would  suffer
    but merely confirms problems exist. The Judge considered  the  evidence
    and disbelieved her and gave reasons for those findings.

15. The permission  suggested  that  the  Judge  was  not  aware  that  the
    appellant's sister was married before she left to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom but it is clear from paragraphs [39] and  [40]  the  Judge  was
    aware of this fact.

16. Ms Charlton's submission on credibility amount to nothing more  than  a
    mere disagreement and the findings under Article 3 were clearly open to
    the Judge. Relocation was  not  an  issue  for  the  Judge  because  he
    rejected her account.

17. As regards Article 8 I am satisfied that there is no error.  The  Judge
    carefully considered the evidence given and the findings made were open
    to the Judge.

DECISION

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point  of  law.  I  uphold  the  First-tier
    decision.


Signed:     Dated:14 November 16

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
