

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48105/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 July 2014                               |On 10 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                              MRS ILISHWA ISAAC
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Singh, EMLC
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal with permission against a  decision  by  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal Fox dismissing an  appeal  against  refusal  to  vary
   leave to remain as a spouse.

2) According to the application for permission to  appeal,  at  the  hearing
   before the First-tier Tribunal the judge did not  allow  the  appellant's
   husband to give oral evidence because  he  had  not  provided  a  witness
   statement in accordance  with  the  relevant  Practice  Direction.   This
   assertion was supported by a statement from Mr Olawale, the solicitor who
   appeared on behalf of the appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal.   At
   the start of the hearing we informed Mr Olawale that he would not be able
   to represent the appellant before the  Upper  Tribunal  as  he  would  be
   regarded as a witness for the  purpose  of  this  hearing.   Accordingly,
   following an adjournment, Mr  Olawale  arranged  for  his  colleague,  Mr
   Gurcharanjeet Singh, to represent the appellant.

3) The appellant is a national of Syria and was born  on  6  November  1970.
   She was given leave until 27 September 2013 as the  spouse  of  Mr  Yonan
   Simon.  He is an Iraqi national who is now a British citizen.  The couple
   were married in 2000 and lived in Syria for 6 months or more around  that
   time.  Mr Simon came to the UK in 2002.  The appellant came to  join  him
   in July 2011.  It appears that the reason  her  application  for  further
   leave could not succeed under the Immigration Rules was because  she  did
   not meet the English language requirement.  She sought in her  appeal  to
   rely on the Human Rights Convention.  She argued that to  return  her  to
   Syria would breach Articles 2 and 3 and that to remove her  from  the  UK
   would be a disproportionate  interference  with  her  family  life  under
   Article 8.

4) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal accepted that  the  removal  of  the
   appellant to Syria would be a breach of Articles 2 and 3.  The  judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal was of the view at the time  of  the  hearing  in
   February 2014 that the appellant and her husband would be able  to  carry
   on their family life in Iraq.  There were no insurmountable obstacles  to
   the carrying on  of  family  or  private  life  elsewhere.   The  refusal
   decision was not disproportionate under Article 8.

5) At paragraph 9 of his determination the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   recorded that the appellant's husband did not attend the hearing to  give
   evidence.  It was also recorded  that  the  appellant's  bundle  did  not
   contain a statement from the appellant's husband.  It was  recorded  that
   the  appellant's  representative  acknowledged   the   absence   of   the
   appellant's husband  and  was  given  an  opportunity  to  apply  for  an
   adjournment  but stated on  behalf  of  his  client  that  he  wished  to
   proceed.

6) This account in  the  determination  is  contradicted  by  the  statement
   supplied by Mr Olawale in support of the application  for  permission  to
   appeal.  In his statement he records that he sought the permission of the
   First-tier Tribunal for the appellant's husband to give oral evidence  on
   the day of the hearing although there was no witness  statement  included
   in the appellant's bundle.  The respondent objected.  Mr  Olawale  states
   that he tried to explain that the evidence of the appellant's husband was
   material to the just determination of the appeal.  He agreed  to  proceed
   with the hearing when the judge sustained the objection of the respondent
   in respect of the failure of the appellant to comply  with  the  Practice
   Direction.

7) Mr Olawale further contended in his statement that he had submitted  that
   the appellant's husband was a former asylum seeker from Iraq  and,  taken
   together with the appellant's Syrian national,  the  only  country  where
   they could enjoy family life was the UK.

8) At the hearing before us the attention of the parties was  drawn  to  the
   Record of Proceedings prepared by the Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal.
   According to this the appellant had attempted to call her  husband  as  a
   witness.  There had been an objection and the judge had refused to  allow
   her husband to give evidence.

9) On behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mrs  O'Brien  stated  that  it  was  her
   understanding that no adjournment had been sought before the Judge of the
   First-tier Tribunal.  In her view the proper course would have  been  for
   the Presenting Officer to have sought an adjournment so as to have proper
   notice of the evidence the witness was to give.  The judge should  either
   have adjourned the appeal or excluded the evidence.

10) So far as the substantive appeal was concerned,  Mrs  O'Brien  submitted
   that the respondent's position was that it was reasonable for the  couple
   to carry on family life elsewhere.

11) We expressed our view that the Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
   erred in law by  refusing  to  allow  the  appellant's  husband  to  give
   evidence or to adjourn for the  purpose  of  a  witness  statement  being
   provided by him.  It was then put to the parties that  having  regard  to
   the length of time the appellant and her husband, in particular, had been
   in the UK and having regard to current  conditions  in  Syria  and  Iraq,
   there appeared to be insurmountable obstacles to the family life  of  the
   appellant and  her  partner  continuing  outside  the  UK.    No  further
   submissions were made.

Decision

12) The Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  clearly  mistaken  in  his
   determination in  recording  that  the  appellant's  husband  was  absent
   without any explanation.  In the interests of fairness the proper  course
   for him to have taken at the hearing was either to adjourn the appeal for
   a witness statement to be taken from the appellant's husband or, if  this
   was not  appropriate,  to  give  proper  reasons  for  not  allowing  the
   appellant's husband to give oral evidence.  The failure by the  Judge  of
   the First-tier Tribunal to follow this course was unfair and amounted  to
   an error of law on the basis of which the decision must be set aside.

13) In terms of paragraph EX.1.(b) of Appendix FM, where the  applicant  has
   a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who is in the UK and
   is a British citizen and there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
   life with that partner continuing outside the UK  then  not  all  of  the
   eligibility requirements for leave to remain as a partner require  to  be
   satisfied.  In particular the appellant would not have to show  that  she
   satisfied E-LTRP.4.1, which is the English language  requirement  on  the
   basis of which the refusal decision was made in the current appeal.

14) The appellant is Syrian.  Although she still has some family members  in
   Syria, having regard to the internal conflict  in  that  country  we  are
   satisfied that this conflict constitutes an  insurmountable  obstacle  to
   the couple carrying on family life in Syria.

15) The appellant's husband came to the UK from Iraq around  12  years  ago.
   He has been in the UK since then and is now a  British  citizen.   Having
   regard to the current conflict and uncertainty in Iraq, we are  satisfied
   that there are insurmountable obstacles to family life being  carried  on
   in Iraq.  We therefore conclude that paragraph  EX.1(b)  applies  to  the
   appellant and she need not satisfy all the  eligibility  requirements  in
   Appendix FM, including E-LTRP.4.1.  There is no suggestion that she  does
   not meet the suitability requirements.  Accordingly her appeal  ought  to
   succeed under Appendix FM.

Conclusions

16) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

17) We set aside the decision.

18) We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.


Anonymity

19) The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  order  or  direction  for
   anonymity.  No submission has been made to us for an order to be made and
   we do not perceive any requirement for such an order.

Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


Fee Award               Note: This is not part of the determination

In the light of our decision to re-make the decision in the appeal by
allowing it, we have considered whether to make a fee award.  We make no
fee award for the following reasons.  The application as originally
presented to the respondent did not succeed because the English language
requirement was not satisfied.  At that time the situation in Iraq was
different from the current situation and it was not apparent that there
were insurmountable obstacles to family life being carried on in Iraq.  We
also take into account the failure by the appellant to provide before the
First-tier Tribunal a witness statement for her husband in accordance with
directions made.

Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


