
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48249/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 18 March 2015                     |On 30 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between
                                NIKOLIN ZEFI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr Shilliday Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this  appeal  but
    in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in
    the First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal promulgated  on  11
    November 2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal against a refusal of
    a permanent residence card under the Immigration(EEA) Regulations 2006.



Background

 3. The Appellant was born on  16  February  1975  and  is  a  national  of
    Albania.

 4. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on  19  January  2006  as  the
    family member of an EEA national Vilija Zefi his spouse. He applied for
    a Residence card and this was issued 4 March  2008  and  expired  on  4
    March 2013.

 5. On 31 January 2013 the Appellant applied for permanent residence.

 6. On 28 September 2013 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

      a) The Appellant  asserted  in  his  application  that  his  wife  had
         exercised Treaty Rights in the  United  Kingdom  for  a  continuous
         period  of  5  years.  The  Appellant  evidenced  two  periods   of
         employment for his wife with the Camden Contact  lens  Centre  from
         December 2008 to November 2009 and Sainsbury's from August 2011  to
         the date of application. The Appellant asserted that his wife was a
         job seeker in between these period of employment.

      b) The Appellant's Sponsor was unemployed for periods in excess  of  6
         months  and  therefore  by  reference  to  Regulation  6(2)(b)  was
         required to provide evidence that she was seeking employment in the
         United Kingdom and had a genuine chance of being employed  and  the
         fact that she was in receipt of JSA  was not evidence that met this
         requirement.

      c) The Appellant had not produced evidence for a continuous period  of
         5 years as the evidence produced covered  the  period  30  November
         2008 to 31 January 2013.

      d) The Appellant had failed to provide satisfactory evidence  that  he
         had resided in the UK for 5 years.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lal ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision in a decision that was very brief. The Judge found in essence:

      a) The Appellant and his wife gave credible evidence that a  condition
         of the receipt of JSA was that she was actively  seeking  work  and
         that the sponsor had been placed on a programme %E  which  gave  an
         enhanced level of support for return to the workplace

      b) In relation to the Appellant having lived in the United Kingdom for
         5 years the Judge heard evidence from the Appellant  and  his  wife
         who gave consistent evidence as to the places they had lived during
         that period and the Judge therefore accepted that the Appellant had
         lived in the United Kingdom for 5 years.

 8. Grounds of appeal were lodged on the basis that the Judge had failed to
    make findings in relation to a material issue namely  the  period  that
    the Appellant's sponsor was a jobseeker for the  purposes  of  the  EEA
    Regulations; that the Judge failed to take into account the requirement
    for the Appellant to show during periods of unemployment in excess of 6
    months that she was actively  seeking  employment  and  had  a  genuine
    chance of finding it; that the Judge misdirected himself  that  receipt
    of JSA was evidence that the Appellant  was  sekking  work  and  had  a
    genuine chance of engagement.

 9. On 5 January 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish gave permission to
    appeal stating:

         "Four short sentences at para 13 comprise the entire  substance  of
         the determination. Sentence  two  arguably  amounts  to  the  F-tTJ
         accepting that receipt of JSA equates to compliance with Regulation
         6, which as the application alleges, is an arguable error of law."

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Shilliday on behalf  of  the
    Respondent that :

      a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

      b) There had been a misdirection in relation to the standard of  proof
         in that at paragraph 13 the Judge referred to  there  being  highly
         credible evidence but in this case the Appellant was in the  United
         Kingdom and could have provided documentary evidence

11. Mr Zefi did not wish to say anything other than his wife  was  actively
    seeking work when in receipt of JSA  and  he  had  brought  his  wife's
    Jobcentre 'Looking for Work' record as evidence of that.

Legal Framework

12. The provisions of the 2006 EEA Regulations that were in issue  in  this
    case were Regulation 15(1)(b) which provides that  family member of  an
    EEA National but who is not himself an EEA but who has resided  in  the
    United Kingdom with the EEA National in accordance with the Regulations
    for a continuous period of 5 years .The correct version  of  Regulation
    6(2) (b) is set out below and is not as recited in the  refusal  letter
    and provided:

         "(2) ...A person who is no longer working shall  not  cease  to  be
         treated as a worker for the purpose of paragraph (1)(b) if-

             (a)..

             (b) he is in  duly  recorded  involuntary  unemployment  after
             having been employed in the United Kingdom, provided  that  he
             has registered as a jobseeker  with  the  relevant  employment
             office and-

                  (i) he was employed for one year or more  before  becoming
                  unemployed;

                  (ii) he has been unemployed for no more than  six  months;
                  or

                  (iii)  he  can  provide  evidence  that  he   is   seeking
                  employment in the United Kingdom and has a genuine  chance
                  of being engaged;"

The Law

13. In  relation  to  sufficiency  of  reasons  I  have  considered  Shizad
    (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) Afghanistan [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
    where in headnote it is stated (1): "Although there is a legal duty  to
    give a brief explanation of the conclusions on  the  central  issue  on
    which an appeal is determined, those reasons need not be  extensive  if
    the decision as a whole makes sense,  having  regard  to  the  material
    accepted by the judge."

Finding on Material Error

14. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law.

15. Mr Shilliday opened his arguments by  suggesting  that  the  Judge  had
    applied the wrong standard of proof because he expressed the view  that
    the parties gave very credible evidence. This was not, I  note  one  of
    the grounds of appeal and nor was any application  made  to  amend  the
    grounds. I refuse at this late stage to amend the  grounds  of  appeal.
    Moreover even had I allowed the amendment I would have noted  that  the
    Judge sets out the correct burden and standard of proof at paragraph  6
    of the decision. I do not accept that because he has found the evidence
    of the witnesses to be 'very credible' that this in some  way  suggests
    he has misunderstood the standard of proof to apply.

16. The first ground on which permission was granted  was  that  the  Judge
    failed to make a finding on a material issue namely the  period  during
    which the EEA national spouse was a jobseeker for the purposes  of  the
    Regulations. The Judge at paragraph 5 summarises the issues in the case
    arising out of the refusal letter and  that  included  identifying  the
    periods during which the EEA  sponsor  was  a  job  seeker.  The  Judge
    referred to two periods of unemployment:  9/9/2009-4/2010  and  5/2010-
    8/2010 and the fact that the Appellant  submitted  in  support  of  his
    application a letter from the Jobcentre which were in the  Respondent's
    bundle confirming these two periods as a jobseeker. The Judges  summary
    of the periods was in fact factually inaccurate as the  refusal  letter
    refers to a  third  lengthy  period  of  unemployment  from  18/5/2010-
    14/8/2011. However I am satisfied  that  this  factual  error  made  no
    material difference to the outcome of the case because again this third
    period was confirmed in a letter from the Jobcentre dated 6 June 2012.

17. I am satisfied that given  the  Judge  set  out  the  evidence  of  the
    Jobcentre letters and there did not appear to have been  any  challenge
    raised by the HOPO to this as evidence of the period during  which  the
    sponsor was a jobseeker it was open to the  Judge  to  proceed  on  the
    basis that this was unchallenged evidence against which he assessed the
    appeal.

18. The second and third ground essentially argues that the Judge  was  not
    entitled to conclude that the fact that the sponsor was in  receipt  of
    JSA during the periods  of  unemployment  was  evidence  that  she  was
    actively seeking employment and had a genuine chance of being  engaged.
    The Judge heard oral evidence from both the Appellant and his wife  and
    found at paragraph 13 that the evidence was highly credible. The  Judge
    found that being on JSA 'one would have to show that one  was  actively
    seeking work' and indeed this was a finding that was open to the  Judge
    given that it is a provision of the Jobseekers Act 1995 that one of the
    entitlement conditions for the receipt of JSA is that an applicant  was
    actively seeking employment.

19. The Judge was also required to consider whether  the  Appellant  had  a
    genuine chance of employment. While  the  Judge  did  not  specifically
    identify this second component of the requirements of Regulation  6  he
    does refer to the fact that the sponsor was placed on the 5E  programme
    which was designed for CV improvement and interview technique  and  the
    Judge found this to be an additional level of support that led  to  her
    obtaining  her  job  with  Sainsburys.  In  those  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that the failure to clearly identify this  other  requirement
    made no material difference to the outcome of  the  decision  as  faced
    with her enhanced  level  of  support  and  the  fact  that  she  found
    employment in the field in which she sought it, it would have been open
    to the Judge to conclude that she had a genuine chance  of  employment.



20. I find that the reasons given were certainly very brief but I find that
    such errors as there were made no material outcome to the decision.

CONCLUSION

21. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

22. The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 29.3.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
