
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/48393/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 29th July 2014                               |On 1 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             GREVON MARIO HARRIS
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Young, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Moore, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are as described above, but are referred to in the rest  of
    this determination as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. By determination issued on 18th March 2014 Judge Balloch dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, because he could not succeed under Appendix FM and paragraph EX1
    did not apply, but allowed his appeal under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,
    outside the Rules.

 3. The SSHD's application to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  received  on  28th  March  2014.   It
    states that the determination "was not  received  by  the  Home  Office
    until 21st March...  today  is  the  last  date  to  make  an  in  time
    challenge".

 4. The proposed Grounds of Appeal  are  rather  obscurely  worded.   Their
    ultimate point (I think)  is  that  the  Immigration  Rules,  including
    paragraph EX1, form a complete code, and the judge had no  good  reason
    to go beyond the Rules.

 5. On 29th April 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish issued a decision
    headed "Permission to Appeal Granted", on the view that  the  point  in
    the grounds was that circumstances arising from a parental relationship
    with a child fell  under  paragraph  EX1  and  the  judge  should  have
    considered allowing the appeal within the Rules.

 6. The application for permission is incorrect in stating that 28th  March
    was the last date for applying.  Time runs  from  the  deemed  date  of
    service not the actual date of receipt: Asylum and Immigration Tribunal
    (Procedure) Rules 2005, paragraph 24(2).

 7. Mr Young had ascertained from the file that the  determination  was  in
    fact received by the Home Office on 20th not on 21st March, so an error
    was made in that respect.  The application was out of time, not in time
    as it purported to be.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge who purported to grant  permission  ought
    firstly to have dealt with the issue of  extending  time.   Unless  and
    until time is extended, a valid grant of permission cannot be made.

 9. Mr Young submitted that the delay was the shortest possible and that in
    the interests of justice the SSHD's application should now be  admitted
    and a valid grant of permission made.

10. I observed that even if the case were to reach the stage  of  making  a
    fresh decision, it was difficult to see how the  SSHD's  grounds  could
    prosper.  It is plain, as Mrs Moore submitted, that the case could  not
    have succeeded under paragraph EX1; but even if some flaw  were  to  be
    found in the determination, at the stage of  making  a  fresh  decision
    there would be no good reason for finding against the Appellant.  Under
    section 117B of the 2002 Act  the  public  interest  does  not  require
    removal if a person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    with a UK citizen child and it would not be reasonable  to  expect  the
    child to leave the UK.  The existence of those circumstances is not  in
    dispute.  Mr Young was unable to point to any matter which  might  lead
    to a result adverse to the Appellant.

11. The only problem is how to resolve the matter procedurally.  The First-
    tier Tribunal grant of permission was not validly made.   One  approach
    would be to rule that the issue  of  extending  time  is  still  to  be
    decided by the First-tier Tribunal.  Another would  be  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal, exercising the powers of the First-tier Tribunal, to  decline
    to extend time.  Pragmatically, however, the case having  reached  this
    stage, I think it is better to resolve the case as  follows.   Time  to
    apply for permission is extended and permission  is  granted,  only  to
    enable the Upper Tribunal to make the following decision.   The  SSHD's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.  The  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, allowing the appeal under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,
    shall stand.


                           [pic]


                           31 July 2014
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
