
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/48274/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision and Reasons         |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 16 June 2016                               |On 30 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                BENTLEY POPE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Respondent in this case is a national of Trinidad and Tobago born  on
   8 December 1966. He was the Appellant in the appeal before the First-tier
   Tribunal. For ease of reference I refer to him as the Claimant and to the
   Appellant as the Secretary of State.


2. The Claimant applied on 30 August 2014 for permanent residence under  the
   European Economic Area Regulations 2006 (as amended) ("EEA Regulations").
   That application was refused by the Secretary of State  under  Regulation
   10 (5) as it was concluded that he did not qualify for a  retained  right
   of residence. The Claimant appealed that decision under section 82 of the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the  2002  Act")  and  his
   appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen on 10  August  2015.
   In a decision promulgated on 24 November 2015  he  dismissed  the  appeal
   under the EEA Regulations because he found that the  Claimant  could  not
   satisfy the requirements of Regulation 10 (5) or  15  (1)  (b).  He  also
   found that the appeal under Article 8 ECHR could not  succeed  because  a
   notice under section 120 of the 2002  Act  had  not  been  served  and  a
   decision to remove  the  Claimant  had  not  been  taken  under  the  EEA
   Regulations. However, he allowed the appeal to the extent that it was not
   in accordance with the law because the application and supporting  letter
   from the Claimant's solicitors made it clear that there were children and
   family life and this, and section 55  of  the  2009  Act,  had  not  been
   considered.


3. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the
   grounds that the First-tier Tribunal had materially misdirected itself in
   remitting the appeal. There was no removal decision and the  decision  to
   remit the appeal back to the Respondent was said to be irrational.

4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley  on
   5 May 2016 on the grounds that it was arguable that the  Judge  erred  in
   law by remitting the decision on the grounds that no lawful decision  had
   been made and in finding that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  was
   unlawful when it was clear that no removal decision had been made.

5. The Claimant was not represented at the hearing.  His  solicitors,  David
   Williams Immigration & Nationality Consultant in a letter  dated  6  June
   2016 asked for their written submissions to be  taken  into  account  but
   said they had been requested by the Claimant not to attend  the  hearing.
   I therefore exercised my discretion to hear the appeal in the  Claimant's
   absence.

The Hearing

6. Ms Isherwood submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  by
   remitting the matter to the Secretary of State. She relied on the case of
   Amirteymour and others  (EEA  appeals;  human  rights)  [2015]  UKUT  and
   referred me to pages 23 and 25  where  section  55  was  considered.  She
   submitted that it was wholly unarguable that Zambrano should  apply.  S55
   was all encompassed within  Article  8  and  was  not  freestanding.  The
   Claimant now had no leave. The refusal letter invited  him  to  apply  on
   another basis. He had not been given removal  directions.  There  was  no
   s120 notice in this case. Even without this case  law  the  Claimant  was
   trying to circumvent the case law and proper consideration of the appeal.
   The EEA challenge was abandoned and the Claimant had focused on the  best
   interests of the children. The wife had stopped  working  in  2009.  This
   appeal could not succeed and the Judge was wrong to remit. The  Secretary
   of State could not be criticised for the approach to s55 of the  Borders,
   Citizenship and Immigration Act at the stage of the application.


   Discussion and Findings


7. The Secretary of State had not served a  section  120  notice  under  the
   2002 Act in this case and no  EEA  decision  to  remove  had  been  made.
   According to the case of Amirteymour and Others in these circumstances an
   appellant cannot bring a human rights challenge to removal in  an  appeal
   under the EEA Regulations. A consideration of the best interests  of  the
   child and under s55  of  the  2009  Act  is  made  within  an  Article  8
   assessment. It is  not  a  free-standing  assessment  made  outside  this
   context. It is clear from  pages  23  and  25  of  Amirteymour  that  the
   impugned decisions of the First-tier Tribunal in  that  case  involved  a
   consideration of section 55 and the Upper Tribunal found that  there  was
   no jurisdiction to carry out such an assessment. In the  circumstances  I
   find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in remitting the  decision
   to the Respondent as there was no jurisdiction to do so.  The  First-tier
   tribunal found that the appeal under Article 8 could not succeed and  the
   proper course in the circumstances was to dismiss the appeal.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

There is no direction for anonymity none having been  made  and  none  being
appropriate on the facts.


Signed                                       Dated: 30 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L Murray

