
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49667/2014
                                                               IA/49668/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Bennett House, Stoke   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 14th September 2015              |On 21st September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SONIA AMARACHI PHILLIPS
                           HONOUR IKENNA PHILLIPS
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


                          NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL AND
                   REASONS FOR THE TRIBUNAL GIVING CONSENT

 1. The Respondents are citizens of Nigeria and are minors.  They  applied,
    with their mother for permanent residence  cards  as  persons  who  had
    retained a right of residence following mother's divorce  from  an  EEA
    national.  The children were the step children of the EEA national  and
    thus in accordance with Regulation 7 of  the  EEA  Regulations,  family
    members and  were  such  at  the  date  of  the  decree  absolute.   In
    accordance with Regulation 10(5)  they,  like  their  mother,  retained
    their right of residence.

 2. The Secretary of State refused all three applications.

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal it was accepted that  the  EEA  national
    was a qualifying person at the date  of  decree  absolute.   The  Judge
    found all three succeeded, although not for permanent residence.

 4. The Secretary of State sought and was granted permission to  appeal  in
    relation to the children only, presumably in the mistaken  belief  that
    as step-children they did not retain  their  right  of  residence;  the
    grounds are unclear.

 5. The matter was listed before me to decide in the Upper Tribunal on 14th
    September 2015.

 6. I was informed at the hearing by the representatives on  the  telephone
    that the Secretary of State had clearly realised  her  error  and  both
    children have been issued with  Residence  cards.   On  that  basis  Mr
    McVeety, on behalf of the Secretary of State  requested  permission  to
    withdraw his case before the Upper Tribunal.

 7. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a  whole,
    I give consent to the Secretary of State to withdraw her case.

 8. Accordingly with my consent, and pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  this  appeal  is  recorded  as
    "Withdrawn with the consent of the Upper Tribunal". This  is  a  Notice
    pursuant to rule 17(5) to inform the  parties  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's case is withdrawn.

 9. The effect of the Secretary of State's case being  withdrawn  from  the
    Upper Tribunal is that the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal are at
    an end. There is no appeal before the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier
    Tribunal's decision shall stand.


Signed:

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
Date:  15th September 2015
