
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49734/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR MD SHEHEL RANA MAZUMBER
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Rees of Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Abebrese promulgated on 23 July 2015, brought with  the  permission  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish granted on 5 November 2015.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and Mr Mazumber  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall
    hereafter refer to Mr Mazumber as the Appellant and  the  Secretary  of
    State as the Respondent.

3.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  on  10  December  1985.
    He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 19 November 2014 refusing variation of leave to remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student and also  making  a  Section  47  removal
    decision.  The Appellant's application for leave to remain as a student
    had  been  refused  with  reference  to  paragraph  245ZX(c)   of   the
    Immigration Rules for  reasons  set  out  in  the  combined  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision and 'reasons for refusal' letter.  Essentially the
    Respondent was  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  demonstrated
    sufficient ability in the English language by reference  to  the  IELTS
    test certificate that he had produced in support of his application.

4.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules.  There is no challenge to that aspect of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision made by Mr Mazumber.

5.   However the First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to allow the  Appellant's
    appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR for reasons  set  out  in  his
    decision.  The Secretary of State now seeks to challenge that aspect of
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

6.   As I have indicated there has been no cross-appeal  by  the  Appellant,
    and indeed no Rule 24 response has been received. Nor has the Appellant
    filed any further  evidence  in  his  case  pursuant  to  the  standard
    directions in respect of preparing for the hearing on the basis that if
    the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal the remaking of the decision may follow at the same hearing  -
    such directions being issued to the parties herein on 7 December  2015.
    I should also record for completeness that although the  Appellant  has
    appeared through Mr Rees of Counsel, the Appellant has not attended  in
    person.

7.   The background to the Appellant's case and his immigration history  are
    a matter of record set out in the documents on file and  summarised  in
    the earlier parts of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal:  in  such
    circumstances I do not propose to re-rehearse  such  matters  here.   I
    have however had full regard to the history at all material aspects  of
    this decision, and will make reference to the facts  as  is  incidental
    for the purposes of this decision.

8.    As  indicated  above  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules but went on to  consider
    his case under Article 8 of the ECHR.  The detailed consideration is to
    be found at paragraphs 15 to 17 of the Judge's decision.  I should note
    however  for  completeness  that  the   Judge   also   makes   relevant
    observations and findings at paragraph 14 when considering  the  nature
    of the Appellant's history - both in terms of his  immigration  history
    and his studies.  In that regard, at paragraph 14 the Judge  identifies
    in particular that the Appellant has  "complied  with  the  Immigration
    Rules", is "a genuine student", and also that he "has  taken  steps  to
    suggest he is pursuing his studies".  Indeed it is these  matters  that
    the Judge says justifies going on to consider Article 8 notwithstanding
    the Appellant's failure under the Immigration Rules.

9.   At paragraph 15 of the decision the Judge makes reference to  the  case
    of Razgar and I accept that  it  is  apparent  that  in  the  following
    paragraphs the Judge attempts to traverse the five Razgar questions  in
    an appropriate order.

10.  In respect of the first two Razgar questions the  Judge  says  this  at
    paragraph 15:
         "The Tribunal... does find that the appellant having been  in  this
         country since 2009 that he has established a private life  in  this
         country in respect of his studies.   Therefore  the  Appellant  has
         established a private life  in  this  country  in  respect  of  his
         education."

    The Judge goes on to say this:
         "...the Tribunal finds also that the appellant's removal from  this
         country would cause severe consequences if he were to be  asked  to
         leave the United Kingdom when he has shown that he is a genuine and
         committed student in this country  who  has  expended  considerable
         sums of money towards his education."

    Those matters on the face of it are answers in the Judge's judgment  to
    the first two Razgar questions.

11.  The third and fourth Razgar questions appear to  be  addressed  in  the
    opening sentence of paragraph 16, and thereafter the Judge goes  on  to
    consider the issue of proportionality.  In this regard there appears  a
    sentence - identified in the grant of permission to appeal - which does
    not make any apparent sense:
         "The Tribunal further finds that it would not be in the interest of
         neither to control immigration on the  part  of  the  Secretary  of
         State to remove this Appellant from this country as his presence in
         this country is not contrary to the public interest".

    Mr Rees very fairly and appropriately identifies and accepts that  that
    passage is problematic. Nonetheless the Judge goes on to conclude  that
    the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  disproportionate  to  the  public
    interest.  The Judge also states that "The Tribunal has  taken  account
    of Section 117 of the Immigration Act 2014".

Consideration: Error of Law

12.  In my judgment there are a number of problems with the  approach  taken
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

13.  My attention has been directed to the case of  Patel  &  Others  [2013]
    UKSC 72, and in particular the speech of Lord Carnwath, with whom  Lord
    Kerr, Lord Reed and Lord Hughes agreed, at paragraph  57  -  a  passage
    often quoted in cases of this sort.  I quote it again:
         "It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for 'common sense' in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in the UK for some years (see para
         47 above).  However,  such  considerations  do  not  by  themselves
         provide grounds of appeal under article 8, which is concerned  with
         private or family life, not education as such. The opportunity  for
         a promising student to complete his course in this country, however
         desirable in general terms, is not  in  itself  a  right  protected
         under article 8."

14.  My attention has also been directed to  the  case  of  Nasim  &  Others
    (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal  sought
    to consider and apply what was said in Patel.  In particular I note the
    following from paragraph 20 of Nasim:
         "We therefore agree  with  Mr  Jarvis  [the  Secretary  of  State's
         Presenting Officer] that [57] of Patel & Others  is  a  significant
         exaltation from the Supreme  Court  to  refocus  attention  on  the
         nature and purpose of Article 8 and in particular to recognise  its
         limited utility to an individual where  one  has  moved  along  the
         continuum from the Article's core area of  operation  towards  what
         might be described as its fuzzy penumbra.  The  limitation  arises,
         both from what will at that point normally be the tangential effect
         on the individual of the proposed interference and  from  the  fact
         that, unless there are particular  reasons  to  reduce  the  public
         interest of enforcing  immigration  controls,  that  interest  will
         consequently prevail in striking the proportionality balance  (even
         assuming that stage is reached).".

15.   Mr  Rees  argued  that  the  Tribunal  should  be  cautious   in   its
    consideration of the observations in Nasim, submitting that Nasim  took
    matters further than was strictly warranted by the decision  in  Patel.
    In my judgment I do not see that that is the case.  I consider that the
    Tribunal in Nasim appropriately applied the findings and guidance to be
    gleaned from the Supreme Court, and did not  in  any  inappropriate  or
    unauthorised manner develop or extend such guidance.

16.  The real  difficulty,  in  my  judgment,  for  the  Appellant  in  this
    particular case in seeking to resist the Secretary of State's attack on
    the decision of Judge Abebrese  is  that  Judge  Abebrese  has  had  no
    reference or regard to either Patel or Nasim in considering  the  issue
    of whether or not the Appellant has established a private life  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It is absolutely clear that the Judge only  identifies
    matters of 'private life' relevant to the Appellant's studies:  I  have
    already quoted from paragraph  14  those  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    individual circumstances  that  the  Judge  considered  warranted  some
    consideration pursuant to Article 8, and it is the  same  matters  that
    find echo at paragraph 17 of the decision.   The  Judge  identifies  no
    other aspect beyond the Appellant's involvement  in,  and  pursuit  of,
    studies that might be  relevant  to  private  life  issues.   In  those
    circumstances nothing is said to take the matter beyond the simple fact
    of studies, and in such circumstances I can find no factual  basis  for
    distinguishing this case from the observations made in Patel  that  the
    opportunity for a promising student to  complete  his  course  in  this
    country is not in itself a right protected under Article 8.

17.  In my judgment the decision of Judge Abebrese  flies  in  the  face  of
    that exaltation from the Supreme Court  accepted  and  applied  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in the subsequent case of Nasim.  The Judge, as  I  have
    indicated, does not offer any engagement with this  guidance  and  does
    not  otherwise  make  reference  to  any  matters  that  would  warrant
    departure from those principles.

18.  It seems to me that there are further errors in the decision  of  Judge
    Abebrese.  He refers, at paragraph 15, to "the severe consequences"  in
    the event that the  Appellant  were  to  be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom, but fails to identify at all what such consequences might  be,
    or why they might be 'severe'.  Moreover in this context Judge Abebrese
    does not apparently give any consideration to the extent to  which  any
    such consequences might be remediable by the Appellant  re-applying  to
    enter the United Kingdom as a  student  -  in  other  words,  that  his
    removal from the United Kingdom would not be fatal  to  his  subsequent
    wish to pursue studies whether in the UK or indeed elsewhere.

19.  It is now trite law that in considering Article 8 outside the scope  of
    the Immigration Rules, the Rules need to be taken as a  starting  point
    as informing the expected 'balance' from which  departure  is  invited.
    In that regard, although this is an application as a Tier 4 Student, in
    my judgment it would have also been appropriate for the Judge  to  have
    regard to paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules  as   a  starting
    point for 'private life', and to observe therein the way in  which  the
    Appellant  might  or  might  not  satisfy  the  requirements.   It   is
    startlingly obvious that the  Appellant  would  not  meet  any  of  the
    requirements in respect of time spent in the United Kingdom, and in the
    absence of him advancing any case that he would  not  be  able  to  re-
    settle in his country of origin, on the face of it  the  Appellant  did
    not have a case to  make  out  under  276ADE.  The  Judge  should  have
    expressly recognised as much as a starting point to any non-Rule  based
    consideration of proportionality.

20.  Yet further I am not satisfied that the Judge has demonstrated that  he
    has had due and proper regard  to  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   Not  only  does  the  Judge  wrongly
    describe the relevant provisions in his decision (by referring  to  the
    wrong Act), he makes no  express  reference  to  them.   In  particular
    section 117B(v) is of relevance - "little weight should be given  to  a
    private life established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the  person's
    immigration status is precarious".  Mr Rees appropriately and  properly
    points out that that provision refers to little weight  being  attached
    rather than no weight, but the reality is Judge Abebrese has not  given
    any indication of a specific consideration to that provision, or how he
    has factored that provision into the overall  balancing  exercise.   Of
    course it has to be said that the overall balancing exercise would  not
    in any event have been reached  had  the  Judge  properly  applied  the
    guidance of the Higher Courts and the Upper Tribunal to the  first  two
    Razgar questions.

21.  In all of the circumstances and for the reasons given  I  am  satisfied
    that the Secretary of State has made out her case that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred in law to an extent that the decision requires  to
    be set aside.

Remaking the decision

22.  I invited the representatives' submissions as  to  how  to  proceed  in
    respect of re-making the decision.  Ms Fijiwala invited the Tribunal to
    re-make the decision for itself on the basis that the primary  findings
    of fact of the First-tier Tribunal Judge could stand in respect of  the
    Appellant's history and his education and that it was not necessary for
    there to be any further oral evidence.   Mr  Rees  suggested  that  the
    appropriate course would be to  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, but when invited to do so was unable to identify any specific
    matter by reference to available evidence that was presently unresolved
    or required to be resolved.  In this context I again remind  myself  of
    the standard directions that were issued to the parties by  which  they
    should file any further evidence upon which they might wish to rely  in
    the event of a finding of error of law to be in a position  to  proceed
    to deal with the re-making of the decision immediately upon the finding
    of error of law.  No such further evidence has been filed.  In all such
    circumstances in my judgment it was appropriate that the Upper Tribunal
    proceed to re-make the decision for itself.

23.  Neither party had anything further to advance by way of  evidence,  and
    as I have indicated the Appellant has elected not to attend the hearing
    in person.  In those circumstances, and in any event pursuant  to  that
    which is inherent in the observations made  above  in  respect  of  the
    error of approach to the principles and guidance of Patel and Nasim, it
    seems to me that  the  inevitable  outcome  is  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant has not demonstrated that he has anything to advance  by  way
    of private life beyond his education, and that  his  education  is  not
    sufficient to get him over the first two Razgar questions.

24.  That really is the end of his case under  Article  8  -  and  in  those
    circumstances I re-make the decision by dismissing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  material  errors  of
    law and is set aside.

26.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

27.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:  Date: 25 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed:  Date: 25 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

