
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49833/2013
                                                               IA/49832/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 May 2014                                |On 24 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                              MR JUSTICE GREEN
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                        Miss Osadebamwen Gift Ugiagbe
                            Mr Chukwunnaka Onuoha
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mrs C Chile
For the Respondent:    Ms Alice Holmes


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  of
    13 March 2014 in which on paper the First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appeal of the appellants against the decision of the Secretary of State
    refusing the appellants' leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant under the points-based system and  for
    a biometric residence permit.

2.   The decision of the Secretary of State was taken on 13  November  2013.
    There are two appeals before us today.  They  are  conditional  in  the
    sense that they stand or fall together.

3.   We will start  with  Miss  Ugiagbe's  appeal  and  then  deal  with  Mr
    Onuoha's appeal.

4.   The issue arising on the first appeal is a narrow one.   We  deal  with
    it briefly.  In her decision the Secretary  of  State  found  that  the
    appellant failed to meet the maintenance requirements.   This  decision
    was arrived at upon  the  basis  of  an  analysis  of  the  applicant's
    sponsor's bank accounts.  It ignored the appellant's own accounts.

5.   Two points need to be made at this stage about  this  finding.   First,
    in the application form completed by the appellant there is in  fact  a
    reference to her own bank accounts but there was no analysis of this in
    the Secretary of State's decision.  Secondly, a recent Rule  24  letter
    from the Secretary of State dated 8 May 2014  confirms  this  position.
    The letter states in paragraph 3:

         "The respondent has  investigated  the  CID  Home  Office  computer
         system and notes that the consideration of funds  appears  to  have
         been limited to the sponsor's accounts.  No reference  is  made  to
         the appellant's accounts.  However, the PF1 document  does  include
         in the list of documents applicant's bank statements."

    Unfortunately the file is not to hand and it is not possible to clarify
    what documents are on it.

6.   The Tribunal's determination operates upon  the  basis  that  the  bank
    statements presented with the  application  form  were  only  from  the
    appellant's sponsor.  Paragraph 13 of the determination states:

         "The bank statements presented with the application form were  from
         the first appellant's sponsor.  The first appellant  has  presented
         with her notice of appeal her own bank statements which  cover  the
         required period (10 August 2013 to 6 September 2013).  In Alam  and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ
         960 it was held that in appeals against the refusal of applications
         under the Tier 4 points-based system the exclusion of new  evidence
         introduced by the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
         Section 85A applied to all appeals made after the date that Section
         85A was brought into force.  It was also held  that  there  was  no
         unfairness in the requirement that an applicant must submit all the
         evidence necessary to demonstrate compliance with the  Rules.   The
         Immigration Rules and the policy guidance made it  clear  that  the
         production  of  specified  documents  with   the   application   is
         mandatory.  It is clear that an applicant cannot remedy  a  failure
         to produce specified documents by  producing  them  at  the  appeal
         stage.  In this appeal the bank statements provided  by  the  first
         appellant with the application did not establish that she held  the
         necessary funds throughout the relevant period."

7.   It is clear in our view that the  Tribunal  erred.   The  Secretary  of
    State did have the appellant's statements before her when the  decision
    was taken.  She erred in failing to have regard to them.  The  Tribunal
    erred also in concluding that they were not  before  the  Secretary  of
    State.

8.   We would observe that this was a paper  appeal  and  the  Secretary  of
    State notwithstanding having been served with the appeal papers took no
    part in it.  Had she done so she would  no  doubt  have  confirmed  the
    position that has now been confirmed, namely that the  statements  were
    before the Secretary of State.  If that had been made clear the risk of
    the First-tier Tribunal making this error would, we  trust,  have  been
    eliminated.

9.   We allow the appeal and we  set  aside  the  Tribunal's  decision.   We
    allow the appeal against the Secretary of State and we direct that  the
    Secretary of State grant leave to the appellant.

10.  We turn now to the appeal of Mr Onuoha.  His appeal is contingent  upon
    that of the  first  appellant  as  she  is  his  partner.   The  second
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom in November  2008  with  a  one
    year student visa covering the period September 2008 to September  2009
    to study a three year electrical engineering degree course.   His  visa
    was then extended until 2011 to enable him to complete his course.

11.  On 14 November 2011, prior to the expiry of his visa,  he  applied  for
    leave to remain as a dependant of a  Tier  4  Migrant.   By  virtue  of
    various appeals his status changed so that  he  was  granted  leave  to
    remain in line with his partner's visa  and  this  gave  him  right  to
    remain until 7 October 2013.

12.  On 1 October 2013 he applied for leave to remain as a Tier  4  Student.
    This was refused upon the basis that  his  partner  did  not  meet  the
    requirements in the Rules.  It therefore necessarily follows  from  the
    fact that we have allowed the first appeal that  we  allow  the  second
    appeal, and we make the same ruling in relation to the second appeal as
    we have made in relation to the first appeal.






Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Green

