
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49524/2014
     IA/49527/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2016                          |On 8 April 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Z Y
                                     F Y
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms D Ofei-Kwatia, Counsel instructed by JS
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the Respondents were the Appellants  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  They are mother and daughter respectively.  I shall  be
    referring to the parties in this decision as the Secretary of State and
    the Claimants for the sake of clarity.

2.   The first Claimant applied on 30 June 2014 for leave to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as the unmarried partner of a  settled  person  and  her
    daughter applied as her dependant.   The  Secretary  of  State  refused
    their applications on a number of grounds under the partner  route  and
    under the parent route and also decided  to  refuse  their  application
    outside the Immigration Rules on Article 8 grounds.

3.   The Claimants appealed against  that  decision  and  their  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid who in a decision  promulgated
    on 30 August 2015 allowed both their appeals purportedly,  it  appears,
    under the Immigration Rules.

4.   The Secretary of  State  took  issue  with  that  decision  and  sought
    permission to appeal. Permission was granted on the basis that  it  was
    arguable as asserted in the grounds that the Judge had erred in failing
    to give reasons for allowing the appeal and in failing to  engage  with
    the reasons for refusal letter.  The grounds drafted by  the  Secretary
    of State argue firstly, that there was a material misdirection of  law,
    namely that the Judge had not adequately identified the  provisions  of
    law under which the appeals had been allowed, and, notwithstanding  his
    self-direction, that it was not possible to ascertain from the  Judge's
    reasons why the parties had won and lost.

5.   Further, the  second  ground  asserts  there  was  a  failure  to  give
    adequate reasons in  support  of  material  findings.   The  Judge  had
    indicated at paragraph 5 that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    had raised no other objection to the Claimant's application  for  leave
    to remain other apparently than the birth of her baby girl.   This,  it
    is asserted, was incorrect and  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    Claimant's application under the provisions of the Rules set out in the
    grounds.

6.   The matter now comes before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether  or
    not there was an error or errors of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The first ground relates to  the  adequacy  of  reasons
    given for the decision. In the  case  of  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC) the President stated, as  recorded  in
    the head note, that it is  axiomatic  that  a  determination  discloses
    clearly the reasons for a Tribunal's decision.  It is  clearly  a  duty
    under public law to give sufficient reasons so that  each  party  knows
    why they have won or lost. I find that the decision of Judge Majid  did
    not fulfil that public law duty.

7.   The refusal letter sets out a number  of  bases  why  the  applications
    were refused.  The Respondent refused the application under the partner
    route, the parent route and under paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules. The decision of the judge does  not  disclose  that  he  engaged
    properly or at all with the grounds for refusal  and  the  only  matter
    that he appears to have addressed is the birth of  the  baby  girl.  He
    concluded that on that basis the refusal could not  be  maintained  and
    there is  no  adequate  reasoning  in  the  decision  leading  to  this
    conclusion.  On that basis the decision cannot stand.

8.    However,  it  is  clear  from  having  heard   submissions   by   both
    representatives today that there was a discussion between  the  parties
    prior to the hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal which
    was brought to the attention of the judge.  That has been agreed by  Mr
    Jarvis and by Ms Ofei-Kwatia, who was the advocate at the hearing.  The
    child had been born since the refusal and consequently the refusal  had
    no regard to Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
    2009. What was discussed between the parties was that the matter should
    be reconsidered by the Secretary of State and that was communicated  to
    the judge.  Mr Jarvis suggested that an appropriate  course  of  action
    would be a finding that the decision was not in accordance with the law
    and an order requiring the Secretary of State to consider s55.

9.   In those circumstances I conclude  that  the  decision  should  be  set
    aside and I re-make the decision. Due to the  ongoing  requirement  for
    the Secretary of State to consider the best interests of the child  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and that the  Secretary  of
    State should consider the position of the child. The appeal is  allowed
    to the extent that the decision was not in accordance with the law  and
    in the light of the guidance in MK  (section  55  -  Tribunal  options)
    Sierra  Leone  [2015]  UKUT  223  (IAC),  I  make  an  order  requiring
    reconsideration and a fresh decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and I set it aside. The appeal is allowed to the extent that the  matter  of
s55 is outstanding before the Secretary  of  State  for  a  lawful  decision
thereon.

I make an anonymity direction as the appeal involves a child.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

