

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/49880/2013
                                                           and IA/49881/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 12 November 2014                  |17 November 2014            |
|                                     |............................|
|                                     |...........                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       (1) MRS MARIAN AMIORKOR SARPEI
                     (2) MASTER TYRONE KELVIN BAAH JONES
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Skreemian, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms R Spio-Aidoo, Solicitor (R Spio & Co)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant  (the  Secretary  of  State)  appealed  with  permission
    granted on 18 July 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes against the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  allowing
    the Respondents' linked appeals seeking the issue  of  residence  cards
    under regulation 7, alternatively  regulation  8,  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (as  amended)  ("the  EEA
    Regulations").  The determination was promulgated on 25 June 2014.

2.    The Respondents are nationals of Ghana, mother and  son,  respectively
    born on 14 May 1975 and 20 April 2007.  The  First  Respondent  claimed
    that she was married by  proxy  to  an  EEA  national  exercising  free
    movement rights in the United Kingdom.  Neither Respondent claimed  any
    other basis of entry or stay in the United Kingdom.

3.    Permission for  the  onwards  appeals  was  granted  by  Judge  Parkes
    because he considered it arguable that the judge had erred  by  failing
    to apply Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC)  and
    TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).

4.    By notice under rule 24 of the Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules,  the
    Respondents indicated that they opposed the application for  permission
    to appeal.

5.     Ms  Skreemian  for  the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  judge   had
    manifestly failed to apply Kareem (Proxy marriages  -  EU  law)  [2014]
    UKUT 00024 (IAC) and TA and Others (above).  The validity of the  proxy
    marriage relied on by the Respondents depended on the marriage laws  of
    the home state of the EEA national sponsor.  There was  no  finding  on
    that central issue.

6.    Ms Spio-Aidoo was unable to resist those submissions but  pointed  out
    that the judge had effectively found in the Respondents' favour on  the
    regulation 8(5) issue, the durable relationship between the EEA sponsor
    and the First Respondent.  The maternal relationship between the  First
    and Second the Respondent had not been doubted.

7.    The tribunal indicated at this point that it was unable to uphold  the
    judge's findings on the validity of the proxy marriage relied on by the
    Respondents.  The judge had not had the benefit of TA and Others, which
    had clarified the need for evidence from the sponsor's EEA state as  to
    the recognition  and  status  of  the  proxy  marriage.  There  was  an
    inadvertent material error of law in the judge's approach to the  issue
    of  recognition  of  the  marriage  in  question.   That  part  of  his
    determination would be set aside and remade.  The  appeals  so  far  as
    they were based on the claimed marriage would be dismissed.

8.    It was accepted by  both  representatives  that  the  tribunal  should
    adopt the same approach as was taken in TA and  Others  and  remit  the
    remaining part of the case to  the  Secretary  of  State  so  that  the
    discretion under regulation 17(4) could be exercised.

9.    The tribunal finds that the judge  found  that  there  was  a  durable
    relationship akin to marriage between the first Respondent and her  EEA
    national sponsor, a finding which is accordingly preserved.  There  was
    no  indication  that  regulation  17(4)  had  been  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State, because she had denied that a durable  relationship
    existed.   The Respondents' applications must accordingly  be  returned
    to the Secretary of State for that discretion to be exercised.

10.   No application was made to the tribunal  for  an  anonymity  direction
    and the tribunal can see no need for any such order.

DECISION

    There was a material error of law in part of the First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination, which is set aside  to  the  extent  that  the  original
    Appellants' appeals under regulation 8  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations  2006  were  not  finally  determined.   The
    following decision is substituted:


    The original Appellants' appeals under regulation 7 are dismissed


    No anonymity direction is made


    The original Appellants' appeals under regulation 8 are allowed to  the
    limited extent that the Secretary of State's mandatory discretion under
    regulation 17(4) has not yet been exercised.  The original applications
    are accordingly returned to the Secretary of State for regulation 17(4)
    to be applied in the light of the findings in this determination.

Signed                            Dated 14 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell



TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE
FEE AWARDS

    Although the original Appellants' appeals have succeeded in  part,  the
    Appellants  were  responsible   for   the   difficulties   with   their
    applications to the Secretary of State.  There are accordingly  no  fee
    awards.

Signed                            Dated 14 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
