
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49249/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 6 July 2016                             |On 28 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                laila yousaf
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic Counsel instructed by The Aire Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) For reasons that are  not  relevant  in  our  decision  the  First-tier
    Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  We  make  no  order  restricting
    publication.

 2) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  She appeals  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  31  July  2015  allowing  to  a
    limited extent her appeal against the decision of the respondent on  17
    November 2014 to refuse her a residence card confirming  her  right  to
    reside permanently in the United Kingdom.

 3) The First-tier Tribunal Judge purported to "allow  the  appeal  to  the
    limited extent that the Respondent's decision is not in accordance with
    the law and remains outstanding pending its lawful  consideration".  It
    is doubtful that the First-tier Tribunal has the power to make  such  a
    ruling. It was challenged on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal did
    not determine the material issue before it.

 4)  It  was  the  appellant's  case  that  the  judge's   conclusion   was
    unsustainable.  In simple terms it was her case  that  she  would  have
    been entitled to permanent residence if she had been able to  establish
    five years' continuous  residence  as  the  family  member  of  an  EEA
    national.  In fact she could only establish a slightly  shorter  period
    but it was so close,  she  said,  that  refusing  her  application  was
    disproportionate.  She complained that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    had not addressed the question that mattered.

 5) Ms Asanovic served a skeleton argument on the Tribunal on 4 July  2016.
    Paragraphs 3 and 4 are a helpful introduction to the  case  before  us.
    The appellant is described as "LY".  The appellant states:

         "3.  LY was  married  to  an  Italian  national  who  had  acquired
         permanent residence prior to their marriage.  It was common  ground
         that LY resided in the UK between 30 March 2007 as a  spouse  of  a
         Union citizen until he was deported from  the  UK  on  14  February
         2012.  This is a period of residence that is 44 days short  of  the
         five years required for acquisition of permanent residence.
         4.   LY  contended  that  the  decision  to  refuse  her  permanent
         residence is disproportionate in Union Law and  thus  the  decision
         breaches her rights under EU Treaties in respect  of  entry  to  or
         residence in the United Kingdom (Section 84(1)(d) NIAA 2002)."

 6) The grounds then complain that the First-tier Tribunal simply failed to
    engage with the argument she made on the question of proportionality.

 7) Mr Walker, appropriately, did not seek to defend the decision.  On this
    occasion the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not address her mind to  the
    arguments before her. Rather she reached a conclusion that satisfied no-
    one and which she may well not have had power to make.

 8) We set aside his decision.

 9) The facts are established.  There was no reason to return this case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and no-one asked us to take that course.

10) Article 16 of Directive  2004/38/EC  (Citizens  Free  Movement)  states
    that:

         "Union citizens who have resided legally for a continuous period of
         five years in the  host  Member  State  shall  have  the  right  of
         permanent residence there."

11) Paragraph (2) of Article 16 applies the above paragraph (1)  to  family
    members if they  are  not  themselves  nationals  of  a  Member  State.
    Paragraph (3) provides that

         "continuity  of  residence  shall  not  be  affected  by  temporary
         absences not exceeding a total of six months a year, or by absences
         of a longer duration for compulsory military  service,  or  by  one
         absence of a maximum of  twelve  consequent  months  for  important
         reasons such as pregnancy and childbirth, serious illness, study or
         vocational training, or a posting in  another  Member  State  or  a
         third country."

12) It follows that although the appellant  failed  to  satisfy  the  Rules
    because her husband did not live continuously in the United Kingdom for
    a period of 5 years, albeit by only 44 days, she might have acquired  a
    permanent right of residence even if her husband had been  out  of  the
    United Kingdom for much longer during the five years relied upon if the
    absence had been for some reason other than his deportation.  This is a
    feature that may well fuel a sense of grievance in the  appellant  but,
    for the reasons set out below, if it does then it is a  sense  that  is
    misconceived.

13) On a plain reading of the  Directive  the  appellant's  case  is  quite
    hopeless.  Her husband did not reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    continuous period of five years.  There is nothing in  paragraph  3  of
    Article 16 that helps her.  Continuity of residence is  not  broken  by
    defined temporary absence, even quite long temporary absence.   However
    there is no "temporary absence" here.  Her husband's right to reside in
    the United Kingdom came to an  end  by  deportation.   There  are  many
    restrictions on the deportation of a Union citizen.   Once  deportation
    has been effected, as is the case here, his departure really cannot  be
    regarded as a "temporary absence".

14) The appellant makes two points.

15) First, she maintains that the Directive needs to  be  constructed  with
    regard to the principle of proportionality and, secondly, she maintains
    that if the principle of proportionality is  applied  then  the  appeal
    should be allowed.

16) We have no hesitation in accepting the first limb in this argument.  It
    is well-established to the point of being trite law that the  principle
    of proportionality guides the interpretation of provisions relating  to
    a person's rights under EU law.  That  said  we  struggle  to  find  an
    example, or even to create a hypothetical  example,  of  a  person  who
    fails to meet a precise requirement of EU law being able to  rely  upon
    the principle of proportionality to  say  that  the  person  should  be
    treated as if he or she did in fact meet the requirements.

17) Ms Asanovic relied particularly on the case of Baumbast v SSHD [2002] 3
    C.M.L.R. 23 decided by the European Court of Justice.  Far from helping
    the appellant we find that this case illustrates how the  principle  of
    proportionality does not assist her.  In Baumbast a  person  seeking  a
    residence card was required to have comprehensive  sickness  insurance.
    She had insurance but it was not as  comprehensive  as  an  Immigration
    Appeals Adjudicator decided that it needed to be.  The  European  Court
    of Justice, guided by  the  principle  of  proportionality  and  having
    accepted that the appellant had never applied for any  kind  of  social
    assistance, decided that the appellant was entitled to  reside  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The point was that the  principle  of  proportionality
    acted to stop an  over-literal  construction  of  the  requirement  for
    comprehensive sickness insurance.  The requirement was never as precise
    as the requirement for five years' lawful residence.

18) We are aware that Ms Asanovic took the trouble of preparing a bundle of
    eleven reported decisions and some additional cases were also handed to
    us.  We have considered them but we decline to  be  drawn  into  making
    complex something that is essentially simple.

19) In order to comply with the requirements of the Directive the appellant
    had to show that she and her husband had five years' continuous  lawful
    residence.  She could not do that because her husband had been deported
    before the five-year period was achieved.

20) There is nothing disproportionate about the decision.  We  accept  that
    the purpose of the Directive is to promote  the  free  movement  of  EU
    nationals within the Union.  In many cases movement is not  truly  free
    if a person's close relatives do not benefit  from  similar  provisions
    and the Directive intends to ensure that they do.  The Directive is set
    in precise terms.  It does not provide, for example, that a person will
    be entitled to a residence card  after  about  five  years'  continuous
    lawful residence.  The advantage of a precise term is that it  provides
    for clarity and ease of decision  making.   The  disadvantage  is  that
    people who fall just short of the prescribed amount, and  who  for  all
    practical purposes are every bit as  integrated  in  their  country  of
    residence as they would have been  if  their  stay  had  been  slightly
    longer, do not meet the requirements of the Directive.  When a  minimum
    term is fixed it is not disproportionate to refuse  an  application  of
    someone who does  not  meet  the  minimum  term.   If  there  was  some
    ambiguity  in  the  meaning  of   "five   years"   the   principle   of
    proportionality might be a useful  guide  but  that  is  not  what  has
    happened here.

21) We accept that the applicant may very well be entitled to remain in the
    United Kingdom for other  reasons.  Certainly  she  has  been  given  a
    "derivative residence card" valid for 5 years, but this does not impact
    on our decision.  She cannot be granted permanent leave  to  reside  on
    the basis of her husband's  five  years'  continuous  lawful  residence
    because he did not reside continuously for five years.

22) Ms Asanovic invited us to make a reference to  the  European  Court  of
    Justice.  We decline to do that.  We do not find that this cases raised
    a  difficult  point  of  interpretation.   We  find  that   the   clear
    interpretation produces a result that is disagreeable to the  appellant
    and that is quite a different point.

23) It follows that although we allow the appeal to the extent  of  setting
    aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  we  substitute  the
    decision dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State.

    Notice of Decision

24) The appellant's appeal against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    is allowed. We substitute a decision dismissing the appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent for the reasons given above.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 27 October 2016                |





