

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49165/2014
                                                               IA/49182/2014
                                                               IA/49188/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Centre                              |                               |
|On 8 March 2016                     |On 1 April 2016                |
|                                    |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  [M r] (1)
                                  [f h] (2)
                                  [S z] (3)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hussain, of Immigration and Work Permit UK


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. [MR] is the principal respondent.  [FH] is  his  wife  and  [SZ]  their
    daughter.  The status of the second and third respondents in the UK  is
    dependent on that of [MR].  For this  reason  this  decision  discusses
    only the issues arising in relation to [MR].

 2. The appellant Secretary of  State  appeals  against  the  decision  and
    reasons  statement  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Somal   that   was
    promulgated on 23 June 2015.  Judge Somal allowed the  appeal,  finding
    that the Home Office's allegation  that  [MR]  had  submitted  a  false
    document with his tier 4 (general) student application of 1  July  2014
    was not made out and directing that  the  Home  Office  should  make  a
    decision regarding the substance of the tier 4 application which it had
    failed to do.

 3. The grounds of appeal are that the judge erred in  law  by  failing  to
    consider the specific evidence that identified [MR] as a person who had
    obtained a TOEIC certificate via ETS by using a proxy test taker.   The
    Home Office relied on evidence from ETS that confirmed the  certificate
    was invalid and argued that the judge had  failed  to  appreciate  that
    this was a case where the declaration of invalidity was evidence of the
    use of a proxy test taker having been  employed  as  explained  by  the
    witness statements of two senior Home Office officials, Ms Collings and
    Mr Millington.

 4. Mr  Mills  amplified  the  grounds  and  established  by  reference  to
    paragraphs 8 and 9 of Judge Somal's decision that she  had  before  her
    the two witness statements and the extract from  the  ETS  spreadsheet.
    He explained that in this appeal he was not arguing generalities  about
    the ETS system but that the judge failed to engage with  the  evidence.
    As a result her findings were not sound because they  were  superficial
    and not drawn from a fair assessment of  the  evidence  presented.   Mr
    Mills added that he was not arguing  that  the  judge's  findings  were
    irrational and again steered me to considering whether  the  judge  had
    examined the relevant evidence when making her decision.

 5. Mr Hussain  argued  that  the  Home  Office's  argument  was  based  on
    irrationality even if Mr Mills said it was not.  Mr Hussain pointed  me
    to the judge's findings at  paragraph  11  were  sufficient.   In  that
    paragraph  the  judge  found  that  [MR]  was  generally  credible  and
    therefore the Home Office allegation was not made out.

 6. In answer to my own enquiries,  both  Mr  Mills  and  Mr  Hussain  were
    satisfied that the  judge  had  failed  to  make  findings  as  to  the
    substance  of  the  [MR]'s  tier  4  application  and   that   remained
    outstanding.

 7. Having not made my decision at the hearing, I make it now.

 8. Although I find there are difficulties with the  judge's  decision  and
    reasons, looked at in the round I am satisfied  that  the  Home  Office
    argument, regarding the finding that the  allegation  of  submitting  a
    false document was not made out,  is  not  correct  for  the  following
    reason.

 9. There is a problem with the judge's comment at the start  of  paragraph
    8.  She states that it was "not apparent from the Respondents  file  as
    to where these allegations have arisen." As I have  already  indicated,
    the  evidence  before  the  judge  included  an  extract  from  an  ETS
    spreadsheet and  the  witness  statements  from  the  two  Home  Office
    officials.  Together these showed why the allegation arose.  There  was
    a prima facie case in that the statements show that a number of foreign
    students and others had obtained English test certificates fraudulently
    by employing a proxy test taker.  On the face of it,  the  invalidation
    of the appellant's test certificate brought him within this profile.

10. However, this is the only problem I find with  the  decision.   It  was
    open to the judge to find that neither statement from the  Home  Office
    officials went beyond this prima facie position.  In paragraphs 8 and 9
    the judge examines each statement and identifies that  neither  relates
    specifically to [MR].  This means that the statements are  evidence  of
    the possibility that he was a person who might have  employed  a  proxy
    test taker but did not establish that it was more likely than not  that
    he was such a person.

11. In paragraphs 10 and 11 the judge examined the  other  evidence  before
    her which included evidence that [MR]  would  have  had  no  reason  to
    employ a proxy test taker.  He did not fit  the  profile  of  a  person
    whose English language skills were such as to  require  him  to  do  so
    because there was unchallenged  evidence  that  he  had  the  necessary
    English language skills and had completed studies in the UK.

12. At the end of paragraph 11 the judge identified that  the  Home  Office
    had not provided any evidence specific to [MR] to  show  that  ETS  had
    identified him as using a proxy test taker.  It is obvious that a  test
    certificate might be invalidated for  reasons  unrelated  to  a  person
    using a proxy test taker and therefore the  mere  fact  that  the  Home
    Office provides evidence that ETS has invalidated a certificate is  not
    enough to establish fraud.

13. The Home Office, however, pursued a second  line  of  argument  in  its
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It said that the judge should  not  have
    allowed the appeal to the limited extent that the  Home  Office  should
    make a decision on the substantive aspect because it is trite law  that
    the First-tier Tribunal has jurisdiction to make such a decision itself
    unless the matter involves the exercise of discretion.  In this case Mr
    Mills submitted there had been no need to remit the appeal since  there
    was sufficient evidence before the judge to deal with it outright.

14. I find there is merit in this argument and that the judge erred in  law
    by not addressing the substance of  the  appeal.   Mr  Hussain  agreed.
    Because of this consent, I find that the judge  erred  in  law  by  not
    determining the substance.  This matter remains outstanding not  before
    the Secretary of State but the First-tier Tribunal and it  is  to  that
    chamber that I remit the matter.

15. I add three points.  First, the findings of Judge Somal that  the  Home
    Office has not made good its allegation that  [MR]  submitted  a  false
    document is upheld and this point cannot be argued further.

16. Secondly, [MR] may wish to consider whether he should pursue the matter
    because on the available evidence he did not  supply  a  valid  English
    language certificate with his application because the one on  which  he
    relied has been invalidated by ETS.  That is  a  matter  that  will  no
    doubt have to be considered at the next hearing and on one  I  make  no
    findings because [MR] may have an answer to that situation.

17. The First-tier Tribunal will also have to make findings in relation  to
    the second and third appellant when deciding the remitted appeals.

18. To sum up, I find that the decision and reasons statement  contains  an
    error on a point of law for the reasons I  have  given  and  remit  the
    remaining matter to be determined by a judge other  than  Judge  Somal.
    The hearing can be in Nottingham, Stoke or Birmingham.

Decision

The decision and reasons statement of Judge Somal contains  an  error  on  a
point of law and is set aside.

The appeals are  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  remitted
hearing is subject to the directions and observations set out in  paragraphs
13 to 15 above.





                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
