
IAC-AH-VP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49878/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th December 2014                            |On 29th December 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         mr isaac mdbolaji gbadamosi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Augustine Otor-Osagie (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mill (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Graham, promulgated on 13th August 2013, following a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 14th July 2014.  In the determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of Isaac Mdbolaji Gbadamosi.   The  Respondent
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, whose was born  on  28th
    September 1980.  He applied for further leave to remain in  the  UK  as
    the partner of Oluwatosin Odunola, a person present and settled in  the
    UK under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   By  a  decision  dated
    23rd October 2013,  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The appellant claimed that he was no longer in a relationship with  the
    mother of his child, Oluwatomiwa Mobolaji Isaac J  Gbadamosi,  who  had
    been born to them on 13th June 2012, and  this  was  confirmed  by  the
    child's mother herself.  What the appellant  maintained,  however,  was
    that he is the primary carer of  his  son,  dropping  the  son  off  at
    school, collecting him from the nursery regularly  (see  paragraph  9).
    The child's mother is studying at Coventry University for a  degree  in
    biomedical sciences and it is the appellant who is really  the  day-to-
    day carer of the child to all intents and purposes (see paragraph 10).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge  found  both  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  as  credible
    witnesses,  the  evidence  being  consistent,  and  accepted  that  the
    appellant was looking after the 1 year old son on  a  day-to-day  basis
    (paragraph 12).  The judge had regard to the case law in Gulshan [2013]
    UKUT 00640, and allowed the appeal on the basis that, the Secretary  of
    State not having fully considered  the  effect  on  the  child  if  the
    appellant were to be returned to  Nigeria,  that  the  child's  welfare
    required the appellant to be  in  the  UK  to  provide  him  with  care
    (paragraph 23).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred with  respect  to
    the decision under Article 8, in failing to properly heed the direction
    in Gulshan that compelling circumstances were required before one could
    consider the position under the Article 8  if  the  appellant  did  not
    already succeed under the Immigration Rules.

 6. On 25th September 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 7. At the hearing before me  on  5th  December  2014,  the  appellant  was
    represented by Mr Augustine Otor-Osagie, and the  Respondent  Secretary
    of State (who was appealing before me on this occasion) was represented
    by Mr David Mills.  Mr David Mills, submitted that when the Grounds  of
    Appeal were drafted, the point was taken that there was an intermediary
    test under Gulshan that had to be satisfied before one could go  on  to
    consider Article 8.  The failure of the judge to do this  rendered  his
    determination unsafe.  However, since then, the case of MM in the Court
    of Appeal (see MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985),  now  confirmed  that
    all that was required was an arguable  case  that  there  may  be  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   Furthermore,
    this had been adopted only a day before this hearing in a determination
    by the Upper Tribunal in the case of Oludoyi [2014] UKUT  00539.   This
    being so, Mr David Mills submitted that he would have to  concede  that
    the Grounds of Appeal could no longer be sustained.

 8. For his part, Mr Augustine Otor-Osagie submitted that if that  was  the
    case, he could not add very much.

No Error of Law

 9. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside that decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

10. First, it is clear, that the judge does refer to Gulshan (at  paragraph
    18) and applies the test as stipulated by Gulshan (even if that test is
    now no longer  sustainable),  by  requiring  an  additional  basis  for
    "compelling circumstances".  This, as the judge explained, was  a  case
    if one had regard to the  Section  55  obligation  of  the  BCIA  2009,
    whereby a decision maker had to have full regard to the welfare of  the
    child in any arrangement, and the Secretary of State had  not  done  so
    (see paragraph 19).  The judge having looked at  the  factual  scenario
    himself, concluded that as far as the appellant was concerned, he  sees
    the child every day and regularly has the child to  stay  overnight  in
    this case although the child is  of  a  tender  age"  and  that  "I  am
    satisfied that it  is  not  in  the  child's  welfare  to  require  the
    appellant to leave the UK for an indefinite period and thereby separate
    the child from his father and deprive the child of his  primary  carer"
    (paragraph 23).  The judge was entitled to come to this view,  even  if
    he was applying the strictures in Gulshan.

11. Second, and in any event, the position in Gulshan has now been eclipsed
    by a number of cases beginning  with  the  case  of  MM  (Lebanon)  and
    culminating of late with the Tribunal decision in Oludoyi, all of which
    suggest that there is no intermediary test that additionally has to  be
    satisfied.  What is needed is an arguable case that good grounds  exist
    for granting leave.  The judge would have allowed the  appeal  on  this
    basis as well.  This being so, there is no error of law at all  in  the
    determination.

Decision

12. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The decision shall stand.

13. No anonymity order is made.


Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss        27th December 2014
