



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/49725/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        |              Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 19th November 2015                    |              On 4th January 2016    |
|                                         |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

                               mr manzur rasul
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs U Sood, of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of Pakistan born  15th  November  1986  appeals
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal, in respect of a decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge G  Cox)  promulgated  on  24th  March  2015,
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal against a decision of the  Respondent
    dated 21st November 2014 refusing to vary his  leave  to  remain  as  a
    spouse and deciding to remove him from the UK under S.  10  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 1999.

 2. By way of background, the Appellant came to the UK  as  a  student.  He
    entered on 20th April 2011 having obtained entry clearance  abroad.  He
    subsequently obtained further leave as  a  student  which  was  granted
    until December 2014. During the currency  of  his  leave  he  formed  a
    relationship with Rebecca Stevenson a British citizen. They married  on
    2nd April 2014 and he applied for leave to remain as a  spouse,  within
    the currency of his previous leave as a student.  The  application  was
    made on 27th October  2014  and  refused  by  the  Respondent  on  21st
    November 2014.

 3. On 21st November 2012 the Appellant apparently took an English Language
    Test, or at least that is what he says he did. The Secretary  of  State
    contends that a third party proxy test  taker  took  the  test  on  his
    behalf.  The  Appellant  was  originally  awarded  a   certificate   in
    recognition of this apparent success but, subsequently, the Educational
    Testing Services (ETS), an organisation  which  administers  tests  and
    reviews English language test results reported its view that  the  test
    results for this Appellant, had been obtained through  deception.  This
    led to a cancellation of the ETS Certificate. The Appellant had  relied
    upon the grant of this certificate when applying earlier  to  vary  his
    leave to remain as a student (granted on 8th March 2013) and  had  also
    submitted this certificate to obtain  the  Biometric  Residence  Permit
    (BRP) also issued on 8th March 2013.

 4. The Appellant applied on 27th October 2014, for leave to  remain  as  a
    spouse. In a refusal letter of 21st November 2014, the Respondent  said
    that the Appellant did not  satisfy  the  suitability  Section  of  the
    Immigration Rules because of  the  deception  surrounding  the  English
    language test. As a consequence he did not meet the eligibility section
    either, though it was accepted by the Respondent that his  relationship
    with Rebecca Stevenson was genuine. The Secretary of State then went on
    to consider the possible application of paragraph EX.1 of  Appendix  FM
    to the Immigration Rules but decided the requirements contained therein
    were not met either.  It  was  said  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances such as to justify granting the application under Article
    8  of  the  ECHR  in  circumstances  where  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules were not met, so the spouse application was refused.

 5. The Appellant's appeal against that refusal was heard by the First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Cox)  on  4th  March  2015.  The  Appellant  gave  oral
    evidence. He relied on a witness statement  supplemented  by  the  oral
    evidence. His wife was not present. Documentary evidence concerning the
    English Language  Test  Certificate  was  produced  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State namely the statement of Hillary Rackstraw who  is  a
    Senior Caseworker employed by the Home Office. Annexed to her statement
    is a copy of an excerpt from an ETS spreadsheet showing  the  Appellant
    as one of those identified within the ETS system as having his  English
    Language Test Certificate cancelled  because  of  using  a  proxy  test
    taker. In addition there were  statements  from  Peter  Millington  and
    Rebecca Collings both of whom have been heavily engaged  in  overseeing
    the delivery of a secure English Language Test System on behalf of  the
    Home Office.

 6. Judge Cox also noted that he had before him a  report  from  Dr  Philip
    Harrison a Forensic Consultant specialising in the analysis  of  speech
    audio  and  recordings.  This  report  as  I  understand  it  was   not
    commissioned on instructions from the  Appellant.  Instead  the  report
    appears to have been commissioned by Bindmans on behalf of a  different
    appellant.  Nevertheless Judge Cox referred to and noted the content of
    Dr Harrison's report, when reaching  his  conclusions  in  the  present
    case.

 7. Having considered the evidence, Judge Cox concluded  he  was  satisfied
    that the Respondent had  proved  that  the  Appellant  had  engaged  in
    deception in using a proxy test taker in his English Language Test. The
    Judge then reminded himself that what  was  before  him  was  a  spouse
    application. He looked to see if Article 8 right to private/family life
    could avail the Appellant. He noted particularly that  the  Appellant's
    wife did not attend the hearing or appear to support him by  way  of  a
    witness  statement.  He  noted  that  the   Respondent   accepted   the
    genuineness of  the  marriage  but  concluded  that  there  was  little
    evidence to show that family life between the Appellant and his  spouse
    could not reasonably be enjoyed in Pakistan. He therefore dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal.

 8. The Appellant appealed that decision  and  permission  was  granted  by
    Deputy UTJ  Saini on a renewed application, in the following terms.

         "The appellant renews his permission to appeal on the same  grounds
         with embellishment as to the errors in the decision.

         I am prepared to grant permission as it is arguable, as  stated  in
         the grounds, that the evidence  giving  rise  to  the  issue  of  a
         section  10  decision  did  not  comply   with   the   Respondent's
         Enforcement Instruction and Guidance which may render the  decision
         not in accordance with the law.

         It  is  also  arguable,  as  stated  in  the  grounds,   that   the
         unchallenged evidence of the expert was not the subject of findings
         against the generic and non-specific evidence from  the  Respondent
         as to deception practiced by the Appellant specifically.

         Permission to appeal is granted on all bases."

     Thus the matter comes before me.

Error of Law Hearing

 9. I heard submissions  from  Mrs  Sood  and  Mrs  Pettersen.  Mrs  Sood's
    submissions, so far as I understand them, focussed on whether Judge Cox
    erred:

      . In allowing the Respondent to rely upon evidence of deception  when
        the deception pertained to an earlier application, rather than  the
        present one.

      . The issue of whether deception was used  should  be  treated  as  a
        discrete one because the Appellant's case has always been  that  he
        did  not  use  deception  to  obtain  his  English  language   test
        certificate.

      . The Section 10 decision  was  incorrect  procedurally  because  the
        First-tier Tribunal's decision reflects no analysis of the detailed
        Enforcement Instructions and Guidance (EIG) issued by the Secretary
        of State as to how officers should  exercise  their  discretion  in
        removal decisions.

      . The FtT failed to consider  properly  the  expert  evidence  in  Dr
        Harrison's report.

    Mrs Sood finished her submissions with what amounts to  an  application
    to adduce further evidence on behalf of the Appellant,  because  it  is
    claimed that  he  is  suffering  from  stress  as  a  result  of  these
    proceedings.

10. Mrs Pettersen submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  directed
    itself appropriately on the burden and standard of  proof  required  in
    deception  cases.  The  Judge  had  properly  considered  the  evidence
    provided from ETS via the civil servants working in the Home Office and
    the Respondent was fully entitled to  make  a  removal  decision  under
    Section 10. The evidence  in  the  removal  decision  clearly  met  the
    requirements of the EIG. The expert's report was not challenged by  the
    Respondent since in the main it accepted that the  principles  used  by
    ETS were appropriate. Whilst the expert report did provide  a  critique
    of the ETS procedures that report itself was also a  generic  one.  The
    findings that the Judge made in the present case could not be  said  to
    be perverse or irrational. The decision should therefore stand.

Consideration

11. I find little merit in the first ground  of  appeal.  This  is  an  in-
    country appeal.  The  Judge  is  entitled  to  consider  all  available
    evidence at the  date  of  hearing.  He  took  a  carefully  considered
    approach to the evidence. In [13] [14] and [15] he considers whether he
    is able to admit the evidence of the deception on the basis that it was
    used not in the present application but in a prior one.  He decides  in
    fact that he should not admit the evidence on the  basis  that  it  was
    used in a prior application, but that he could admit it as evidence  of
    deception used by the Appellant when obtaining the Biometric  Residence
    Permit.  In [18] the Judge says the following:

         "Having carefully considered S-LTR.2.2 (a), it is my view that  the
         Respondent cannot rely on the main part of the provision, when  the
         alleged false information had not been submitted with  the  present
         application. Although the Respondent may have intended to enable  a
         decision maker to take into  account  deception  arising  from  any
         application, interpreting the first part of S-LTR.2.2 (a)  sensibly
         and adopting the ordinary and natural meaning of the  words,  I  am
         satisfied that only false representations, or false information  or
         false documents submitted in support of the present application can
         be considered within the main part of S-LTR.2.2 (a)."

     He goes on in [19] to say:

         "On the other hand, I accept the Presenting  Officer's  alternative
         submission. It seems to me that the ordinary and natural meaning of
         "a document used in support of the application", ought  to  include
         the BRP that  an  applicant  has  provided.   Since  the  BRP  will
         demonstrate that the applicant has existing leave to remain in  the
         UK and can therefore meet the requirements of E-LTRP.2.1."

12. I see no error on the part of the Judge in this  regard.  The  evidence
    was there before him and it formed the centrepiece of the  Respondent's
    case. The Appellant could not have  been  surprised  by  this  evidence
    since he was well aware of what the Respondent was  saying  about  him.
    The Judge was correct therefore to consider  all  the  evidence  before
    him.

13. The remaining grounds revolve around  a  criticism  of  the  Judge  for
    relying on the evidence contained in the statements put forward by  the
    Respondent.

14. Mrs Sood made much of saying that this evidence was "unreliable".  This
    was because it was generic based evidence and therefore the  Judge  had
    wrongly found as he did at [32] that the Respondent had acted  lawfully
    and in accordance with the Immigration Rules when exercising her  power
    to exclude the Appellant under the suitability requirements of Appendix
    FM. She placed into the equation, the report of Dr Harrison which,  she
    said, the FtT had found "impressive." Given that finding, the Judge had
    then wrongly placed little or no weight upon it. She suggested that the
    evidence advanced by the Secretary of State in cases such as this,  was
    generally unpersuasive and referred me to R v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department (ETS - Judicial Review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327 (IAC)
    I disagree.

15. The Judge gave very full and careful consideration to the  question  of
    whether or not the Appellant had used deception  with  respect  to  the
    test he claimed to have taken. He did so in passages running from  [21]
    to [31]. Amongst the points made were these; the process by  which  ETS
    had reached its conclusion was outlined and evidence was put before him
    confirmed the identity of the Appellant as  one  of  those  individuals
    whose test result had been deemed to be invalid; no argument  was  made
    that the Appellant's certificate issued on 21st November 2012  was  not
    the one referred to in the extract of the spreadsheet provided by  ETS.
    Instead the Appellant's representative at the FtT hearing relied on  Dr
    Harrison's report. That  report  was  unchallenged  by  the  Presenting
    Officer and it is correct to say that the Judge found  it  "impressive"
    but the Judge clearly decided that that report simply took  the  matter
    no further as far as this Appellant is concerned.

16. The FtT  noted  also,  that  although  the  Appellant  made  a  witness
    statement this did not specifically address the question of whether  or
    not he had submitted a false  certificate  in  support  of  an  earlier
    application for leave to remain. As the Judge found the  statement  was
    in fact "silent on the matter". He drew an adverse inference from that.



17. Therefore looking at all the evidence before him and properly directing
    himself on where the burden  and  standard  of  proof  lay,  the  Judge
    concluded that the Respondent had proved that the  Appellant  had  used
    deception by engaging a proxy test taker for his English Language  Test
    in November 2012.  Those were findings which the Judge was able to make
    on the evidence before him. They cannot be categorised as  perverse  or
    irrational.

18. Having made those findings, the Judge then  went  on  to  consider  the
    application of EX.1 and whether the Appellant could  avail  himself  of
    any Article 8 ECHR private/family life considerations. He noted that it
    was accepted by  the  Respondent  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and Rebecca Stevenson is a genuine one and that the Appellant
    is able therefore to meet the financial requirements of the Immigration
    Rules. However, as the Judge pointed out in [39] although he  was  able
    to attach weight to the Appellant's relationship with his wife and  the
    fact that the relationship was commenced whilst the Appellant had leave
    to remain in the UK, nevertheless he was obliged to note at [40]  there
    is a lack of evidence as to her circumstances. She did not attend court
    nor  has  she  submitted  any  written  testimony  in  support  of  the
    Appellant's appeal. There is a bare statement from the  Appellant  that
    his wife could not go to Pakistan and she does not speak Urdu.  In  all
    the circumstances the Judge was driven to conclude that  the  Appellant
    had failed to  demonstrate  that  his  wife  could  not  reasonably  be
    expected to accompany him to Pakistan. That was a conclusion fully open
    to him.  There was nothing further put before me in evidential terms to
    show that the Judge was wrong on that point. Likewise no  evidence  was
    put forward supporting the proposition that the Appellant is  suffering
    a stress related illness because of these proceedings.

19. For the foregoing reasons therefore  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the Appellant's appeal contains no  error  of  law.
    The decision stands.

Decision

20. This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made




Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Fee Award


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signature                                             Dated

