
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA492902014
                                                                 IA492942014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House               |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 3 May 2017                      |On: 19 May 2017                      |
|                                    |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR HE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [J H]
                                     [R]
                       (No anonymity directionS made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr L Rahman of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the  Secretary  of  State  for
   the Home Department and the [respondents are citizens] of Bangladesh born
   [1982 and 1984 respectively].  However, for the sake  of  convenience,  I
   shall continue to refer to the latter as  the  "appellants"  and  to  the
   Secretary of the State as the "respondent", which  are  the  designations
   they had in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.



2.    The appellants, who are husband and wife, appealed to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the   respondent   refusing   their
   application for indefinite leave to remain pursuant to Article 8  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fletcher
   Hill allowed the appeal pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention
   on Human Rights.




3. Deputy Tribunal Judge Saini found there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
   determination as the  Judge's  findings  were  contradictory  because  at
   paragraph 60 of the decision the Judge states that  the  removal  of  the
   oldest child would be reasonable in respect of paragraph 276 ADE (1) (iv)
   of the Immigration Rules but in respect of Article 8 and section 117B (6)
   of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 at paragraph  67  the
   Judge finds that the removal  would  not  be  proportionate  because  the
   appellant is a qualifying child and that  117B  (6)  is  met.  The  Judge
   allowed the respondents appeal and  retained  the  appeal  in  the  Upper
   Tribunal for a substantive hearing.




4. Thus, the appeal came before me.



    Remaking of the decision




5. At the hearing, I heard evidence from  the  appellants  where  they  were
   questioned, cross-examined and I asked some questions. The full notes  of
   the hearing are in my record of proceedings.




6. It was accepted  that  the  appellant  and  his  wife  have  three  minor
   children who were all born in the United Kingdom, on [ ] 2008, [  ]  2012
   and [ ] 2014 respectively. The first  and  second  appellant  married  in
   Bangladesh two months before the first appellant  left  to  come  to  the
   United Kingdom with a work permit visa valid from 17 July 2005  until  17
   July 2006. On 29 June 2006, the appellant submitted  an  application  for
   leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a student which was refused with
   no right of appeal on 24 July 2006. Thereafter the  first  appellant  was
   served with Notices IS 151A and IS. 96 on 24 November 2006  and  remained
   at large until he was arrested.



7. The appellant's wife entered the United  Kingdom  on  10  September  2007
   with a visit visa valid until  28  February  2008,  the  reason  for  the
   purported visit being to visit her siblings in the United Kingdom. I note
   here that she did not mention that she was  also  visiting  her  husband.
   Their children were all born in this country.  The  first  appellant  was
   encountered and arrested for working illegally at [ ] in Essex.




8. The ultimate question in this appeal is whether it  would  be  reasonable
   for the appellants to be denied further leave to remain given that  their
   daughter is a qualified child as she has been here for about  nine  years
   and whether it would be unreasonable for the family to leave  the  United
   Kingdom as a family unit taking into account the best  interests  of  the
   qualifying child including the other children. I  also  consider  whether
   there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the   family   relocating   to
   Bangladesh.



9. What are the best of interests the children have to be determined  taking
   into account  all  the  circumstances  in  this  appeal,  especially  her
   circumstances. The best interests of the child must be based on a careful
   consideration of the  likely  circumstances  of  the  appellant  and  the
   children if returned as a family unit to Bangladesh. I have to take  into
   account all the factors relevant to the  appellant's  qualifying  child's
   well-being if returned to Bangladesh.




10. I find the starting point as  to  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of
   children lie with living with their parents wherever they live. The  bond
   between parent  and  child  cannot  be  underestimated  and  the  child's
   equilibrium and security rests with being with his or  her  parents.  The
   other best interests  of  the  children,  also  includes  that  they  are
   provided with security, well-being, social integration, education and  to
   be clothed, housed and fed. If these objectives can be accomplished,  the
   best interests of the child would have been met.



11. It is clear from the case of MA Pakistan [2016] EWCA Civ 705,  that  the
   fact that there is a qualified child is a relevant consideration and  one
   that might be said to point to it being in the child interest  to  remain
   in the United Kingdom, but it is equally clear  that  the  assessment  of
   reasonableness must take account of the conduct of the claimant  and  his
   wife. To make  an  adequate  legally  and  factually  finding,  a  proper
   assessment of the best interests of the child must be based on a  careful
   consideration of the likely circumstances of the children, if returned as
   a unit to Bangladesh.



12. An objective evaluation needs to be made on the question of whether  the
   appellant and his wife would be able to get  a  job  in  Bangladesh.  The
   evidence is that the appellant has worked in this country and  came  here
   on a work permit. He was arrested while working in a tandoori  restaurant
   but at the hearing he denied that he was working and said that it belongs
   to his brother-in-law and he was visiting. I do not accept this  evidence
   that the appellant was not working  at  the  restaurant  given  that  his
   brother in law owned it. Even if he was not working at the restaurant, my
   decision would remain the same.




13. The appellant's evidence was that all men of his and his  wife's  family
   work as taxi drivers. He was asked whether he has a driving  licence  and
   he said that he was issued one in  the  year  that  he  worked,  in  this
   country, on a work permit. When he was asked why would  he  apply  for  a
   driving licence when he did not have a car, the appellant  said  that  he
   had always dreamt about having a car which is  why  he  applied  for  the
   driving licence.



14. I find that the  more  reasonable  explanation  for  why  the  appellant
   obtained a driving licence was  because  he  has  been  working  in  this
   country as a taxi driver. This shows that the appellant has the skills to
   be a taxi driver in this country and he can find a job as a  taxi  driver
   in Bangladesh. There is no evidence before me that the appellant will not
   be employed in Bangladesh and therefore can look after all his  children,
   including the qualifying child.




15. It has been alleged that the education of the qualifying child would  be
   interrupted and the syllabus in the United Kingdom is not consistent with
   the education system in Bangladesh. There is no dispute that there is  an
   education system in Bangladesh, which the minor children can access  even
   if the syllabuses are different. Education does not cease to be education
   because the syllabus is different. Therefore, the qualifying child  would
   have access to education in Bangladesh.



16. The qualifying child being at the age of nine is not at a pivotal  stage
   of her education and can adapt  to  life  and  the  education  system  in
   Bangladesh.  In the case of Azmi Moyed and  others  [2013]  UKUT  it  was
   stated that the children's connections the  United  Kingdom  become  more
   important from ages of 4 to 11. The qualifying child he is nine years old
   and therefore her ties to this country are still tenuous.




17. The evidence is that the qualifying child is clever and a  fast  learner
   and therefore will not have any problems in readjusting to  education  in
   Bangladesh. Requiring her to leave the United Kingdom in respect  of  her
   education is reasonable even if the quality of education is better in the
   United Kingdom than it may be in Bangladesh. There is no evidence  before
   me that the education in Bangladesh is such that it is tantamount to  the
   child effectively not getting an education. It  is  not  the  quality  of
   education which is the test that the fact that education will be given to
   the qualifying child, meets her best interests.



18. The first appellant has been working in this country and  therefore  has
   adequate skills to find a job and look after his  family  in  Bangladesh.
   Therefore, the qualifying child will have parents to look after  her  and
   her siblings and will provide them with security,  education,  and  their
   general upkeep. This would take into account the qualifying child's  best
   interests to be in a stable environment with her parents with  her  basic
   needs met. This equally applies to the other two children.



19. The first appellant came to the United Kingdom  in  July  2005  for  one
   year with a work permit. He had no legal right to remain after  his  work
   permit expired. Even though he was in this country  illegally,  his  wife
   entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa and continue to live  in  this
   country after her visit visa expired. They gave birth to  3  children  in
   this country knowing that there were here illegally. I emphasise  that  I
   do not take into account  only  the  illegal  status  of  the  qualifying
   child's parents in determining the best interests of the child however, I
   find that it is a material factor to be taken into account  to  determine
   reasonableness of return.




20.  The  other  reason  given  was  that  the  appellant  does  not   speak
   Bangladeshi. At the renewed hearing  the  appellant  and  his  wife  gave
   evidence through an interpreter. The appellant  said  that  he  does  not
   speak English very well and nor does his wife  and  that  they  speak  to
   their children in broken English. However, their evidence  was  that  the
   children speak in English with each other.



21. I find it wholly incredible that the appellant and his wife  would  have
   their three children living with them with whom they cannot  communicate.
   I do not find it in the least  credible  that  the  appellant's  children
   speak amongst themselves in English and the appellant and his wife cannot
   understand what they are saying other than a few words. I find  that  the
   appellant's children speak  Bangladeshi  and  therefore  they  can  enter
   education  in  Bangladesh.  Even  if  they   cannot   speak   Bangladeshi
   sufficiently well, they can learn the language on their return.




22. I accept that in respect of Article 8 all family  relationships  have  a
   knock-on effect on each other. The appellant's daughter is not a  British
   citizen but a citizen of  Bangladesh.  I  find  there  would  be  nothing
   unreasonable about requiring this family to leave the United Kingdom  and
   settle back in their country in Bangladesh, as a family unit. I also find
   that there are no insurmountable obstacles  for  the  appellant  and  his
   family  to  return  to  their  country  Bangladesh,  of  which  they  are
   nationals.




23. Considering all the evidence in this appeal, I dismiss  the  appellant's
   appeal. That finalises this appeal.




DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed.

I remake the decision and dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                    The 16th day of May 2017

