
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Numbers:
IA/49212/2014

                                                     IA/49214/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 9 March 2016                          |       On 30 March 2016             |
|Extempore                                |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                              TEMILOLA OLANIYI
                     ISABELLA GRACE IYANUOLWA OGHENERHO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I S Lamb promulgated on 1 September 2015  in  which
    he dismissed the appeal of the appellant against the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse to issue  them  with  residence  cards  as
    confirmation of their right of residence in the United Kingdom pursuant
    to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. The Secretary of  State  had  refused  to  issue  the  residence  cards
    requested on the basis that the marriage between  the  first  appellant
    and her husband, a German national who it is  accepted  was  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom, was one of convenience.

 3. The Secretary of State's case that the marriage is one  of  convenience
    is set out in the refusal letter and it can be  summarised  as  falling
    into two separate sets of reasons.  The first relates to the  appellant
    and her husband's arrival late on the day which was she  said  was  not
    explained.    The second set  of  reasons  are  to  do  with  what  was
    disclosed in the interview and  it  is  said  there  are  discrepancies
    regarding when they met, when they started living  together,  when  the
    proposal was made and where the second appellant attends school.

 4. It is not in dispute that in this case there is no  transcript  of  the
    interview available nor has the Secretary of State sought to adduce any
    file notes nor any other evidence in support of the assertions made  in
    the refusal letter.

 5. At the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal the Secretary of State was
    not represented. The appellants were represented there as before me  by
    Mr Balroop.  The judge records the submissions made by Mr  Balroop  and
    accepted that there was no interview available. What the judge does say
    is at [20]

         "I do not agree with the submission of Mr Balroop that  the  simple
         failure of the respondent to serve a full record of the  interview,
         coupled  with  the  explanation  for  its  absence,  entitles   the
         appellant to succeed on her appeal without  more.   I  cannot  take
         into account the evidence of the appellant and  her  witness  about
         their difficulty arising from inability  to  recall  the  interview
         because he did not tender that evidence, even though there  was  no
         one present to challenge it."

 6. The judge appears also to have considered  that  what  Mr  Balroop  was
    submitting was that the appeal should be allowed on the  basis  of  the
    procedural failure.  That, I accept, appears to  have  been  an  error.
    The judge found that the Secretary of State had made out her  case  and
    dismissed the appeals.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on  the  grounds  in  summary
    first, that the judge had misdirected hissed as to the relevant test to
    be applied as set out in the case of Papajorgji and, second, had  erred
    in his approach to the evidence in that he had taken  into  account  as
    evidence matters in the refusal letter  which  were  simply  assertion.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on
    26 January 2016.

 8. Mr Balroop before me relied upon  the  grounds  of  appeal.   Mr  Duffy
    submitted that for the reasons set out in the letter produced  pursuant
    to Rule 24 and dated 2 February 2016 it was clear that  the  judge  had
    directed himself properly.

 9. I indicated, having heard submissions that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an  error
    of law for the reasons which I now give.

10. The Court of Appeal has recently considered  the  issue  of  burden  of
    proof in regard to marriages of convenience in both Agho v Secretary of
    State [2015] EWCA Civ 1198 and Rosa v Secretary of  State  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 14.   The proper test is clearly set out by the Court of Appeal  in
    particular in Rosa at [24] and more particularly at [29].   It  appears
    however from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, in particular  at
    [10] and [11] that the judge misunderstood how the test is properly  to
    be applied.  It also appears from the judge's decision that he believed
    that there was some evidential burden on the appellants which would  in
    the circumstances of this case be incorrect.   It cannot be said that a
    refusal letter is in itself evidence particularly where  the  facts  of
    which it is said have to be proved by the author of the letter  and  in
    that sense the  judge  has  erred  in  law  in  accepting  as  evidence
    assertions of fact which are not in fact supported  by  evidence  which
    was not provided by the Secretary of State.

11. I note in passing that the circumstances of this case are significantly
    different from both Agho and Rosa in that there were in those  cases  a
    substantial involving of material provided by the  Secretary  of  State
    including reports of visits to the relevant properties.

12. I consider that it was not open to the judge to reach the  findings  of
    fact which he did given the failure properly to direct himself  in  law
    and accordingly the decision has to be remade.

13. In remaking the decision I heard submissions both from Mr  Balroop  and
    from Mr Duffy.  Mr Balroop submitted that there  was  nothing  in  this
    case for the appellant to prove.  She had shown and it was not disputed
    that she was married to a German national who  resided  in  the  United
    Kingdom and who is a qualified person by virtue of employment.  It  was
    submitted that in this case the Secretary of State has simply failed to
    provide any evidence to support the contention that this was a marriage
    of convenience.  Mr Duffy accepted that he was in  some  difficulty  in
    this case in the absence of evidence and relied on the refusal  letter.



14. I consider that in this case the Secretary of State  has  not  produced
    any evidence which is capable of being relied upon. What is said in the
    refusal  letter  are  simply  assertions.   They  are  not  in  and  of
    themselves evidence.  There is no transcript of the  interview.   There
    are no notes of what is said to have  transpired  on  the  day  of  the
    interview.

15. Bearing in mind that the burden in this case is  on  the  Secretary  of
    State to show on the balance of probabilities the marriage  is  one  of
    convenience, I consider that she has not provided  sufficient  evidence
    to do so and that accordingly, reviewing the evidence as a whole, I  am
    satisfied  that  this  is  not  a  marriage  of  convenience  and  that
    accordingly the appellants meet  the  requirement  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 and  therefore  ought  to  be
    issued with residence card as confirmation thereof.







    SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  18 March 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be  payable  as  the  respondent
has consistently failed to provide any evidence to support her contention.



Signed                                  Date:  18 March 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul





