
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49641/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2016                             |On 11 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                 jawad khan
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr. A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge De Haney, promulgated  on  7  July  2015,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to grant further leave to remain in the United Kingdom.






 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It looks like the Appellant's CAS was valid when the  application  was
    made on 31 July 2014 but subsequently became invalid when the sponsor's
    licence was suspended.  The only evidence that the appellant knew about
    this is in his email of 15 October 2014.  The effect of the decision on
    25 November 2014 arguably denied him the 60 days to find an alternative
    sponsor in accordance with  the  respondent's  policy  and  common  law
    fairness."


 3. I heard oral submissions from the Appellant and from Mr. McVeety.   The
    Appellant was not represented.  The nature of an "error of law" hearing
    was explained.  The Appellant confirmed that he understood that it  was
    the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  being  appealed
    against, not the decision of the Respondent, and it was not a chance to
    re-argue the points put before the First-tier Tribunal.  At the end  of
    the hearing I reserved my decision which I set out below with reasons.


Error of law

 4. Paragraph [10] of the decision states:


    "The Appellant today claims that he should be  given  further  time  to
    find another college because he was  unaware  that  the  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn.  However, the copy e-mail which he has provided  appears  to
    undermine this in that that e-mail is dated 15th October  2014  and  is
    enquiring about the status of his college, progress  and  classes.   In
    these circumstances it would appear to be that the Appellant  has  done
    everything he can in contacting the Respondent but does not  appear  to
    have been able to find a course that he has been able to sign up to  or
    ask the Respondent that he should be granted further leave in order  to
    do so.  Any 60 day period  therefore  seems  to  have  elapsed  in  any
    event."


 5. It was not in dispute that, when the application was made  on  31  July
    2014, a valid CAS was submitted.   The  CAS  was  not  valid  when  the
    Respondent made her decision on 25 November 2014.  It was  accepted  by
    Mr. McVeety that, if the college's licence had been revoked leading  to
    the withdrawal of the CAS, a "60 day letter" should have  been  issued.
    However, it was clear from the decision that this was not the  case  on
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.


 6. The reasons for refusal letter states on page 2:


    "The Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies  Checking  Service  was
    checked on 25 November  2014  and  it  confirmed  that  the  CAS,  with
    reference  number  E4G1KD9D16H0U0,  that  you   submitted   with   your
    application has been withdrawn by your Sponsor."


 7. The reasons for refusal letter does not indicate the  reason  that  the
    CAS had been withdrawn.


 8. There is a document at B1 of  the  Respondent's  bundle  entitled  "CAS
    details".  This states:


    "The CAS has been marked  as  WITHDRAWN.   The  details  are  displayed
    below.
    **WARNING - the sponsor's licence is currently suspended.**"


 9. This evidence was before the judge.  The suspension of a  college  from
    the Tier 4 Sponsor register would result in the withdrawal of the  CAS.
    However, what this  document  does  not  do  is  indicate  whether  the
    withdrawal of the CAS and the suspension of the college were connected.
     There is no indication in  this  document  of  when  the  licence  was
    suspended.


10. In his email of 15 October 2014, also before the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    the Appellant wrote:


    "With great respect that I am a student of NABT, I send my  application
    of visa extension under NABT, but the college is suspended now (out  of
    list) so please update me about the progress, status and classes."


11. The judge states in his decision that the  CAS  was  withdrawn  by  the
    Sponsor, paragraphs [3] and [11].  He does not state that this was  due
    to the Respondent having revoked  the  Sponsor's  licence.   There  was
    evidence before the judge that the college licence had  been  suspended
    after the Appellant made his application, but prior to the date of  the
    decision.  Such suspension would result in the withdrawal of  the  CAS.
    However, neither the "CAS details" document, nor  the  email  from  the
    Appellant, is evidence that it  was  this  suspension  of  the  college
    licence which led to the CAS being withdrawn.  The  Appellant  did  not
    provide any evidence to the First-tier Tribunal, such as correspondence
    from the Sponsor college, to show that it was  the  suspension  of  his
    Sponsor's licence which led to his CAS being withdrawn.


12. Following the Court of Appeal in EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA Civ 1517,
    it is only in circumstances where the Respondent has caused the CAS  to
    be withdrawn by reason of her own actions, such as revoking the licence
    of a sponsor college, that an applicant is entitled to a 60 day letter.
     The evidence before the judge did not indicate that the CAS  had  been
    withdrawn due to the revocation or suspension of the  college  licence.
    The undated "CAS details" document did not indicate  when  the  college
    was suspended.  The email provided by the Appellant  did  not  indicate
    that the suspension of the college was the reason for the withdrawal of
    his CAS.


13. The evidence before the judge was that the CAS had  been  withdrawn  by
    the college.  There was no evidence that this withdrawal was  connected
    with  any  revocation  or  suspension  of  the  college's  licence.   I
    therefore find that it was not open to the judge on the evidence before
    him to allow the appeal on the basis that the Respondent had failed  to
    exercise her own policy.  The judge did not make an  error  of  law  in
    dismissing the appeal.


14. I have not made an anonymity direction.


Notice of Decision


15. The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law and
    I do not set it aside.


16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Signed                                  Date 9 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

