
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: IA/49003/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                          |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th April, 2014                              |On 16th May 2014           |
|Signed 15th May, 2014                           |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                   Upper Tribunal Judge  Richard Chalkley,

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                IDOWU ANJOKWU


                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant:     Mrs H Rackstraw, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the respondent:          Mr MA Bhutyan, a solicitor's clerk with
Messrs. Haque & Hausmann, soliciotrs

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant is the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  and
      in this determination I refer to her as "the clamant".  The respondent
      is female, a citizen of Nigeria and was born on 9th December, 1975.

2.          The claimant appeals against the  determination  of  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Fox, promulgated  on  14th  February,  2014  supposedly
      allowing the appeal of the respondent  against  the  decision  of  the
      claimant, taken on 8th November, 2013 to refuse to issue  a  Residence
      Card under Regulation 15A(2) and 15A(4) of the  Immigration  (European
      Economic Area) Regulations, 2006 ("the regulations").

3.    The claimant's grounds of appeal point out that at  paragraphs  13  to
      16 of the determination the First Tier Tribunal Judge appears to  have
      made findings that the respondent is not entitled to a Residence Card,
      but then, at paragraphs 17 to 19 of the determination  says  that  the
      respondent should have been  granted  Residence  Card.   Further,  the
      First Tier Tribunal Judge says at paragraph 18  of  the  determination
      that the appeal is allowed on human rights grounds under Article 8.

4     Mr Bhutyan told me that his client was not  present  but  was  on  her
      way.  He confirmed, however, that he had no objection to the error  of
      law issue being dealt with in her absence.  Mr Bhutyan confirmed  that
      there was no Reply under  Rule  24  and  that  is  accepted  that  the
      determination does contain errors of law.

5.    Mrs Rackstraw invited me to remake the determination,  dismissing  the
      appeal since  the  respondent  could  not  bring  herself  within  the
      regulations; she could not satisfy Regulation 15A(2)  or  15A(3).   Mr
      Bhutyan accepted that the regulations are not satisfied  in  terms  of
      the respondent being  a  qualified  person  and  although  she  cannot
      qualify under Article 8 because she could not satisfy the  Immigration
      Rules,  he  suggested  that  she  could  succeed   under   Article   8
      jurisprudence.

6.    However, the First Tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  the  appellant's
      Article 8 appeal in paragraph 16 of the determination.  Section EX  of
      Appendix FM does not apply and the judge  found  that  there  were  no
      "insurmountable obstacles" presented to her  on  the  evidence  before
      her. I believe that given the judge's findings at paragraphs 13 to  16
      of the determination, what the judge said at paragraphs 17 to 20, were
      simple errors on her part which she failed to correct when  correcting
      and approving her determination.

7.    I am satisfied that Mr Bhutyan was entirely correct to agree that  the
      claimant was entitled to  have  her  appeal  against  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge's decision under the Immigration Rules  allowed in  all
      the circumstances.  I am satisfied that the respondent cannot  succeed
      in her human rights Article 8 appeal, given the judge's findings.

8.    Having carefully read the determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and the grounds of application, I am satisfied that the  determination
      of Judge Fox does contain an error on a point of law as identified  in
      paragraph 3 above.  The making of the previous decision  involved  the
      making of an error on a point  of  law.   I  set  aside  the  previous
      decision.  My decision is that the respondent's appeal be dismissed.

Decision


      The respondent's appeal is dismissed.
      [pic]
      Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
