
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49211/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Determination Promulgated |
|On 3rd December, 2014                    |On 19th December, 2014    |
|Signed 16th December, 2014               |                          |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                              ms thi hoa nguyen
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singh, Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a Vietnamese citizen who on 27th December,  2012  made
    application to the Secretary of State for a derivative  residence  card
    as the primary carer of an EEA national, namely her son Ricky Lee Tran,
    a British citizen.  Her application was refused and she appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant's appeal was heard  on  3rd  April,  2014  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hague.  He allowed her decision.

3.   On his behalf Greater Manchester Law Centre applied for  permission  to
    appeal on the basis that having allowed the  appellant's  appeal  under
    Regulation  15(a)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the Regulations"), the judge failed to deal with the
    appellant's Article 8 rights.   At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Singh
    referred me to paragraph 26 of the Regulations and in particular to sub-
    paragraph 7.  He suggested that the Rules had changed with effect  from
    2nd October 2000 which was the same date that the Immigration (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2000 were introduced.  He reproduced a  copy
    of the Immigration Rules  as  they  were  at  July  2006  and  drew  my
    attention  to  former  Immigration  Rule   paragraph   257(c)   headed,
    "Requirements for leave to enter or remain  as  the  primary  carer  or
    relative of an EEA national self-sufficient child."  At some point part
    of the EEA Regulations were in the Immigration Rules  and  Rule  5  was
    introduced, he submitted to ensure no duplication of either Rules.

4.    He  emphasised  that  it  must  have  been  the  intention  to   avoid
    duplication of the Rules.  He submitted, however, that  an  Immigration
    Judge has the power and duty to consider human rights appeals and  this
    judge should have considered the appellant's human rights  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  Paragraph 5 of Statement of Changes in  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 which says:-

         "Save where expressly indicated, these Rules do not apply to  those
         persons who are entitled to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
         by virtue of the provisions of the 2006 EEA Regulations.   But  any
         person who is not entitled to  rely  on  the  provisions  of  those
         Regulations is covered by these Rules."


5.   He submitted that it would be perverse if  an  Immigration  Judge  were
    prevented by Rule 5 of the Immigration Rules from considering  a  human
    right appeal.  He submitted that Regulation 26(7) refers  to  the  2002
    Act and by implication incorporates Section 83.  He suggested that  the
    judge's failure to consider and make findings under Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules to consider the appellant's Article 8 appeal  outside
    the Rules was an error of law.  Responding, Mr Harrison suggested  that
    the Reasons for Refusal Letter of 30th August, 2013  addressed  to  the
    appellant made clear that should the appellant wish to rely  on  family
    or private life then she must make a separate charged application using
    the appropriate form.  No such application was made by this  appellant.
    Human rights was not raised in the application.  There is a significant
    difference in the Home Office fees which are payable and  a  very  much
    higher fee would have been charged if the appellant had  made  a  human
    rights application.


6.   Mr Harrison suggested that it  would  be  extremely  difficult  for  an
    Immigration Judge to deal with an appellant's Article  8  rights  where
    there were no removal directions and  therefore  no  interference.   He
    submitted that the appellant had the opportunity to make an application
    under the Immigration Rules but had not done so.

7.   Mr Singh submitted that Article 8 was raised in the grounds  of  appeal
    to the First-tier and were referred to in  the  written  argument.   He
    told me that Article 8 had been referred to in the submissions  of  the
    representative appearing on behalf of the appellant before  the  judge.
    I pointed out to Mr Singh that there was  no  mention  at  all  in  the
    judge's Record of Proceedings of  Ms  Tasselli  having  made  any  oral
    submissions in respect of Article 8 and that in  the  circumstances  it
    appeared to me that the judge had not erred by not dealing with it.  He
    told me that the judge's Record of Proceedings was challenged in  those
    circumstances;  Ms Tasselli had made oral  submissions  in  respect  of
    Article 8.  Mr Singh referred me to a decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    Ahmed Amos.  He told me that the citation was [2013]  UKUT  00089.   He
    referred me specifically to paragraph 43, but told me he did not have a
    copy of that decision for me.  I asked him to ensure that  he  provided
    me with a copy.

8.   I reserved my decision.

9.   The appellant's application of 8th April, 2013 was made on  form  EEA2.
    It appears to have been  submitted  by  South  Manchester  Law  Centre.
    Following refusal of application, notice of appeal  was  given  and  in
    part 8 of the notice of appeal the following grounds were recorded:-

         "The decision  to  refuse  the  applicant  a  derivative  right  of
         residence breaches her  rights  under  the  Community  Treaties  in
         respect of residence in the United Kingdom.


         The decision to remove the  applicant  is  unlawful  by  virtue  of
         Section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act and in breach of Article 8  of
         the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).


         The decision is otherwise not in accordance with the law.


         That  the  person  taking  the  decision  should   have   exercised
         differently a discretion conferred by the Immigration Rules.


         That the decision is not in accordance with the Immigration Rules."


10.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Hague heard oral evidence from the  appellant
    which he found to be credible.  He had concluded that the appellant was
    the primary carer of her son and that her son's  father  and  she  were
    estranged and he plays no part in the life of the son.  He  found  that
    the appellant satisfied the requirement of paragraph 15(a) as principal
    carer and allowed the appeal.

11.  The Secretary of State's Reasons for  Refusal  Letter  of  30th  August
    refers to the appellant's application for a derivative residence  card.
    It also makes it clear that  any  application  to  consider  family  or
    private life rights needs to  be  made  in  a  separately  charged  for
    application.  The letter suggests that there  is  no  right  of  appeal
    against the decision, but the judge was satisfied  that  the  appellant
    had provided sufficient evidence of relationship and did have  a  right
    of appeal under Regulation 26(3)(a).

12.  Following the Secretary of  State's  decision  she  did  not  make  any
    removal decisions.

13.  Those representing the appellant had not sought permission  to  have  a
    copy of the judge's Record of Proceedings made available to them.  That
    is unfortunate.  I  have  examined  the  Record  of  Proceedings  which
    clearly records that the Presenting Officer made submissions  that  the
    appellant did not have a valid right of  appeal.   The  judge  recorded
    that he held there was a valid right if appeal and that  the  appellant
    gave evidence.  I  have  only  scanned  the  Record  but  can  find  no
    reference in it to the representative appearing  before  the  judge  to
    having made any  submissions  in  respect  of  Article  8.   I  accept,
    however, that Article 8 was dealt with in what  is  referred  to  as  a
    "skeleton  arguments"  but  what  is  actually  a  written  submission,
    comprising six pages with a further eight pages attached.

14.  To the extent that the appellant's family and private life rights  were
    raised in the skeleton argument, it was an error on  the  part  of  the
    judge not to deal with them.  However, it cannot possibly be said  that
    this amounted to a material  error  of  law  because,  as  Mr  Harrison
    pointed out, there is no interference with the appellant's  private  or
    family life rights; no removal  directions  had  been  issued  and  the
    refusal of a derivative residence card cannot  be  said  to  amount  to
    removal directions.  In any event the judge had proceeded to allow  the
    appellant's appeal and there cannot, therefore, be any  possibility  of
    the appellant being required to leave the United Kingdom.

15.  I have  concluded  that  the  making  of  the  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hague did not involve the making of a material error  of
    law.  The judge's decision stands.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
