
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49976/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2014                               |On 9 July 2014               |
|Prepared 20 June 2014                         |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRS HINA SIDDIQUI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Hill, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. In this determination the Secretary of State is referred to as such and
    the Respondent is referred to as the claimant.

 2. The claimant, a national of Pakistan, date of birth  6  November  1991,
    appealed against the Secretary of State's decision, dated  19  November
    2013, to refuse to vary leave to remain in respect  of  an  application
    made on 11 October 201 and to make removal  directions.   The  combined
    decisions  were  properly  made.   It   would   appear   although   the
    determination (D&R), dated the 4 March 2014,  of  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge Caskie (the judge) is less than  clear,  the  effective  decision
    made by the judge was to  allow  the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    variation of leave. The consequence  of  that  decision,  although  the
    judge did not state  it,  was  to  allow  the  appeal  against  removal
    directions.

 3. Permission to appeal the  judge's  decision  was  given  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parkes on 14 April 2014.

 4. The Secretary of States' grounds clearly set out the troubling  aspects
    of the approach taken by the judge in deciding to determine an  Article
    8 ECHR claim.

 5. It is clear the judge reached entirely the correct  decision  that  the
    appeal failed under the Immigration Rules. Quite  simply  the  claimant
    could not meet the relevant requirements under Appendix FM because  she
    had leave to be in the United Kingdom as a visitor. Therefore she  fell
    outside of the provisions of the Rules (D&R 4).

 6.  Nevertheless the judge then went on to consider a  general  Article  8
    claim. As is evident from paragraphs 5 and 10 of the D&R the judge  did
    not start with the question whether or not there was  a  good  arguable
    case and if so  were   there  compelling  circumstances  not  otherwise
    provided for under the  Rules.  Instead  the  judge  decided  that  the
    Article 8 ECHR  claim  succeeded  and  accordingly  there  was  a  good
    arguable case. In doing so the judge missed the  point  of  the  staged
    process  demonstrated by the decision in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640.

 7. It is also clear in the reasoning that the judge had regard to the best
    interests of the child (dob 23 January 2012), the father of  the  child
    is originally a Pakistan national who now has British  nationality  and
    may be a dual national, the Appellant is a Pakistan  national  and  the
    child is of Pakistan parents, whose birth is registered in  the  United
    Kingdom, is a British national and may be entitled to dual  nationality
    in Pakistan.

 8. The fact of the matter was as is made plain  in  ZH  (Tanzania)  [2011]
    UKSC 4 is that the  nationality  of  the  child  will  be  relevant  in
    assessing the best interests of the child in the outcome of  an  appeal
    but it is not determinative and it is not a "trump card".

 9. However, on reading the determination at paragraph 8 it is  plain  that
    the child's nationality is treated as being the  determinative  factor.
    There was in the exercise the judge purported to  carry  out,  although
    without express reference  to the cases of Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27  and
    Huang [2007] UKHL 11, no consideration of  the  public  interest  or  a
    balanced judgment for the purposes of assessing proportionality.  It is
    either clear that he did not apply the appropriate test or there  is  a
    deficiency of  reasoning  or  evidence  to  show  how  he  reached  the
    conclusion that such was the disruption and uncertainty that  would  be
    caused to the child, age 2 years, by the mother returning  to  Pakistan
    to apply for  entry  clearance  as  a  spouse.   The  judge  refers  to
    Chikwamba [2008]UKHL 40 which does  not  assist  in  understanding  the
    judge's reasoning for the finding made on proportionality.

10. For these reasons I  am  satisfied  the  original  Tribunal's  decision
    cannot stand.

11. At the hearing the Appellant started to indicate  a  general  claim  of
    threats while she, her  husband  and  child  were  in  Pakistan;  those
    threats related to kidnapping and extortion, how her husband  had  sold
    up all his property, at reduced price, and they fled to the UK to avoid
    such threats. These threats were said also to come from  her  husband's
    large family; who  were  involved  in  such  activities.   The  claimed
    threats were not a matter that had ever previously been  raised,  given
    there  was  a  paper  determination  of  the  appeal  it   is   perhaps
    understandable, but remains  unexplained.   Nevertheless  in  what  are
    extensive grounds of appeal  plainly  tied  in  to  this  claimant  and
    relating to the grounds before the First-tier Tribunal.

12.  Apart from a stray reference to a fear of persecution in paragraph 10,
    the grounds are all directed at the issue of right to be in the  United
    Kingdom and a violation of the children's rights rather  than  anything
    directed at a fear of ill-treatment,  persecution  or  proscribed  ill-
    treatment in Pakistan were she to return there let alone were  they  to
    return as a family. There was no evidence  of  delay  in  deciding  new
    applications  for  leave  to  enter  nor  was  there  evidence  of  the
    likelihood of material harm to the child.

13.  The original Tribunal's decision cannot stand

DIRECTIONS

 1. The matter must be re-listed in the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing.
    Not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Caskie.

 2. Time estimate: two hours.

 3. Urdu interpreter required.

 4. List for PTR.

 5.  No  findings  of  fact  to  stand  other  than  in  relation  to   the
    determination on the claim under the Immigration Rules.  The sole issue
    therefore is whether or not in the light of  the  case  law  Article  8
    falls to be considered and if so on what basis  and  whether  there  is
    sufficient grounds to show there is a good arguable  case  and  whether
    there are compelling circumstances  that  militate  in  favour  of  her
    remaining.

 6. No anonymity order was made previously but it will be for the judge re-
    making this case to consider whether one is appropriate or necessary.


Signed                                  Date6 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


