
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/49213/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2015                  |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                             malik ehtasham ali
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Taylor-Gee, Counsel instructed by Inayat
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15 November 1985 and now
    aged 29 years.  He appealed against the decision dated 6 November  2014
    to refuse him leave to remain.  His  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Hagan on 16 March 2015 and in a  decision  promulgated
    on 25 March 2015 Judge O'Hagan  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds and further to
    the Immigration Rules.

 2. The background to the appeal was set out by Judge O'Hagan at  paragraph
    5 where he stated that the appellant entered the UK on  29  March  2010
    with entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid from  1  March
    2010 and that leave was subsequently extended to 5 May 2014.  On 23 May
    2012 his leave was curtailed because of difficulties that had arisen at
    the college where he was studying.  On 24 December 2012  the  appellant
    made his current application for indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a child over 18.  He was  last  granted  leave  under
    paragraph 302  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  application  was
    refused.   The  decision  was  subsequently   reconsidered   when   the
    application was again refused.  It was that refusal which  came  before
    the judge.

 3. The judge specifically noted at 6(i) that the respondent  had  rejected
    the  application  under  the  provisions  of  Paragraph  298   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The appellant was recorded as being over the age of
    18 and he had not been granted leave to enter or remain with a view  to
    settlement under paragraph 302 or Appendix FM.  As such  he  could  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 298(ii) of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge also referred to the rejection of the appellant's claim under
    paragraph 276ADE.

 4. At the hearing before me  Ms  Taylor-Gee  relied  on  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal and in particular she stated that  ground  1,  the
    judge erred in requiring corroborative evidence.  The  ground  set  out
    that the judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness  but
    a clear if not primary principle  reason  why  the  judge  refused  the
    appeal was due to the lack of corroborative evidence as could  be  seen
    from paragraphs 45 to 48.  The lack of  evidence  was  the  very  first
    point relied on by the judge.  Further to ST (corroboration  -  Kasola)
    Ethiopia [2004]  UKIAT  00119  it  was  an  error  of  law  to  require
    corroboration.

 5. At paragraph 38 it is clear to my mind that the judge considered all of
    the evidence and stated that the appellant's claimed  account  was  not
    credible and putting aside the  reference  to  corroboration.   As  the
    judge states at [38]:

         "It is important that I emphasise that in reaching  my  conclusions
         about the credibility of the claim, I did not consider any  one  of
         the matters that I have identified as being determinative.  Rather,
         each of the individual matters identified  formed  a  part  of  the
         jigsaw of the evidence before me.  It was the cumulative impact  of
         all of those matters, considered  in  the  round  as  part  of  the
         overall tapestry of oral and written evidence before me, which  led
         me to reach my conclusion."

 6. Criticism was made of the judge's decision because he remarked  on  the
    lack of corroborative evidence in relation to (i)  the  assertion  that
    his uncles killed his  father,  (ii)  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    paternal family were wealthy and  powerful  people  who  wielded  great
    influence (iii) that the appellant's father had a legal interest in the
    land and bequeathed it  to  his  son  and  (iv)  that  his  uncles  had
    unlawfully confiscated such documents.

 7. As I stated at the hearing it can be seen from paragraph 15 of ST  that
    the fact that corroboration is not  required  does  not  mean  that  an
    Adjudicator is  required  to  leave  out  of  account  the  absence  of
    documentary evidence which might reasonably  be  expected.   An  appeal
    must be determined on the basis of the evidence produced but the weight
    to be attached to oral evidence may be affected by a failure to produce
    other evidence in support.

 8. It is  reasonable  for  the  judge  in  the  circumstances  to  request
    documentary evidence.  The account of the appellant is that his  family
    were wealthy,  powerful  people  who  wielded  influence  and  that  in
    particular there was an underlying land dispute which was said to  have
    been the motive for the murder of the appellant's father.  The judge at
    [48] confirmed that he was struck by the total  lack  of  evidence  and
    there was no documentary evidence at  all  in  any  of  the  papers  to
    support the appellant's claim that his father had a legal  interest  in
    land or property jointly held in Pakistan with his brothers nor that he
    bequeathed such interest to his son.  Indeed from the submissions it is
    suggested that even the appellant did not know the extent to  the  land
    he claimed.  The submissions were made on  the  basis  that  he  had  a
    potential claim.

 9. As the judge stated at [48]:

         "I find it surprising that neither the  appellant  nor  his  mother
         would have come into  possession  of  a  single  solitary  document
         relating to the appellant's father's interest in the land following
         his death.  I would have expected at the very least for there to be
         some documents held in the appellant's father's personal effects or
         by his solicitors or accountants or something of that kind".

10. Ms Taylor-Gee submitted that this was the judge looking at  it  through
    an Englishman's eyes as the judge  stated  there  was  nothing  in  the
    appellant's father's personal effects let alone by  his  solicitors  or
    accountants.  There is no indication that advocates  are  not  used  in
    Pakistan and as this narrative related to land it was open to make this
    finding in respect of the appellant's evidence.  No  evidence  was  put
    forward to confirm that land holdings in Pakistan are not evidenced  in
    documentary form.  Even taking the criticism that the judge should  not
    look through an Englishman's eyes all of the reports confirm that there
    are legal systems and advocates in Pakistan and this was  a  reasonable
    expectation by the judge.

11. As the judge indicated, it was not even clear how the appellant knew he
    had an interest in the land if  he  had  no  documentation.  The  judge
    stated that this was a man who was said  to  be  from  a  powerful  and
    wealthy family and that he personally had a legal interest in  a  share
    of the family's land and property and it was normal for such people  to
    have recourse to solicitors, accountants and such like to manage  their
    affairs.

12. As stated above it is not the sole reason that the judge dismissed  the
    claim.  The judge did consider the police report and noted that it  was
    not just the lack of corroborative evidence but  noted  that  from  the
    police report and evidence which was presented to the court  [44]  that
    the identity of the killers reported on the police report was  "unknown
    persons".  The judge stated "therefore whilst I accept  the  report  as
    evidence that the appellant's father was murdered it does  not  provide
    evidence to link the appellant's uncles with that crime".

13. The judge was criticised again for improperly rejecting the appellant's
    claim on the grounds of plausibility and specifically paragraph 50  was
    cited and this is what the judge stated in that paragraph:

         "If I were to accept the Appellant's account that  his  uncles  are
         rich, powerful men who had managed to seize  hold  of  all  of  the
         documentary evidence relating to the property and land, and for the
         reasons set out above I have difficulty  with  that,  it  does  not
         particularly assist his case.  In such  circumstances,  the  uncles
         would be in a very strong position indeed.  On the Appellant's  own
         account, they have physical possession of the land.  If  they  also
         have  possession  of  all  the  legal  documents  relating  to  the
         property, it is difficult to understand why they would  be  fearful
         of any potential claim that the Appellant might make. Having regard
         to the passage from the Home  Office's  country  guidance  which  I
         quoted at paragraph 39, he would be poorly placed to bring any such
         claim and they would be in a very strong position to defeat  it  if
         he were to try to do so.  It is not at all clear  to  me  why  they
         would, in such circumstances, seek to kill him or harm him for  the
         land or property.  This is not, after all, a situation  which  they
         are trying to gain possession of the land or  property;  they  have
         already done that.  On his own account, the Appellant has  made  no
         effort to challenge their possession of the land and, as I said, he
         would be poorly placed to do so.  Whilst it is  unlikely  that  the
         Appellant could disturb their possession of the land, were they  to
         engage in the criminality of murder or inflicting serious harm upon
         him, that could attract the attention of the authorities.  Even  if
         I accept the Appellant's account of the history is  true  and  that
         his view of the level of police corruption is also  true,  I  would
         still have to conclude that the  risks  to  the  uncles  of  taking
         action against the Appellant would be far greater  than  the  risks
         involved in simply doing nothing at all."

14. The application for permission to appeal cited Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ
    1223 such that  at  paragraph  25,  judges  are  reminded  that  it  is
    important to view events from an  appellant's  point  of  view  in  the
    context of the conditions in the country from which  he  comes.   There
    can be no doubt that at paragraph 43 the judge did set out the  context
    of the claim in terms of what happens in Pakistan and at  paragraph  44
    the judge specifically states that he considered the specific  evidence
    presented in the case.  At paragraph 50  supra  the  judge  also  makes
    reference to the passage from the Home Office's country guidance  which
    he quoted at paragraph 39 such  that  the  appellant  would  be  poorly
    placed to bring any such claim and that the uncles who were wealthy and
    in legal possession/legal possession of the land it was not  clear  why
    they would seek to kill him or harm  him.   Indeed  the  appellant  has
    decided to remove himself to the UK rather than stay and fight  through
    the courts.

15. It was also submitted  that  the  second  reason  for  the  persecutory
    treatment, namely the appellant's reason to refuse to marry his cousin,
    was because it was an attempt to keep the land in the family.   As  the
    land as the appellant claims was  already  in  the  possession  of  the
    uncles the appellant's refusal to marry his cousin  would  not  form  a
    foundation for his fear.  Indeed the judge acknowledges  and  addresses
    this issue at paragraph 53 and states that he could not accept that  if
    they were already in possession of the land  and  the  legal  documents
    that they would be anxious for him to marry his cousin and there was no
    need for them to insist upon a marriage to secure their  position.   At
    the close of paragraph 53 the judge said:

         "Culturally it is normal for people to marry  relatively  young  in
         Pakistan.  It is therefore striking that despite all that  is  said
         about their ruthlessness  and  their  determination  to  bring  the
         marriage about, actually they  appear  to  have  done  nothing  but
         simply allowed matters to drift over a period of several years"

    Thirdly, it was stated that the judge made no findings  in  respect  of
    the appellant's aunt's evidence and AK (failure  to  assess  witnesses'
    evidence) Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230 was cited.  The judge at  paragraph
    45, 46 and 47 confirmed that he explored the other documentary evidence
    including the witness statements and that he had  also  considered  the
    oral evidence.  He concluded that  he  found  nothing  to  support  the
    appellant's assertion that his uncles were responsible for  the  murder
    of his father.

16. At part 46 he stated, "this is all bare assertion with no  evidence  to
    substantiate  any  of  what  is  said"  and  in  the   light   of   the
    reasonableness of respecting documentary evidence I find that  this  is
    sound.

17. At paragraph 47 the judge stated that:

         "Save for what is said in their  witness  statements  there  is  no
         evidence presented by the appellant, his  mother  or  his  aunt  to
         support their account of the appellant's paternal family  as  being
         wealthy and powerful people who wield great influence.  I find that
         surprising  since  wealthy  powerful  people  who  wield  influence
         usually have a public profile which, in turn, generates evidence of
         a kind that is publicly available.  No such evidence was put before
         me."

18. These are valid reasons given by the judge for his conclusions  and  it
    is clear that the judge did address the evidence of the aunt.

19. The last ground was that the judge  failed  to  make  any  findings  in
    respect of the appellant's family life in the UK.

20. Mr Tufan pointed out the only criticism that could be made of the judge
    was that he continued to make findings outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    under Article 8 without good reason.  The judge to my mind explored the
    avenues of Article 8 thoroughly.  He found at  paragraph  58  that  the
    appellant could not  qualify  under  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM,
    (bearing in mind the sustainable findings, the appellant cannot succeed
    under Paragraph 276ADE), the appellant did not  have  a  child  in  the
    country and did not satisfy the criteria for  leave  to  remain  as  an
    adult dependent  relative.   The  appellant  only  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010 and was in his late twenties.   The  judge  found  that
    although he had a girlfriend  the  relationship  did  not  satisfy  the
    definition of a partner.  The only avenue open to him according to  the
    judge was outside the Rules.  Indeed the judge went on to consider  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights and the question of whether the  appellant
    had established on the balance of probabilities family or private life.
     On the facts  of  this  case  the  judge  stated,  "it  seemed  to  me
    reasonable to accept that  the  appellant  had  established  sufficient
    private life in the UK to cross the threshold of Article 8(1)".

21. At  paragraph  63(iv)  the  judge  clearly  states  he  considered  the
    relationship  of  the  appellant  with  his  mother,   stepfather   and
    stepsisters and accepted that they loved each other and it  was  normal
    for there to be love between a mother and son but  both  the  appellant
    and his  mother  sought  to  depict  the  relationship  in  terms  that
    suggested a closeness that "went far beyond the norm.  I did not accept
    that".

22. The judge found that the appellant was an educated,  intelligent  adult
    capable of leading an independent life and the most  telling  indicator
    that the relationship between them was the normal  loving  relationship
    that one might expect but no more than that,  was  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's mother felt able to leave him behind in Pakistan  when  she
    came to this country to marry her new husband.

23. In effect the judge found that the mother proceeded to relocate to this
    country, leaving the appellant in Pakistan where he remained  for  four
    years after she had left.

24. It is clear that the judge rejected in  the  first  instance  that  the
    appellant had a family life and found that he had a private life.   The
    judge correctly identified the elements of his private life finding  no
    family life and found that on balance the decision for his  refusal  of
    leave to remain and removal was proportionate.

Notice of Decision

25. There is no error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    which is thorough, comprehensive and well-argued and the decision shall
    stand.


Signed   Date 9th October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
