
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49773/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 February 2016                   |On 8 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                             MUHAMMAD IMRAN KHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Worrall counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ince  promulgated  on  23  June  2015  who  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  11
    November 2014 to refuse to grant him a Residence Card under  Regulation
    8(2) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as  an  extended  family
    member of his uncle Shafiq Ur Rehman a citizen of Belgium.

The Judge's Decision

 3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ince("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision.

 4. The Judge heard evidence  from  the  Appellant  and  his  EEA  national
    sponsor, his uncle and had a bundle of documentary evidence.

 5. The Judge found both witnesses to be credible and on the basis of their
    oral and documentary evidence he found that the Appellant was currently
    a member of his uncles household and was  dependent  on  him.  He  also
    found that the sponsor was self employed as claimed and was therefore a
    qualified person.

 6. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  arguing  that  having  found  that  the
    Appellant was an extended family member of the sponsor the issue  of  a
    residence card to an extended family member is at the discretion of the
    Secretary of State and as such the matter  should  have  been  remitted
    back to the Respondent. They relied on Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria
    [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC).

 7. On 21 September 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom gave permission to
    appeal.

 8. Before me Worrall also conceded that the Judge made an error of law and
    that the decision should be remade.

Finding on Material Error

 9. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made a material error of law.

10. There was no challenge to the findings  made  by  the  Judge  that  the
    Appellant was an extended  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under
    Regulation 8(2) of the EEA Regulations. The only matter  in  issue  was
    what the Judge should have done thereafter.

11. I am satisfied that Regulation 17(4) makes the  issue  of  a  residence
    card to an extended family member a matter  of  discretion.  Where  the
    Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most  an
    Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow the appeal as being not
    in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether  to  exercise
    this discretion in the Appellant's favour or not to  the  Secretary  of
    State. This is what the Judge should have done in this case.

Decision

12. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal with regard to the exercise of the discretion available  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations such that the decision  is  set
    aside

13. I remake the appeal.

14. I allow the appeal as being not in accordance with the law leaving  the
    matter of whether to exercise this discretion in the Appellant's favour
    or not to the Secretary of State.


Signed      Date 2.1.2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
