
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA490522014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2016                               |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                        Miss SUZETTE MARSHA McDONALD
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms Hyatt, Counsel instructed by Greenland Lawyers
LLP
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson  dated  12  April  2016.
    The appeal relates to a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Callow
    promulgated on 14 October 2015. The Judge dismissed the appeal  against
    the Respondent's decisions refusing leave to remain and a  decision  to
    remove the Appellant.

2.    The background to the Appellant's case was that  she  had  established
    considerable private and family life here in the United Kingdom because
    she lived here with her twin sister and she looked after her sister's 9
    year old son.

3.    Ms Hyatt in her submissions said she relied on the grounds  of  appeal
    drafted by her instructing solicitors and also to paragraph  5  of  the
    grant of permission by Judge Nicholson. She said  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had accepted that the Appellant  had  established  family  and
    private life with her nephew and in effect had parental  responsibility
    for him. The nephew was British. This was a parental role and therefore
    it was more important and pivotal. She said it was in the last three or
    four years that the physical and emotional bond had  developed  because
    her twin sister  had  suffered  domestic  violence.  That  had  led  to
    depression and there had been medical evidence before the Judge.  There
    were some "very dark days" for the Appellant's twin sister.

4.    Ms Hyatt said that none of the  facts  or  the  medical  evidence  was
    disputed. The Judge had  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  played  a
    significant role and takes the nephew to school etc. It was in that way
    that the twin sister was able to go to work. The twin  sister  did  not
    want the Appellant to rely on public funds.

5.    As for the legal  aspects  it  was  quite  clear  from  the  grant  of
    permission at paragraph 5 and from the grounds themselves at paragraphs
    8 and 9 that the Judge had not made adequate findings.  In  respect  of
    key matters relating to the best interests of the child in  respect  of
    section 55  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  ZH
    (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  which  were
    raised in the skeleton argument at the First-tier Tribunal,  they  have
    not been dealt with.

6.    As for the Rule 24 Reply from the Respondent the  position  could  not
    be cured. It was quite clear that there was insufficient weight  placed
    by the Judge on the best interests aspect. There was a need to  promote
    and to safeguard the  best  interests  of  the  child  and  that  these
    features  were  nowhere  in  the  decision.  Seemingly  there  was   no
    consideration of not just the emotional support but also the  practical
    support that the Appellant provided to her sister.

7.    Mr Whitwell in his submissions said that he  relied  on  the  Rule  24
    Reply. He said having seen the skeleton argument before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, it did not say that it was an argument run before the  Judge.
    As for the best interests of the Appellant's nephew, he relied  on  the
    Rule 24 Reply at paragraph 8. It was implicit in the determination.  It
    was good in law. The nephew was not  an  Appellant  in  cases  such  EV
    Philippines or Zoumbas.  Those were  children  as  part  of  a  nuclear
    family and were all removed as a unit.

8.     Here  the  disruption  of  the  family  would   not   have   dramatic
    consequences. Family life was taken into account.  A  failure  to  take
    into account a best interests assessment of someone not a party  to  an
    appeal does not amount to a material error of law.

9.    It was submitted that I was being asked to decide  whether  there  was
    an error of law, not whether the outcome ought to have been different.

10.   There was also another factor in respect of the facts.  At  paragraphs
    4 and 5 the Judge found that there was back up and in  respect  of  the
    sister's relationship. It may have been another reason for the  finding
    at paragraph 16. I was invited to dismiss the application.

11.   After hearing further from Ms Hyatt I had reserved my decision.

12.   In my judgment it is quite clear that there is  a  material  error  of
    law. Although  it  is  trite  law  that  the  Judge  did  not  have  to
    specifically refer to the statutory provision or to case  law  for  his
    conclusions, it was imperative that he at least referred to the correct
    legal test and legal language. There is no mention at all of  the  best
    interests of the child being a primary  consideration  in  the  Judge's
    decision. In my judgment it was necessary to do that.

13.   Nowhere does the Judge mention or get close  to  mentioning  the  best
    interests. It is a statutory provision. It is clear from  the  decision
    of the Respondent and from the Appellant's skeleton argument before the
    Judge that there was reference by the parties to this provision and  to
    the best interests to be considered. It is therefore more  than  merely
    fanciful that the Judge might have come to a different decision had  he
    applied those provisions and that case law. As much of the recent  case
    law at the Upper Tribunal shows in respect of  the  best  interests  of
    children there are important duties which apply to both  the  Secretary
    of State and upon the Tribunal. For example, in MK (Section 55-Tribunal
    options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 00223 (Mcloskey P  and  Perkins  UTJ)
    said,

    We take this opportunity to highlight that in all cases where section
    55 of the 2009 Act applies, the  requirement  to  perform  the  twofold
    statutory duties is unaffected by the statutory  reforms  made  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014 and, in particular, the insertion of the new  Part
    5A into the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  There  has
    been no amendment of section 55 of the 2009 Act. It continues to  apply
    with full vigour. It has not been modified  in  any  way  by  the  most
    recent flurry of statutory activity. Given that  "qualifying"  children
    feature in Part 5A, per section 117B(6)(a) and section 117C(5), in  the
    context of Article 8 ECHR, there is, of course,  some  overlap  between
    the two statutory regimes: the section 55 exercise will  be  duplicated
    to some extent in the Article 8 exercise. In  the  present  appeal,  no
    specific issue concerning the relationship between these two  statutory
    regimes falls to be determined. Both regimes will have to be given full
    effect by the Secretary of State in appropriate cases.

14.   Therefore I conclude that there  is  an  irremediable  error  of  law.
    There shall be a rehearing at the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law and is set aside. None of the  findings  shall  stand.


The Appellant's appeal shall be reheard at the First Tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 16 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood
