
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49574/2014
                                                               IA/49578/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 13 November 2015                  |On 9 February 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                    MRS VANDA LUCIA BOAS CANTUARIA VILLAS
                             MR MARCOS CANTUARIA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:
For the Respondent: Mr A Slatter, counsel instructed by Turpin & Miller
                    Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Appellant:  Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge NJ Osborne, promulgated on 22 June  2015,  allowing  the
    respondents' appeals against the refusal of their applications for  EEA
    residence cards.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on
    9 September 2015.

 3. The respondents previously applied for residence cards on  30  December
    2010 on the basis that the first respondent's son is married to an  EEA
    national. Those applications were refused owing to a lack  of  evidence
    of dependency and the appeals against those decisions were dismissed on
    26 July 2011.  A further application was made on the same basis and was
    also refused owing to a lack of evidence of dependency.

 4. The FTTJ was told by the first respondent  that  she  had  given  false
    evidence during her previous appeal. He accepted that she did so, owing
    to poor legal advice. He allowed the appeals on  the  basis  that  each
    appellant was entitled to a residence card.

 5. The Secretary of State appealed on the basis that the FTTJ had  made  a
    material misdirection in law in accepting that the  first  respondent's
    previous representative was guilty of improper conduct in  the  absence
    of any supporting evidence with reference  to  BT  (Former  solicitors'
    alleged misconduct) Nepal [2004] UKIAT 00311 applied.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted, with  FTTJ  Colyer  noting  that  the
    "first appellant had given false evidence at an earlier appeal hearing,
    contending that she did so having been advised by Fenix solicitors. The
    judge accepted that there had been improper  conduct  of  the  previous
    solicitors that (sic)  noted  that  she  did  not  provided  (sic)  any
    documentary evidence of a formal complaint of professional misconduct."
    Permission to appeal  was  granted  owing  to  the  FTTJ's  failure  to
    consider the case of BT.

 7. When this matter came before me,  Ms  Fijiwala  applied  to  amend  the
    grounds in the light of the decision in  Amirteymour  and  others  (EEA
    appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC). She argued  that  there
    had  been  an  unlawful  consideration  of  Article  8  by  the   FTTJ.
    Furthermore  she  wished  to  adduce  the  2011  determination  of  the
    respondents' previous appeal.

 8. Mr Slatter conceded there  was  merit  in  the  additional  ground.  He
    objected to the admission of the determination, stating that this would
    only be relevant if a material error of law was found. He would need to
    consider it and take further instructions in that event.  I  agreed  to
    amend the grounds to include the Amirteymour point  and  to  admit  the
    determination.

 9. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the first respondent claimed that  she  lied
    at her previous hearing owing to advice received. However she had  made
    no formal complaint  regarding  the  previous  solicitors.  The  FTTJ's
    approach was incorrect, in accepting the first respondent's unsupported
    evidence.  It was irrelevant whether the evidence was challenged by the
    presenting officer at the hearing. This error had infected  the  entire
    decision of the FTTJ.

10. Mr Slatter argued that it was not an error for  the  FTTJ  to  fail  to
    consider an authority that is not starred; adduced or  relied  upon  by
    either party and was not drawn to the judge's attention. It was not  an
    error for FTTJ to proceed on the basis that a  serious  allegation  was
    made without the solicitors being given an opportunity to respond.   BT
    was not authority for precluding the FTTJ from accepting that a  formal
    complaint had been made as the first respondent said in  her  evidence.
    Evidence, which was not challenged or contradicted by the Secretary  of
    State. The FTTJ's acceptance of the first respondent's evidence did not
    have any material bearing on his decision as to dependency.

11. I reserved my decision on the error of law  and  issued  the  following
    directions on 13 November 2015;-

         "Following the error of law hearing, in relation to the decision of
         First-tier    Tribunal Judge N J Osborne, I reserved my decision as
         to whether such an error was made.  Having  considered  the  matter
         further, I consider that an obvious issue has arisen which has  not
         been raised by either party; that is  whether  the  appellants  are
         entitled to  have  their  case  considered  under  the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.   Consequently,  I  make
         the following directions;

         1. Both parties are to provide written submissions  as  to  whether
         the appellants can be considered to be  either  family  members  or
         other/extended family members in view of  the  judgment  in  Soares
         [2013] EWCA Civ 575 at [4(ii)]; such  submissions  are  to  include
         commentary as to my jurisdiction to raise an issue not relied  upon
         by either party to the appeal.

         2. The Secretary of State's submissions are to  be  served  on  the
         Upper Tribunal and the respondents' representatives within  7  days
         of receipt of these directions.

         3. The respondents' submissions are to be  received  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal and the Secretary of State within 7 days of receipt of the
         Secretary of State's submissions."

12. There was no response to these directions from either  party  following
    which I asked to be sent  to  the  parties  again.  Upon  receiving  no
    further correspondence from the parties, I  resolved  to  arrive  at  a
    decision on the error of law alone.

13. I find that the FTTJ made a material error  of  law  in  accepting  the
    first respondent's claim that  she  deliberately  misled  the  previous
    judge owing to the advice of a previous solicitor and also that she had
    made a complaint about that solicitor.

14. In BT, the headnote reads, "... if an appeal is based in  whole  or  in
    part on allegations about the conduct of former representatives,  there
    must be evidence that those allegation have  been  put  to  the  former
    representative, and the Tribunal must be shown either the  response  or
    correspondence indicating that there has been no response."

15. In this case, the FTTJ took no account of BT and erred in accepting the
    first  respondent's  oral  evidence,  which  was  unsupported  by   any
    documentary evidence.  BT has been in the public domain  in  2004,  the
    FTTJ ought to have had regard to it and there was  no  requirement  for
    the Secretary of State to draw it to the FTTJ's attention.

16. I consider that the subject matter of the first respondent's  dishonest
    evidence was material, in that it went to a core issue  of  her  claim.
    She claims that she lied about her  assets  in  Brazil.  In  the  first
    appeal she spoke of having a property from which  she  derived  income.
    She now says that she only  said  this  owing  to  legal  advice.   The
    evidence relating to the property in Brazil is obviously relevant to  a
    claim of past or present dependency. It was as relevant  in  the  first
    appeal as it was in the appeal before FTTJ Osborne. This matter is also
    relevant in relation to the first respondent's credibility in general.

17. I accordingly set aside the decision of the FTTJ in its entirety,  with
    no findings preserved.

18. I have decided to remit these appeals to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  de
    novo, given the passage of time since the appeals  were  heard  as  the
    respondents may wish to adduce up to date evidence.

19. At any de novo hearing,  the  FTTJ  should  invite  submissions,  as  a
    preliminary issue, on the matter raised in my directions as to  whether
    either respondent is an extended family members given that  neither  is
    related to the EEA sponsor in question.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Columbus House, with a time estimate of 2 hours.

A Portuguese interpreter is required.


Signed:  Date: 6 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
