

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49349/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 August 2015                         |On 22 September 2015                |
|                                          |                                    |
|                                          |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Ms AMAL KHAFIF
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Khan, instructed by KC Chambers.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State  against  the
      decision of the First tier Tribunal (Judge James) dated  6  May  2015.
      In this decision, I shall refer to the parties as  they  were  in  the
      First tier i.e. Ms Amal Khafif is the Appellant and the  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department is the Respondent.

2     In that decision Judge James allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  against
      the Respondent's decision of 20th November 2014 refusing to  vary  the
      Appellant's leave to enter the UK, and making a removal decision under
      section 47 Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

      Background

3     The Appellant is a national of Morocco born on  20  March  1988.   The
      Appellant's husband, Mr Nadeem Siari ('the  Sponsor'),  is  a  British
      national resident in the UK, and of Moroccan descent. The Sponsor  had
      previously been married to Meriem Siari, and together  they  had  four
      children: three daughters, aged 16, 13, and 9, and a son  aged  6,  at
      the time of the FtT hearing. Regrettably,  Meriem  Siari  died  in  26
      October 2012 of breast cancer.

4     The Sponsor and Appellant met on an  internet  marriage  site  in  May
      2013. They first met in  person  in  June  2013.  They  married  on  4
      November 2013 in Morocco. The Appellant made an application for  entry
      clearance as a family visitor, which was granted on 13 February  2014,
      valid until 13 August 2014. She  entered  the  United  Kingdom  on  24
      February 2014 and then again on 29 March 2014.

5     On 11 August 2014 the Appellant applied for further  leave  to  remain
      in the United Kingdom, on form  FLR(FP).  Representations  from  Kings
      Court Chambers dated 8 August 2014 accompanying the  application  made
      submissions as to the Appellant's entitlement to leave to remain under
      Appendix FM of the immigration  rules,  but  accept  (M8  Respondent's
      bundle) that the Appellant was at the time of that application present
      in the United Kingdom as a visitor. Although  the  representations  do
      not accept in terms that this results in the Appellant not being  able
      to satisfy the 'immigration status requirements' of Appendix  FM,  the
      remaining arguments within the  representations  focus  on  Article  8
      ECHR.

6      By  email  to  Kings  Court  Chambers  dated  3  November  2014,  the
      Respondent requested further evidence in support of  the  application;
      original passports and  birth  certificates  for  the  Sponsor's  four
      children, and documentary evidence that the children resided with  the
      Appellant at their current address. That evidence was to  be  provided
      by 17 November 2014 (Respondent's bundle, O2). That email received  an
      acknowledgment (which appears to be an automated response) from  Kings
      Court Chambers on the same date (P2)

7     It would seem that  no  substantive  response  was  provided  to  that
      request for further evidence.

8     In a  decision  dated  20  November  2014,  the  Respondent  made  the
      decision refusing to vary leave, and to remove, on the basis that  the
      application was to be refused:

      (i)   under S-LTR.1.7 App FM (a mandatory ground on which an applicant
           'will  be  refused  limited  leave  to  remain  on  grounds   of
           suitability' (S-LTR.1.1)), on the basis that the  Appellant  had
           failed without reasonable excuse to comply with a requirement to
           provide information;

      (ii)  either as a partner, under E-LTRP.2.1, or as a parent  under  E-
           LTRPT.3.1, on the grounds that, as a visitor, the Appellant  did
           not satisfy the relevant immigration status requirement;

      (iii) as a parent, under E-LTRPT.2.2, on the grounds that it  was  not
           established that the children were  in  the  UK,  and  under  E-
           LTRPT.2.3 on the grounds that the Appellant did  not  have  sole
           responsibility for the children, and claimed to  live  with  her
           partner and the children;

      (iv)  on private life grounds, on the basis that the  requirements  of
           276ADE were not met;

      (v)   as the decision was not disproportionate under  Article  8  ECHR
           outside the rules.

      The FtT hearing

9     The Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision,  the  appeal  coming
      before Judge James on 10 April 2015. The Appellant clarified that  she
      no longer sought to advance her appeal under  the  immigration  rules,
      but under  Article  8  ECHR  only.  The  Appellant  and  sponsor  gave
      evidence.

10    The Judge found at  [43]  that  while  the  relationship  between  the
      Appellant and the Sponsor and his children had been relatively  short,
      there was a family life established between the all  in  the  UK.  The
      Appellant relied upon changes in her position since entering the UK as
      a visitor; the children had became attached to her such that she could
      not 'abandon' them [19], [35]; and  the Sponsor's  mother  Mrs  Habiba
      Siari (dob 10 October 1950 and therefore 64), had been  looking  after
      the  children  since  their  mother  died,  but   her   eyesight   was
      deteriorating and her arthritis was bad [24].

11    In that regard, there was a letter before the Judge  relating  to  the
      health of the Sponsor's mother, from Dr Chana of the  Watford  General
      Hospital dated 29 April 2014, addressed to Mr Frank Larkin, Consultant
      Ophthalmic surgeon at the Moorfields Eye Hospital.  The  letter  is  a
      referral to Mr Larkin. Dr Chana describes Mrs Siari as having  corneal
      scarring in the right eye,  left  childhood  amblyopia,  and  a  right
      cataract. The  old  scarring  in  the  right  was  probably  from  HSV
      keratitis. This was her only good eye with a visual  acuity  of  6/60.
      She was 'very visually disabled now'. It was said that 'in view of the
      corneal scarring we can't go ahead with the cataract surgery.  I  have
      reassured her that it will be a  very  guarded  prognosis.  Could  you
      kindly send her an appointment  to  reassure  her  or  offer  her  any
      assistance necessary."

12    It is not stated when Mrs Siari first  had  symptoms  arising  from  a
      cataract in her right eye, but it is to be noted  that  the  scarring,
      which  'probably' arose  from  herpes  simplex  virus  keratitis,  was
      'old', and the amblyopia in her left eye is a condition that  she  has
      had since childhood.  There was no further evidence before  the  Judge
      as to what if anything had arisen since the referral to Mr Larkin. The
      Judge acknowledged  that  there  was  no  evidence  that  Mrs  Siari's
      eyesight had deteriorated, but concluded that the Sponsor's mother had
      'very poor eyesight and was therefore limited in the support that  she
      can provide the children' [46]. The Judge had  previously  found  [43]
      that the Sponsor's mother, who had been  helping  to  look  after  the
      children, was no longer able to do so as she was visually impaired..

13    The Judge held that it was not practicable  or  reasonable  to  expect
      that Sponsor and the children to move to  Morocco  for  a  variety  of
      reasons set out at [45]; a finding which  is  not  challenged  by  the
      Respondent. The Judge also held at [47] that in light of the needs  of
      the children and the  family  life  that  has  been  established,  the
      suggestion that the Appellant return  to  Morocco  to  study  for  the
      English language test, before applying for entry clearance  to  return
      to the UK, was not a 'reasonable requirement'. The  Judge  noted  that
      the Appellant was at the tine of the FtT hearing pregnant and about to
      give birth, and ultimately held  that  the  proposed  removal  of  the
      Appellant would amount to a  disproportionate  interference  with  her
      family life [48].

      The Respondent's appeal

14    The Respondent challenged that decision in grounds dated 13 May  2015,
      which argue that the Judge erred in law by:

      (i)   failing to  acknowledge  and  balance  the  public  interest  in
           maintaining an effective immigration control against the  rights
           of the individual, in the overall proportionality assessment;

      (ii)  failing to treat the rules as an  important  starting  point  in
           that process;

      (iii) failing to refer to the considerations within Part 5A NIAA 2002;
           s.117B in particular.

15    Permission to appeal was  granted  on  these  interlinked  grounds  by
      Judge of the First tier Tribunal Fisher on 7 July 2015  on  the  basis
      that the grounds were properly arguable.

      Hearing

16    I heard submissions from both parties. Mr Kandola adopted the  grounds
      of appeal, amplifying them on them very little.

17    For the Appellant, Mr Khan sought to argue that there was no  material
      error  of  law  in  the  decision.  He  argued  that  the  Judge   had
      demonstrated within the determination that he had taken  into  account
      the importance of maintaining immigration  control.  For  example,  at
      [8], there was reference to  that  issue.  He  also  referred  to  the
      Sponsor's evidence set out at [22] that he fully understood  the  need
      for immigration control. Finally, at  [45]  the  Judge  held  "I  have
      considered whether such interference is proportionate to the  need  to
      maintain effective innovation controls." The  determination  disclosed
      no material error and was sustainable, he argued.

      Discussion


18    I am of the view that  the  Judge  has  materially  erred  in  law  in
      determining the appeal, in the manner  set  out  in  the  Respondent's
      grounds of appeal and summarised at paragraph 14 (i)-(iii)  above.  Mr
      Khan's references to certain passages of the decision do not  indicate
      that  the  Judge  adequately  held  in  mind,  as  a  public  interest
      consideration, the importance of maintaining immigration  control.  At
      [8], the Judge merely recites the Respondent's position, and does  not
      demonstrate that he engaged his own mind to address the issue  of  the
      maintenance of immigration  control.  Similarly,  at  [22],  there  is
      merely a recitation of the evidence given by the sponsor. The  Judge's
      comments at [45] do not in my opinion establish that  the  Judge  held
      clearly in mind the importance  of  considering  the  public  interest
      question  of  maintaining  immigration  control  when  performing  the
      proportionality balancing exercise.

19    As argued by the Respondent,  the  Administrative  Court  held  in,  R
      (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712:

           "12.The Immigration Rules are the important first stage and  the
           focus of Article 8 assessments. Indeed it will be  an  error  of
           law not to address Article 8 by  reference  to  the  Rules.  The
           position is explained by the Court of Appeal in Halleemudeen  at
           paragraphs 40 to 42, 47 and 51."


      And, as per Halleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558, para 47:

           "The passages from the judgments in the cases of  Nagre  and  MF
           (Nigeria) appear to give the Rules greater weight than as merely
           a starting point for the consideration of the proportionality of
           an interference with Article 8 rights.""

20    Having observed at [4] that "As the Appellant does not  seek  to  rely
      upon the Rules in this appeal, it suffices to say that after  analysis
      the Respondent determined that the Appellant had failed  to  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules." I would respectfully disagree; it  is  not
      sufficient merely to acknowledge that an appellant does not  meet  the
      rules; rather, some degree of reference must be made to the reason why
      the appellant does not do so, together with a consideration of whether
      a particular rule closely follows rights enshrined  in  the  ECHR,  or
      whether there is a noticeable gap between the two.

21    Further, I am of the view that the Respondent's  second  ground,  that
      the Judge did not consider the terms of the immigration rules as being
      a relevant starting point for the  proportionality  consideration,  is
      made out.

22    Relevant to these two issues ((i) the degree to  which  a  failure  to
      meet the immigration rules  is  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the
      proportionately of an immigration decision, and (ii)  the  appropriate
      starting point in that assessment) is the recent case of SS (Congo)  v
      SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387. I understand the following  points  to  have
      been made within the Court's single judgment (emphasis added):

      (i)   If there was a wide gap between the  way  in  which  immigration
           rules were  framed,  and  the  protection  that  was  rightfully
           afforded under Article 8 ECHR, then the practical guidance  from
           the  rules   as   to   public   policy   considerations   in   a
           proportionality balancing exercised was reduced [17].

      (ii)  On the other hand, if the rules were fashioned so as  to  strike
           an appropriate balance under Article 8, and any gap between  the
           rules and what Article 8 required was  narrow,  the  court  will
           give weight to the Secretary of State's formulation of the Rules
           as an assessment of what public interest required [17].

      (iii) Following MM v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985, there will generally be
           no or only a relatively small gap between the new LTE  Rules  as
           promulgated by the Secretary of State and  the  requirements  of
           Article  8  in  individual  cases,  including  those   involving
           Sponsors who are British citizens or  refugees  located  in  the
           United  Kingdom  [24].  Further,  outside  of  the  context   of
           precarious family life or deportation: '...if the  Secretary  of
           State has sought to formulate Immigration  Rules  to  reflect  a
           fair balance of interests under Article 8 in the general run  of
           cases falling within their scope, then, as explained above,  the
           Rules themselves will provide  significant  evidence  about  the
           relevant public interest considerations which should be  brought
           into account when a court or tribunal seeks to strike the proper
           balance  of  interests  under  Article  8  in  making  its   own
           decision.' [32].

      (iv)  Where the immigration rules were not satisfied, different  types
           of cases required the presence of different factors to  outweigh
           the public interest in the maintenance of immigration control:

           *      precarious  in-country  cases  not  involving   children:
                 exceptional factors [29];

           *     deportation: very compelling reasons [30];

           *     refusal of leave  to  remain  or  leave  to  enter  cases:
                 compelling circumstances [33], [40].

      (v)   The state has a wider margin of appreciation in determining  the
           conditions to be satisfied before LTE is  granted,  by  contrast
           with the position in relation to  decisions  regarding  LTR  for
           persons with a (non-precarious) family life already  established
           in the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State has  already,  in
           effect, made some use of this wider margin  of  appreciation  by
           excluding section EX.1 as a basis for grant of LTE, although  it
           is available as a basis for grant of LTR.  [40].

      (vi)   'The  LTE  Rules  therefore  maintain,  in  general  terms,   a
           reasonable relationship with the requirements of  Article  8  in
           the ordinary run of cases' [40].

      (vii) 'However,  it  remains  possible  to  imagine  cases  where  the
           individual interests at stake are  of  a  particularly  pressing
           nature so that a good claim for LTE can be  established  outside
           the Rules. In our view, the appropriate general formulation  for
           this category is that such cases will arise where  an  applicant
           for LTE can show that compelling circumstances exist (which  are
           not sufficiently recognised under the new Rules) to require  the
           grant of such leave' [40].

      (viii)      The approach to Article 8 in the light  of  the  Rules  in
           Appendix  FM-SE  should  be  the  same  as  in  respect  of  the
           substantive LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM.  In  other  words,
           the same general position applies, that compelling circumstances
           would have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or LTR  where  the
           evidence Rules are not complied with [51].

23    Finally, s.117A NIAA  2002  now  provides  that  in  determining  "the
      public interest question", ie the question of whether an  interference
      with a person's right to  respect  for  private  and  family  life  is
      justified under Article 8(2), Tribunals and Courts must have regard to
      the following considerations (in a non-deport case) set out in s.117B:



           "(1)The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in  the
           public interest.
           (2)It is in the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
                 (a)are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b)are better able to integrate into society.
           (3)It is in the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
           interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
           persons who seek to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom  are
           financially independent, because such persons-
                 (a)are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b)are better able to integrate into society.
           (4)Little weight should be given to-
                 (a)a private life, or
                 (b)a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
                 established by a person at a time when the person is in the
                 United Kingdom unlawfully.
           (5)Little weight should be given to a private  life  established
           by a person at a time when the person's  immigration  status  is
           precarious.
           (6)In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
           public interest does not require the person's removal where-
                 (a)the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                 relationship with a qualifying child, and
                 (b)it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
                 the United Kingdom."

24    It is not necessary to set out those  provisions  in  terms  within  a
      decision, so long as it is apparent that the relevant  test  has  been
      applied  (Dube (ss.117A-117D) [2015] UKUT 90 (IAC)).   However,  I  am
      not satisfied that the present decision discloses that the  Judge  had
      considered the above considerations adequately or at all.

25    I am of the view that these matters amount to material errors  of  law
      in the manner in which the Judge allowed the appeal  under  Article  8
      ECHR. I am of view that the determination is unsustainable and  I  set
      it aside, although I  have  retained  certain  findings  of  fact,  as
      discuss below.

      Submissions - re-making

26    I reserved that decision in the hearing, but invited  the  parties  to
      make submissions as to how the appeal  should  be  re-decided  by  the
      Upper Tribunal, in the event that I were  to  find  that  the  Judge's
      decision contained a material error of law. The parties  agreed  that,
      given the findings of fact made by  the  First  tier  Tribunal,  which
      would not in themselves  be vitiated by error of law by the  challenge
      brought by the Respondent, that no  further  oral  evidence  would  be
      necessary. The parties therefore made further oral submissions,  which
      I have recorded in the record of proceedings.

27    Mr Kandola relied on the reasons for  refusal  letter  dated  20th  of
      November 2014, and re-iterated the points  made  in  the  Respondent's
      grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal which have just been discussed
      above. Mr Khan made submissions in support of  the  appeal,  including
      asserting that but for the Appellant having limited leave to remain in
      the UK as a visitor, she  would  have  satisfied  the  rules.  If  the
      Appellant had merely waited to become an overstayer and then made  her
      application for leave to remain,  she  would  not  be  excluded  under
      immigration status requirements, so long as she satisfied Section Ex1.
      To dismiss her appeal on the grounds that she  applied  sooner,  as  a
      visitor, rather than later,  as  an  overstayer,  would  be  perverse.
      There were compelling reasons to allow the appeal outside the rules.

      Discussion - re-making

28    In re-deciding this appeal I retain the  following  findings  of  fact
      from the First tier decision:

      (i)   The Appellant, sponsor, and his four children have  developed  a
           family life in the UK. [43].  The  Appellant  is  the  principal
           carer  for  the   four  step  children,  including   help   with
           schooling, homework, cleaning, cooking and bathing. They have an
           excellent rapport (evidence at [15], which was credible [41]).

      (ii)  It would not be practicable or reasonable to expect the  sponsor
           and the children to move to Morocco [45].

      (iii) Although I am rather sceptical about the issue  of  whether  the
           Sponsor's mother has suffered any deterioration in her  eyesight
           or otherwise in her health since the Appellant's arrival in  the
           UK, I accept that due to  her  very  poor  eyesight  she  is  of
           limited support in providing care to the  children  -  [43]  and
           [46].

      (iv)  The children have come to rely on the  Appellant  and  would  be
           adversely affected by the Appellant's departure from UK [46].

      Additionally, I must take into account that the Appellant  now  has  a
      child who is approximately 3 months old. The house in which the family
      lives is  in  fact  the  Sponsor's  mother's  house  (representations,
      Respondent's bundle, M5).

29    It is, as per my error of law ruling, necessary  to  acknowledge  that
      the Appellant fails to meet the immigration rules, in the ways set out
      at paragraph 8(i)-(iv) above. The Appellant's claim was never  seeking
      to rely on leave to  remain  as  a  parent,  but  in  relation  to  an
      application for leave to remain as a partner, it is important to  note
      that the Appellant fails:

      (i)   on a mandatory suitability ground (the failure  to  Kings  Court
           Chambers to rely to a request for further evidence);
      (ii)  under the immigration status requirements; and
      (iii) by non-satisfaction  of  the  English  language  requirement  (a
           ground  not  actually  set  out  in  the  Respondent's  original
           decision, but it is not disputed  that  she  has  not  passed  a
           relevant English language test).

30    Neither the suitability ground nor the immigration status  requirement
      can be overcome  by  the  Appellant  seeking  to  establish  that  she
      satisfies Section Ex.

      The consequence of non-satisfaction of the rules

31    Appendix FM enables family migration under the rules in some, but  not
      all family life scenarios, as is acknowledged by Sales J in  Nagre,  R
      (on the application of) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)  paras  26-27.
      That fact did not result in Appendix FM being  unlawful  (Nagre),  nor
      are the financial eligibility requirements unlawful - MM & Ors, R  (On
      the Application Of) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Rev
      1) [2014] EWCA Civ 985.

32    The fact that the present Appellant has a family life in the  UK,  but
      does not satisfy the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  that  does  not
      necessarily mean, applying the analysis of the Court of Appeal  in  SS
      (Congo), that there is a wide gap between the way in which immigration
      rules are framed, and the protection that is rightfully afforded under
      Article 8 ECHR. In my view, the rules have indeed been fashioned so as
      to strike an appropriate balance under Article 8, and the gap  between
      the rules and what Article 8 requires is narrow.

33    The 'gap' between  the  present  Appellant's  circumstances,  and  her
      satisfaction of the rules, does not arise  because  the  Secretary  of
      State overlooked or failed to cater for some form of family life  when
      drafting the immigration rules.  Rather, the Appellant simply fails to
      satisfy certain conditions that the Secretary of State has consciously
      decided to include within the immigration rules as pre-requisites  for
      leave to remain under the rules on the grounds  of  family  life:  ie,
      being a 'suitable' candidate; not entering  as  a  visitor  and  later
      seeking to remain on family life grounds; and  speaking  English.  The
      fact that the Appellant does not meet these requirements does not mean
      that the nature of her family  life  is  not  adequately  catered  for
      within the rules; rather, the  rules  consciously  preclude  her  from
      qualifying for leave to remain on family life grounds.

34    I therefore find that for the Appellant, there is no wide gap  between
      the rules and the nature of the family life that  she  is  seeking  to
      protect. I find the fact that  the  Appellant  does  not  satisfy  the
      immigration rules them is a weighty factor against her  in  performing
      the proportionality balancing exercise.

35    However, I do not search for 'an arguable case that there may be  good
      grounds for  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the  Rules'  before
      proceeding to consider the Appellant's possible entitlement  to  leave
      to remain under Article 8 ECHR, as may appear to be indicated by Nagre
      at [30], as the Court of Appeal in MM Lebanon at [129] considered that
      there was "little  utility in  imposing  this  further,  intermediary,
      test. If the applicant cannot satisfy the rule, then there  either  is
      or there is not a further Article  8  claim.  That  will  have  to  be
      determined by the relevant decision-maker". The Court of Appeal in  SS
      Congo described the task to be performed in the following way:

           "44 ...,  If there is a reasonably arguable case under Article 8
           which  has  not  already  been  sufficiently   dealt   with   by
           consideration  of  the   application   under   the   substantive
           provisions  of  the  Rules  (cf  Nagre,  para.  [30]),  then  in
           considering that case the individual interests of the  applicant
           and others whose  Article  8  rights  are  in  issue  should  be
           balanced against the public interest, including as expressed  in
           the Rules, in order to make an  assessment  whether  refusal  to
           grant LTR or LTE, as the case may be,  is  disproportionate  and
           hence unlawful by virtue of section 6(1) of the  HRA  read  with
           Article 8."

36    I find, given the existence of family life, and having regard  to  the
      best interests of the children, that there is at  least  a  reasonably
      arguable case for the Appellant under Article 8, which I therefore  go
      on to consider, taking into account in particular  the  considerations
      under s.117B NIAA 2002.

37    I take into account the following considerations:

      (i)   The maintenance of effective immigration  controls,  is  in  the
           public interest, and I note that the Appellant does not meet the
           requirements of the rules  (s.117B(1) NIAA 2002).

      (ii)  The Appellant is not able to speak  English  (at  least  to  the
           required standard under Appendix FM) (s.117B(2) NIAA 2002).

      (iii) The  Appellant  is  probably  financially  independent,  as  her
           husband earns approximately �36,000 per  year,  although  it  is
           doubtful that the Appellant has provided evidence of  that  fact
           compliant with Appendix FM-SE. However, for the purposes of this
           proportionality assessment I am  prepared  to  accept  that  the
           Appellant is financially independent (s.117B(3) NIAA 2002).

      (iv)  The Appellant has not been in the UK unlawfully, and so no issue
           arises under s.117B (4) NIAA 2002.

      (v)   The Appellant entered as a visitor and her position  in  the  UK
           has been 'precarious'. Any private life (as  opposed  to  family
           life) that she has developed in the UK is  to  be  given  little
           weight, by reason of s.117B(5) NIAA.

      (vi)  The public interest does not require the Appellant's removal, as
           she has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with five
           qualifying  children  (all  the  children  are  British  -   the
           Sponsor's four children, and the Appellant's new born child,  by
           reason of being born in the UK where one parent is British) and,
           as per the preserved findings  of  the  FtT,  it  would  not  be
           reasonable,  to  expect  these  children  to  leave  the  United
           Kingdom.

38    Considerations (i) and (ii) militate against the Appellant.  (iv)  and
      (v)  are  irrelevant.  (iii)  and  (vi)  militate  in  favour  of  the
      Appellant; (vi) strongly so. However, I do not consider that  positive
      satisfaction of s.117B(6) as being the end point of the  deliberations
      on whether removal is disproportionate; but rather  as  a  significant
      factor to take into account.

39    I have regard to the best interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
      consideration. I find that the family life  that  has  been  developed
      between the Appellant and her step-children has come about as a result
      of the Appellant entering the United Kingdom as a  visitor,  and  then
      deciding to remain in the United Kingdom. Although  remaining  in  the
      United Kingdom and developing these bonds with the children created  a
      situation where the children were at risk of another separation from a
      mother-figure, I accept the Appellant's evidence  that  she  took  the
      role of second mother to the children out of a genuine desire to  look
      after the children and cater for then needs. I find that it is in  the
      children's best interest that  the  Appellant  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom with them, and to care for them.  However, the best  interests
      of the children are not a determinative factor.

40    I hold firmly in mind that the Appellant's step  children  lost  their
      biological mother only recently,  and  that  they  need  stability.  I
      accept that if the Appellant had to leave the United Kingdom, even  if
      only for a  temporary  but  uncertain  period,  for  the  purposes  of
      learning English and making an application for entry  clearance,  this
      is likely to have a very significant averse effect  on  the  children,
      and that her leaving the UK may  feel  to  them  like  losing  another
      mother.

41    I am also of the view  that  requiring  the  Appellant  to  leave  the
      United Kingdom to return to Morocco for  the  purposes  of  making  an
      application  for  entry  clearance  from  abroad  would  require   the
      Appellant to take her newborn child with her to Morocco.  She  is  the
      primary caregiver for this child. Requiring the Appellant's  new  born
      child to leave  the  United  Kingdom  would  deprive  the  Sponsor  of
      developing important bonds with their very young child for a number of
      months at a crucial time in the  development  of  the  child  and  the
      development of the relationship between father and daughter.

42     Although  the  Appellant,  thought  the  inaction   of   her   former
      representative, fails to meet the suitability requirements of Appendix
      FM, this in my view precludes her from being granted leave  to  remain
      under  Appendix  FM.  I  do  not  consider  that  failure  to  meet  a
      suitability requirement under Appendix FM mandates refusal of leave to
      remain  outside  of  the  immigration  rules.  I   have   taken   into
      consideration  the  policy  issues  lying   behind   the   suitability
      requirements of Appendix FM. The other mandatory grounds  for  refusal
      on  suitability  grounds  (S-LTR.1.2  to  1.6)   relate   to   serious
      criminality, such that it is conducive to the public good for a person
      to remain in the UK, or issues of character and  conduct  such  it  is
      undesirable for a person to remain in the UK. Although  the  Secretary
      of State has found it appropriate to include a failure to respond to a
      request for further evidence as amounting to a  mandatory  ground  for
      refusing leave to remain under Appendix FM, it is clear  that  such  a
      failure is of a different nature  than  the  criminality  and  conduct
      issues considered in S-LTR.1.2 to 1.6.

43    Even taking the Appellant's failure to  respond  to  the  Respondent's
      request  for  further  information  into  account,  I  find  that  the
      Appellant has now produced sufficient evidence to the FtT and to  this
      Tribunal to establish that she lives with the children. The failure to
      provide that evidence to the Respondent does not in my view  represent
      a significant factor requiring refusal of leave to remain outside  the
      rules.

44    It is ultimately the likely adverse consequences  on  the  Appellant's
      new daughter and her step children that I find amount to  sufficiently
      compelling circumstances in the present appeal (SS Congo v SSHD,  para
      33), to find that requiring the Appellant to leave the United  Kingdom
      would amount to a disproportionate interference with  the  Appellant's
      right to private and family life in the United Kingdom.




Decision

45    I find that the making of the decisions by  the  First  tier  Tribunal
      involved the making of an error of law.

46    I set aside the First tier decision.

47    I re-decide the Appellant's  appeal,  allowing  her  appeal  on  human
      right grounds.





Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

Date: 22 September 2015






