
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49281/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 July 2016                               |On 16 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                               mr Afnan Afnan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                   (Decision given orally on 22 July 2016)

 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Judge Behan,  issued
    on 13 January 2016, concluding that the appellant does not have a right
    of appeal against the Secretary of  State's  ('SSHD')  decision  of  25
    November 2014 refusing the  appellant  leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.

 2. The SSHD's decision states as follows, under the  heading  "Section  C:
    Right of Appeal":
         "You have made an application on  8  August  2014.   However,  your
         leave remain expired on 31 July 2014.  You therefore did  not  have
         leave to remain at the time of your application.
         There is no right of appeal against this decision"

 3. The appellant,  nevertheless,  lodged  an  appeal  against  the  SSHD's
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal, submitting  that  his  application
    for leave was made on 31 July 2014, which coincided with the  date  his
    leave expired, not 8 august as claimed by  the  SSHD.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that if this transpires to be the case then the appellant would
    have had a right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. In its determination the FtT concluded as follows:
         "11.     I am satisfied that the appellant believed at  least  when
             he completed the form that he had  submitted  his  application
             online but I am also satisfied that he did  not  do  so.   The
             application summary which he referred to as a receipt does not
             say that the application has been made and at the top  of  the
             first page of the application form the instructions  tell  the
             applicant to make  the  application  the  'official  document'
             (i.e. the application form) must be  sent  in  by  post.   The
             appellant relies on  guidance  from  the  respondent  but  the
             guidance he relies on is for online applications and the point
             is the appellant did not make an online  application  he  just
             used a computer to type in answers to  the  questions  on  the
             form and also to make pay  the  fee.   The  appellant  has  no
             documentary evidence to show he made an application using  the
             online.
         12.  One can see how there was scope for error if an applicant does
             not read the  form  and  the  guidance  carefully  and  I  was
             satisfied  the  appellant  did  make  an  unfortunate   error.
             However as was held in Wasif the respondent's procedures  were
             not unfair and in my  view  there  is  nothing  to  materially
             distinguish this appellant's case from that of Mr  Wasif.   In
             both cases the applications were not made until the forms were
             posted to the respondent.
         13.      I am satisfied the appellant used the so called print  and
             send procedure rather than the online procedure  to  make  his
             application.  ..."

 5. The reference to Wasif in the FtT's determination is reference to R (on
    the application of Wasif)  v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (rule 34 - print  and  send)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  0270,  the
    relevant paragraphs of the head note thereof stating as follows:
        "(ii) Between June 2013 and August 2014, Tier 4 applicants  had  the
            choice of submitting their applications either online or by the
            print and send mechanism.
         (iii)    The correct construction of the Rules is as follows:
            (a)   The first of these options required the submission of the
                completed application  form  online  and  the  provision  of
                supporting documents by post.
            (b)   The second option, print and send, required the applicant
                to print the completed application form and  send  it,  with
                accompanying supporting documents by post.   The  print  and
                send instruction does not amount to an online application. "



 6. In the instant case the appellant completed  the  relevant  application
    form on 31 July 2014 by typing the appropriate answers to the questions
    asked thereon.  He also paid the necessary fee on that  date.  However,
    he only sent the form and accompanying documents to  the  Secretary  of
    State on 8 August 2014.

 7. Mr Iqbal submits that  this  constituted  an  online  application.   Mr
    Whitwell maintains this was a 'print and  send'  application  which  in
    effect amounts to an application made by post.   In  my  conclusion  Mr
    Whitwell is correct in  his  submissions  and  the  FtT  was  therefore
    correct in its conclusion that the appellant did  not  make  an  online
    application.

 8. Mr Iqbal's  initially  submission  related  to  the  interpretation  of
    paragraph 12 of Wasif, which reads as follows:
    "The "print and send" mechanism was first introduced in  the  Rules  in
    October 2012.  I have, for convenience, reproduced in the  Appendix  to
    this judgment the version of paragraph A34  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which governed the Applicant's application at the material time (it has
    been superseded subsequently).  Giving effect to the above principles I
    construe this as follows:
      a) The opening paragraph establishes,  in  unambiguous  language,  two
         options: the applicant is to either complete "the  relevant  online
         application  process"  in  accordance  with  the  requirements   of
         paragraph A34(iii) or make use of "the specified application  form"
         in accordance with paragraphs 34A - 34D.
         Option 1
      b) The first option requires the application to be made via  the  UKBA
         website, in accordance with the process therein  stipulated.   This
         requires the applicant  to,  inter  alia,  select  the  appropriate
         "immigration category".
      c) Invocation of the online option requires any  specific  fee  to  be
         paid in accordance with the "method specified".
      d) Invocation of the online application option  clearly  requires  the
         completed application to be submitted on line by the relevant date.


      e) Where the online  application  option  is  selected,  the  Rule  is
         unequivocal  in  the  requirement  relating  to  the  provision  of
         "supporting documents":  these must be submitted by  post  "in  the
         specified manner within 15 working days of submission of the online
         application".
      f) Where the online application option is selected, the  sanction  for
         non-compliance with the relevant requirements is  unambiguous:  the
         application "... will be invalid if it does  not  comply  with  the
         requirements of paragraph A34(iii) and will not be considered."
         Option 2
      g) Where the second of  the  two  options  offered  is  selected,  the
         "specified application form" must be used and completed.   This  is
         accessed via the UKBA website.
      h) In this event, the appropriate fee  must  be  paid  in  the  manner
         prescribed.
      i) The specified types of information must be provided.
      j) The completed application must be accompanied  by  the  photographs
         and documents specified as mandatory in the application form and/or
         related  guidance  notes  and  the  form  must  be  signed  by  the
         applicant.
      k) Transmission of the completed application form, accompanied by  the
         stipulated photographs and documents, must be by pre-paid  post  to
         UKBA or in person at a public enquiry office of UKBA, subject  only
         to the exceptions listed.
      l) Where the "Print and Send" option is selected, the sanction for non-
         compliance with  the  relevant  requirements  is  unambiguous:  the
         application "... will be invalid if it does  not  comply  with  the
         requirements of paragraph A34(iii) and will not be considered."

 9. The competing submissions can be summarised  thus.   Mr  Iqbal  asserts
    that in paragraph 12 the  President  is  therein  concluding  that  the
    'print and send' application  process  is  a  subgroup  of  the  online
    application process. He further  asserts  that  as  a  consequence  the
    relevant date of application must be treated as the date of application
    was completed online submission and relevant  fee  paid.   Mr  Whitwell
    contended to the contrary i.e. that the President  concluded  that  the
    print and send option was not part of the online process and  that  the
    specified application form had to be sent to the Secretary of State. It
    is the date this is undertaken that is to be treated  as  the  date  of
    application.

10. I have no doubt Mr Whitwell's reading  of  paragraph  12  of  Wasif  is
    correct. In paragraph 12(a) the President identifies the 2  alternative
    processes for making an application to the SSHD. Immediately below that
    the online application process is set out in paragraphs 12(b) to 12(f).
    Thereafter, in paragraphs 12(g) to 12(l), under the heading "Option 2",
    there is a description of the alternative to the  online  process.  The
    print and send process is therein identified.

11. Mr Iqbal submitted in the  alternative,  for  the  first  time  at  the
    hearing, that the form found on the Secretary of  State's  website  for
    completion in print and send cases is not a specified application  form
    and, consequently, its  use  cannot  be  pigeonholed  into  the  second
    category of case identified  in  paragraph  12  of  Wasif,  i.e.  those
    applications which are to be made by  post.  This  is  said  to  be  so
    because an application sent by post must be made on an application form
    specified for that purpose.

12. There is, though, a complete absence of evidence produced in support of
    Mr Iqbal's contention in this regard. Although an adjournment was  made
    at the hearing in order to obtain such evidence I refused to accede  to
    such request, given both the late hour of (i) the  application  for  an
    adjournment, and  (ii)  the  submission  identified  in  the  preceding
    paragraph. In these  circumstances  I  reject  Mr  Iqbal's  alternative
    submission, given the absence  of  evidence  to  underpin  the  factual
    assertions upon which it relies.  In  any  event,  in  my  view  it  is
    implicit within  the  decision  in  Wasif  that  the  Tribunal  therein
    concluded that the application form found on the  Home  Office  website
    for  use  in  print  and  send  applications  is  indeed  a   specified
    application form.

13. Mr Iqbal finally submits that the print and send procedure is unfair.

14. In this regard I turn to consider the application  form  used  in  this
    particular case. Having done  so  I  observe  that  it  appears  to  be
    identical to the application form considered by the President in Wasif.
     It is of significance that it displays a number of features which  one
    would have thought should have led the appellant to correctly  identify
    the date to be treated as the  date  of  application.  I  highlight  in
    particular the following, found at the top  of  page  2  of  the  form:


         "This is your official document for your application.
         You need to submit this to  us  by  post  in  order  to  make  your
         application".

15. This is a perfectly clear statement of the procedure which needs to  be
    undertaken by an applicant before an application is treated  as  having
    been made.

16. In any event, the unfairness issue was dealt with by the  President  in
    Wasif (see paragraphs 12 and 14 thereof). I concur with the conclusions
    therein.

17. Mr Iqbal reserved a further submission on the issue of unfairness until
    his reply at the hearing, asserting that  page  8  of  the  appellant's
    application form contained false information regarding  the  amount  of
    monies the appellant required to satisfy the  maintenance  requirement.
    It is said that this false information was provided through no fault of
    the appellant's but because the date  of  application  was  treated  as
    being after 31 July. In short, if the appellant's application was  made
    on 31 July he required less monies to meet the maintenance  requirement
    of the Immigration Rules than if his application  was  submitted  after
    that date. It is said that this makes  the  print  and  send  procedure
    unfair.

18. I do not  see  how  the  provision  of  incorrect  information  by  the
    appellant on the application form, whether through  his  own  fault  or
    not, renders the procedure for making the application unfair. There  is
    simply no logical nexus between the two circumstances. It maybe that if
    the SSHD took against the appellant the fact that  he  had  acted  with
    deception in the instant application, this may be seen to be  'unfair',
    but this point was not taken by the SSHD in the instant case and I  can
    see no reason why such a point would be taken against the appellant  in
    the future if he were to make another application.

19. Finally, although not relied  on  by  Mr  Iqbal  at  the  hearing,  the
    appellant's grounds pray in  aid  the  more  recent  decision  of  this
    Tribunal in Prodobreyev  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00699  in  support  of  the
    contention that the date of application should be treated as  being  31
    July.  In my conclusion this decision adds nothing of substance to  the
    decision of Wasif and does not provide any support for the  submissions
    made in the grounds in this case.  Prodobreyev  is  a  case  about  the
    failure to submit a document with an application  form.  The  competing
    arguments in that case  related  to  whether  the  police  registration
    certificate was to be treated as a specified mandatory document. It  is
    the conclusion on that issue that forms the ratio of  the  decision  in
    Prodobreyev.

20. For all these reasons, and despite  Mr  Iqbal's  eloquent  submissions,
    I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal was correct in its  conclusion
    that it had no jurisdiction  to  hear  an  appeal  against  the  SSHD's
    decision of 25 November 2014.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
