
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49017/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 September 2016                       |On 18 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                                   Between

                         suchit bhupindrabhai desai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  India,  born  16  September  1986.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in 2009 with leave to enter  as  a  student.
    This leave was later extended, so as to be conferred until 10 May 2014.
     On 12 May 2014 the appellant submitted a human rights application, but
    this was treated as invalid due to non-payment of the required fee.

 2. Thereafter, the Secretary of  State  made  a  decision  to  remove  the
    appellant as an overstayer on 4 December 2014.  The appellant  appealed
    this decision to the First-tier Tribunal on or around 10 December  2014
    and two days later made a further human rights claim, which was refused
    on 22 December 2014 and certified  as  clearly  unfounded  pursuant  to
    Section 94(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Decisions of the FtT - jurisdiction

 3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle on  11  December
    2014, sitting as a  Duty  Judge  in  Arnhem  House,  Leicester.   Judge
    Doyle's decision is headed "Decision on preliminary issue -  validity".
    It identifies the respondent's submission as being that  there  was  no
    right of appeal against the 4 December 2014 decision (I observe at this
    juncture that the decision of 4 December 2014 itself identifies that in
    the Secretary of State's view there was a right of appeal  against  it)
    and goes on to say:

         "3.   The  Appellant  therefore  relies  on  Basnet  (validity   of
             application - respondent) Nepal [2012] UKUT  113,  which  held
             that if the respondent maintains that an application  was  not
             accompanied by a fee (and so is not valid) the respondent  has
             the onus of proof.  Further, that the respondent's  system  of
             processing payments with  postal  applications  risks  falling
             into procedural unfairness.

         4.   Mindful of the dicta in Basnet I direct

               a) That the appeal is listed for a substantive hearing.

               b) That at the substantive hearing the issue of  validity  be
                  decided.

               c) At least 14 days prior  to  the  substantive  hearing  the
                  respondent lodge  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
                  appellant any information showing that the correct fee was
                  not paid.

               d) At least 14 days prior  to  the  substantive  hearing  the
                  appellant  lodge  with  the  Tribunal  and  serve  on  the
                  respondent information showing how he attempted to pay the
                  fee..."

 4. The matter then came before First-tier Tribunal Judge M  A  Khan  on  6
    July 2015. Judge Khan did not deal with the issue of  jurisdiction  and
    wrongly  identified  the   decision   under   appeal   as   being   the
    refusal/removal decision of 22 December 2014.

 5. A notice of hearing had previously been sent to  the  appellant  on  21
    February 2015, at the address provided by him for service.  That notice
    also set out a series of directions to the parties. The  appellant  did
    not attend the hearing, provided no  explanation  for  his  absence  to
    Judge Khan for not attending, and did not seek an  adjournment  of  the
    hearing.

 6. As identified above, in his decision Judge Khan did not, contrary Judge
    Doyle's decision, consider the  issue  of  jurisdiction  -  but  rather
    determined the  substantive  issue  in  the  appeal  i.e.  whether  the
    appellant's removal would lead to a breach of Article  8  ECHR.  Having
    done so Judge Khan dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  the
    basis that he had not been aware that the hearing of 6  July  2015  was
    intended to deal with the substance of his appeal, and thus he did  not
    attend

 8. In granting permission  to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  was
    unimpressed by that ground but  granted  permission  on  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction (a ground not pleaded), which had  not  been  resolved  by
    Judge Khan.  Thus the matter came before me.

 9. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Jarvis quite properly accepted that  there
    was  no  issue  as  to  jurisdiction.  The  First-tier   Tribunal   had
    jurisdiction and both Judge Doyle and Judge  Hanson  had  misunderstood
    the relevance of the appellant's application of 12 May 2014  which  the
    Secretary of State had rejected as invalid because  of  non-payment  of
    the required fee.  This concession is plainly correct.

10. The application of 12 May 2014 postdates the date of the expiry of  the
    appellant's leave (10 May 2014). Consequently, even if it  had  been  a
    valid application his leave would not have been  extended  pursuant  to
    Section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971  as  a  consequence  of  such
    application having been made. Therefore, any decision to refuse a later
    application  could  not  under  any  circumstances  have  brought   the
    appellant's leave to end. That leave had already been brought to an end
    by the effluxion of time.

11. Second, the decision under appeal  before  the  FtT  was  in  fact  the
    decision of 4 December 2014 to remove the  appellant  from  the  United
    Kingdom. This was appealable of itself pursuant to section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Discussion and Decision

12. Having invited the Tribunal  to  accept  that  it  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had jurisdiction, Mr Jarvis submitted that the FtT's  decision
    on the substance of the appeal was legally  sound  and  should  not  be
    interfered with.

13. I observe at the outset that the identification by Judge  Khan  of  the
    wrong decision under appeal had no material impact. The Judge looked at
    whether the appellant's removal would breach Article 8 ECHR, as he  was
    required to do. The fact that he did so in the  context  of  the  later
    decision was irrelevant because the judge was required, and  did,  look
    at the circumstances as of the date of hearing - at  least  insofar  as
    they were before him.

14. Moving on to the issue of procedural fairness raised by the  appellant.
    The appellant accepts that he had notice of the hearing of 6 July  2015
    and also that he had Judge Doyle's decision prior to that date.  It  is
    absolutely plain from both Judge Doyle's decision and the notice of the
    hearing, that the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal of 6 July 2015
    was to deal with both the issue of  jurisdiction  and  the  substantive
    appeal.

15. Furthermore, the appellant accepts (i) that he was required to, but did
    not, send  any  documents  to  the  Tribunal  in  compliance  with  the
    directions and (ii) that there was no significant matter,  relating  to
    his personal circumstances, of which Judge Khan  had  notice  that  was
    left out of account by the judge in his  decision.   It  is  noteworthy
    that Judge Khan refers to legal representations made by  the  appellant
    (paragraph 11) as the  foundation  of  the  appellant's  claim.   Those
    representations highlight the relatively short period of time that  the
    appellant has been in the United Kingdom, the fact that he has built up
    ties with his friends here and assert that to return  him  to  his  own
    country would cause him to lose those ties and feel depressed.   It  is
    also said that the appellant is 'currently' depressed as a  consequence
    of the uncertainty stemming from his immigration situation.

16. Before the Upper Tribunal the appellant identified that his father  had
    passed away in India in 2010 and that he had not been  able  to  travel
    back to India since then. He further stated that as a  consequence  his
    family members were no longer speaking to him.  These were not  matters
    that were before the First-tier Tribunal and, in my view, are also  not
    matters that are capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

17. In short, I concur entirely with Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson's analysis
    of the grounds pleaded by the appellant, i.e. that they do not disclose
    any procedural unfairness.   In  addition,  even  if  there  were  such
    unfairness, the facts of this case as presented to both the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal are not such so as  to  be  capable  of
    leading to a decision in  the  appellant's  favour  on  the  Article  8
    ground.

18. The appellant plainly does not meet the requirements of the Immigration
    Rules and there are no circumstances outside the Rules of a  compelling
    nature that should or even  could  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  his
    removal would breach Article 8 ECHR.

19. For these reasons the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, despite  the
    identification by Judge Khan of the wrong decision as being that  which
    was under appeal, is legally sustainable, free from material error  and
    is to remain standing.

Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal  and  is  to  remain
    standing.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor



