
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49201/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30th July 2014                               |On 1 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                               MR abdul hameed
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant attended in person
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Abdul Hameed date of birth 19th  August  1978,  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking account  all
    of the circumstances  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Heynes promulgated  on  6th  May  2014.  The  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant  against  the  decisions  of  the
    respondent dated 12 November 2013 to  refuse  the  appellant  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse and to  remove  the  appellant
    from the United Kingdom under section 47 of the 2006 Act.

 4. The respondent has submitted a response to the grounds of appeal  under
    rule 24. In that response the respondent has stated that she  does  not
    oppose the appellant's application for permission to appeal and invites
    the Tribunal to determine the appeal with a fresh oral hearing.

 5. As set out above the appellant has been identified himself as Mr  Abdul
    Hameed. Part of the evidence in the case before the First-tier Tribunal
    had allegedly  identified  "Zubair  Mughal"  as  a  name  used  by  the
    appellant on at  least  one  other  occasions.  The  evidence,  it  was
    claimed, proved that the appellant had used the name Zubair  Mughal  in
    an application for a visit visa in  2006.  That  application  had  been
    refused. Thereafter the appellant in the name of Abdul Hameed had  made
    application in 2007  for  a  visit  visa,  which  ultimately  had  been
    successful.

 6. Part of the evidence had shown  that  someone  using  the  name  Zubair
    Mughal had made another application for entry to the United Kingdom and
    had had an appeal, which had been dismissed. In reliance in  part  upon
    that evidence the judge had made findings of fact with  regard  to  the
    credibility of the appellant overall. That  clearly  had  coloured  the
    approach of the judge to the whole fact-finding issue in respect of the
    appellant's current application to remain as a spouse.

 7. By letter dated 23 April 2014 the respondent  had  been  conceded  that
    part of the evidence relating to Zubair  Mughal  related  to  a  wholly
    different person. Whilst the application in 2006 was still  alleged  to
    be by the appellant, the application  which  had  gone  to  appeal  was
    accepted as not being the appellant. It was  accepted  that  in  making
    findings of fact the judge's  approach  may  have  been  influenced  by
    evidence, which was clearly wrong.

 8. In the response  to  the  grounds  of  appeal  under  rule  24  by  the
    respondent it had been accepted that the appeal would have  to  be  re-
    determined with a fresh  oral  (continuance)  hearing.  Before  me  the
    respondent's representative sought to resile from the  concession  that
    there needed to be a fresh hearing, in part seeking  to  withdraw  from
    the concession made under the rule 24 response.

 9. Given that the findings of fact made rely in part upon  evidence  which
    has now proved to be wrong, a fresh hearing is necessary.

10. At the hearing before  me  the  appellant  sought  to  produce  further
    documents. The representative for the respondent also sought to produce
    further documents which indicated that the appellant  at  the  time  of
    making his original visa application in 2006 had been married and had a
    child in Pakistan. There was no evidence before the Tribunal that  this
    first marriage in Pakistan had ever  been  terminated.   The  appellant
    claimed  that  he  did  have  evidence  that  that  marriage  had  been
    terminated but it was in Pakistan.

11. The appellant having entered on a visit visa in 2007  remained  in  the
    United Kingdom. Before  August  2007  the  appellant  went  through  an
    Islamic ceremony of marriage with Shazia Khan.  The  appellant  married
    Shazia Khan in 2009 describing himself as single for the civil marriage
    ceremony in the  United  Kingdom.  That  marriage  had  allegedly  been
    terminated after an alleged incident of domestic violence  or  2011  in
    March 2012. There  was  no  evidence  of  the  divorce  certificate  to
    terminate that marriage. In Spring 2012 the appellant met Shakina Khan.
    By July 2012 he had gone through an Islamic marriage  ceremony  and  by
    November 2012 had married in a civil ceremony. It is on  the  basis  of
    this latest relationship that the appellant was seeking  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom.

12. Given  the  new  documentation  submitted  without  evidence  that  his
    marriage in Pakistan had been lawfully terminated, it is arguable  that
    the latest marriage is null and  void.  The  appellant  was  not  in  a
    position to deal with the issue of whether and not that first  marriage
    had been properly terminated.

13. The Rule 24 notice accepted that there was a clear  error  of  law.  In
    light of the nature of the error it is appropriate for this  appeal  to
    be heard of fresh. Given the new evidence submitted it  is  appropriate
    that  fresh  findings  of  fact  are  made  on  all  issues.   In   the
    circumstances it is appropriate for the appeal to be remitted  back  to
    the first-tier forever full hearing in the first-tier.

14. In  the  circumstances  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I order that the appeal be remitted back to the  first-
    tier to be heard a fresh by judge other than Judge Heynes.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


