
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49659/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                            Mr RUHUL AMIN MISBAH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain, solicitor, Syeds Law Office
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge A W Khan promulgated on 13 April 2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 15/06/1984 and is a national of  Bangladesh.
The appellant entered the UK on 12 February 2010 with leave to  enter  as  a
Tier 4 student valid until 30 June 2011. The  respondent  granted  leave  to
remain as a student until 15  September  2014.  On  11  September  2014  the
appellant applied for leave to remain in the UK as the spouse  of  a  person
present and settled in the UK. On 5 November  2014  the  respondent  refused
the application.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge A W Khan ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  9  June  2015  Designated  Judge
Zucker gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    Whilst I do not exclude any of the grounds, the grounds  include
    the submission that the Judge was wrong to find that disability  living
    allowance used  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the  appellant  and
    sponsor, but paid to the sponsor by the state for the  benefit  of  the
    sponsor's sister, could not be relied upon.

    3.     The grounds are arguable."

The Hearing

6.    (a)   Mr Hussein, for the appellant, moved the grounds  of  appeal,  &
referred me to the skeleton argument lodged for the purposes of the  appeal.
He told me that the original decision  raised  three  material  issues.  The
first was that it was not accepted  that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
parties to a subsisting marriage. He told  me  that,  at  the  hearing,  the
respondent conceded that the marriage subsists. The  second  material  issue
related to a bank statement covering a 12 month period  showing  payment  of
carer's allowance and disability living  allowance,  and  the  third  was  a
refusal by the respondent to include the sponsor's sister's  entitlement  to
disability living allowance ("DLA")  as  part  of  the  calculation  of  the
sponsor's income.

    (b)    Mr Husein reminded me that at [18] and [22] of the decision, the
Judge found that the appellant and  sponsor  are  parties  to  a  subsisting
marriage, and that the necessary bank statements have been produced.

    (c)    Mr Husein argued that the Judge's decision  that  the  sponsor's
sister's entitlement to DLA does not form part of the sponsor's income is  a
material error of law. He argued that because the sponsor was  her  sister's
appointee for DWP purposes, she was entitled to spend her  sister's  benefit
in any way she saw fit. He told me that it is a  matter  of  fact  that  the
majority of the money received by the sponsor as  payment  of  her  sister's
DLA is  applied  to  the  care  and  maintenance  of  the  sponsor  and  the
appellant. He argued that expenditure is consistent with the purpose of  DLA
payments because it is money spent in the best interests  of  the  sponsor's
sister, because it is in the best interests of  the  sponsor's  sister  that
her carer (the sponsor) is adequately provided for.

    (d)    Mr Hussein noted that the Judge had considered  EX.1  and  found
that there are no insurmountable obstacles to family  life  continuing  out-
with the UK. He argued that in the particular  circumstances  of  this  case
that finding is irrational. He argued that the  Judge  has  given  incorrect
weight to material facts, and that the Judge had failed to acknowledge  that
at the date of hearing the sponsor was pregnant and approaching  full  term.
He  argued  that  the  decision  disclosed  a  false  logic  in  identifying
insurmountable obstacles. Mr Hussein argued that the Judge further erred  in
law in failing to carry out an article  8  proportionality  assessment  out-
with the rules, and in failing to give the appellant credit for factors  set
out in section 117B the 2002 Act.

    (e)    Mr Husein urged  me  to  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  and
substitute a decision in the appellant's favour

7.    Ms Johnstone, for the respondent, told me that the decision  does  not
contain errors of law material, or otherwise.  She  told  me  this  case  is
distinguishable from the case of MK (Somalia) v  ECO  Ethiopia  [2007]  EWCA
Civ 1521, because it is neither the sponsor not the appellant  was  entitled
to DLA, but the sponsor's sister, and the sponsor was obliged to  spend  DLA
benefit money in the best interests of her sister not apply  that  money  to
her own needs & the needs of her husband. She  relied  on  the  case  of  KA
(Pakistan) [2006] UKAIT 00065, and argued that when the  sponsor's  sister's
DLA entitlement fell from the equation, the funds available to  the  sponsor
and appellant fell short of the income support equivalent. She told me  that
the Judge was correct  to  consider  EX.1  and  that  his  consideration  of
section 117B of the 2002  Act  in  his  overall  proportionality  assessment
could not be faulted. She urged me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

8.    The central plank of the appellant's  argument  is  that  because  his
sister-in-law is in receipt of DLA and becasue that money  is  paid  to  the
sponsor as his sister-in-law's  appointee,  then  the  calculation  of  sums
available to the sponsor and the appellant should include that DLA  payment.
In a sense it  is  argued  that  the  appellant  benefits  from  third-party
support.

9.    The flaw in the appellant's argument is that the  weight  of  evidence
indicates that his sister-in-law does not know that  the  benefit  to  which
she is entitled is used to support the appellant. There is no  dispute  that
the sponsor is her sister's appointee  for  DWP  purposes.  The  appellant's
sister-in-law receives DLA because  she  has  a  learning  difficulty.  That
learning difficulty prevents her from managing her own affairs, and  so  the
sponsor is her appointee. Because the sponsor is her sisters  appointee  DLA
benefits are paid into the sponsor's bank account.

10.   The fact that DLA benefits are paid into the  sponsor's  bank  account
does not entitle either the sponsor or the appellant to help  themselves  to
those funds. The DLA benefits are  paid  into  the  sponsor's  bank  account
because the sponsor is her  sisters  appointee.  The  appellant's  solicitor
relied on extracts from the DWP website which explained that DLA is paid  to
an appointee who must use the money in the  best  interests  of  the  person
entitled to that money. In law, an appointee is a person who is acting in  a
fiduciary capacity. To some extent the  evidence  of  the  use  of  the  DLA
benefit payments is irrelevant. The determinative question is  "whose  money
is the DLA benefit?"

11.   The only answer to that question is that the DLA  benefit  forms  part
of the sponsor's sister's income, not the  income  of  the  sponsor  or  the
appellant. Even though the sponsor is the  appointee  for  her  sister,  the
benefit forms part of the sponsor's sister's income.

12.   In Yarce (adequate maintenance: benefits) [2012] UKUT 00425 (IAC)  the
Tribunal reconfirmed that the requirement to show that a person  or  persons
can  be  maintained  (or  will  maintain  themselves)  "adequately"  without
recourse to public funds has long been  a  requirement  of  the  immigration
rules. It continues to be a requirement for various categories of person  in
the amended rules that came into force in July 2012. In order  to  establish
that maintenance is "adequate" under the rules as in  force  before  9  July
2012, an applicant needs to show that the resources available will  meet  or
exceed  the  relevant  income  support  level  set  by  the  United  Kingdom
government (KA (Pakistan) [2006] UKAIT 00065). A similar requirement  is  to
be found in the definitions of "adequate" and "adequately"  in  paragraph  6
of the rules as amended in July 2012.

13.   In MK (Adequacy of maintenance  -  disabled  sponsor)  Somalia  [2007]
UKAIT 00028 the Tribunal held that, for the purpose  of  assessing  adequacy
of maintenance by reference  to  state  benefits,  the  standard  amount  of
Income Support, or Jobseeker's Allowance is the starting point for the  able
bodied: KA and others (Adequacy of Maintenance) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT  00065
applied.  Where a  sponsor  has  disabilities  it  should  be  assumed  that
enhanced benefits, such as a higher rate of Income  Support,  or  Disability
Living Allowance, have been awarded out of necessity and are  not  available
to support dependants coming from abroad.  In  AM  (3rd  party  support  not
permitted R281 (v)) Ethiopia [2007] UKAIT 00058 the Tribunal  reaffirmed  MK
(Adequacy of maintenance - disabled sponsor) Somalia [2007] UKAIT 00028.

14.   Paragraph 6 HC 395 states that public funds, to  which  recourse  must
not  be  had,   include  attendance  allowance  ('AA'),  severe  disablement
allowance ('SDA'), carer's allowance  ('CA'),  disability  living  allowance
('DLA'), personal independence payment ('PIP'), a social  fund  payment  and
child benefit ('CB').  These are forbidden by s.115 Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 1999 to 'a person subject to immigration control,' except in  prescribed
circumstances.

15.   In MK (Somalia) v ECO Ethiopia [2007] EWCA Civ 1521 Sedley LJ  in  the
Court of Appeal said that "although DLA is calculated by  reference  to  the
claimant's need for care and for assistance with mobility, it  is  unrelated
to her means and once in her hands is legally hers to spend or save  as  she
chooses."

16.   In Mohd Shabir  (01/TH/2897)  a  case  which  involved  a  Sponsor  in
receipt of income support and  disability  living  allowance,  the  Tribunal
acknowledged that, in certain  circumstances,  disability  living  allowance
may be sufficient to maintain two people - perhaps where it could  be  shown
that savings had been made.  However, the Tribunal  confirmed  that  it  was
"quite  insufficient  to  establish  that  there  is  adequate   maintenance
available merely by saying - the amount  I  am  getting  is  more  than  the
minimum  amount  required  to  maintain  two.   One  has  to  look  at   the
circumstances of an individual case."

17.   It is argued that the DLA payment amounts to third-party  support  but
there is no evidence to  indicate  that  the  sponsor's  sister  knows  what
happens to the DLA payments. There is  no  evidence  to  indicate  that  the
sponsor's sister has consciously elected to donate her DLA payments  to  the
sponsor and the appellant. The weight of reliable  evidence  indicates  that
because the sponsor is her sisters appointee, she receives the money in  her
fiduciary capacity and has a duty to account to her sister for  the  use  of
that money. The evidence that was before the First-tier  indicates  that  it
is the sponsor (not her sister) who has decided that she and  the  appellant
would find the money useful. There is no reliable evidence to indicate  that
the person who is entitled to the DLA payment has decided to contribute  the
money to the appellant and sponsor.

18.   The result is  that  the  DLA  benefit  payments  belong  not  to  the
appellant nor to the sponsor, but form the income of the  sponsor's  sister.
The Judge was therefore correct to discount the level of DLA  payments  from
the calculation of the funds available to the appellant and sponsor.

19.   It was argued that the appellant that an incorrect  approach  is  that
was taken to EX.1 because the Judge found that there are  no  insurmountable
obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK. At  [29]  and  [30]  the
Judge gives detailed consideration to  EX.1.  At  [29]  he  finds  that  the
appellant cannot benefit from the provisions of EX.1, and at  [30]  he  sets
out an Esto position. Mr Hussein argued before me that the findings  of  the
Judge are irrational and failed to take account of the sponsor's  pregnancy.
There is no merit whatsoever  Mr  Hussein's  submissions.  [30]  contains  a
detailed analysis of the circumstances that the appellant and  sponsor  find
themselves in, of their network of  family  support,  and  acknowledges  the
advanced state of the sponsor's pregnancy.

20.   The findings at [29] to [30] are findings which were well  within  the
range of findings which could competently  be  made  by  the  Judge  on  the
evidence placed before him. It is not  an  arguable  error  of  law  for  an
Immigration Judge to give too little weight or too much weight to a  factor,
unless irrationality  is  alleged.  Nor  is  it  an  error  of  law  for  an
Immigration Judge to fail to deal with every factual issue  under  argument.
Disagreement  with  an  Immigrations  Judge's   factual   conclusions,   his
appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility,  or  his  evaluation
of risk does not give rise to an error of law. Rationality is  a  very  high
threshold and a conclusion is not irrational just because  some  alternative
explanation has been rejected or can be said to be possible.

21.   Finally, it was argued that the Judge failed to give  full  effect  of
section 117B of the 2002 Act. It is argued that there are  factors  set  out
in section 117B which weigh in the appellant's favour, and  that  the  Judge
did not give the appellant credit for those factors.

22.   In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that
the statutory duty to consider the matters set out in s  117B  of  the  2002
Act is satisfied if the Tribunal's decision shows that it has had regard  to
such parts of it as are relevant.

23.   In Forman (ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412  (IAC)  it  was
held that the public interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by
the consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article  8  ECHR  has
at no time been a financial burden on the state or is self-sufficient or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

24.   Between [31] and [35] the Judge clearly considers section 117  of  the
2002  Act  in  its  entirety.  Between  [33]  and  [35]  the  Judge  clearly
acknowledges the factors which weigh in  the  appellant's  favour.  He  then
carries out a flawless balancing exercise before coming  to  the  conclusion
that the balance is in favour of  the  respondent,  not  the  appellant.  In
reality, what is argued for  the  appellant  amounts  to  no  more  than  an
expression of dissatisfaction with the  findings  competently  made  by  the
Judge. The findings made by the Judge are findings which were  realistically
open to him to make.  The  arguments  advanced  for  the  appellant  do  not
identify a material error of law.

25.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

26.   The Judge carefully considered each strand of evidence  placed  before
him. He carefully records the submissions that were  made  and  then,  after
correctly directing himself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to the Judge to reach.

27.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

28.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

29.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
