
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
IA/49404/2014
                                                               IA/00130/2015
                                                               IA/00123/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 9 May 2016                              |On  19  May 2016           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              KHURRAM IFTIKHAR
                                                            First Respondent
                                AMNA IFTIKHAR
                                                           Second Respondent
                                    [Y I]
                                                            Third Respondent
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr A Brurrett (counsel) Instructed by Nasim & Co,
solicitors

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as  they  were  in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Maka,  promulgated  on  28  September
2015 which allowed the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration rules  (para
276ADE(1)) and on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Background


3. The  first  and  second  appellants  are  husband  and  wife.  The  third
appellant is their daughter. The first appellant was born on 5  April  1973.
The second appellant was born on 19 June 1986. The third appellant was  born
on [ ] 2014.  All three appellants are nationals of Pakistan.


4. On 17 November 2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants'
applications for leave to remain in the UK and served removal directions  on
the appellants.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Maka ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeals  against  the  Respondent's
decision.


6. The respondent applied to the First-tier for permission to appeal to  the
Upper  Tribunal.  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Zucker   refused
permission to appeal, stating

      "This application is out of time by two days. The respondent gives  no
      reasons and no explanation for  the  delay  but  simply  asserts  that
      because other cases, which turn on a similar point of law,  have  been
      granted permission I should grant permission in this case.  I  do  not
      know whether other applications were made in time. If I  am  to  grant
      permission some explanation is required. The rules are not arbitrary."



7.  On 23rd of March 2016, the respondent applied to the Upper Tribunal  for
permission to appeal against the decision of  Judge  Maka.  There  were  two
grounds of appeal argued.  On  4  April  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb
granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "4. Ground 2 is arguable. The basis of the decision  under  the  Rules
      and Art 8 was the impact upon the third appellant on return  to  India
      as  a  result  of  the  absence/inadequacy  of   treatment   for   her
      hydrocephalus. It is arguable that, not only could that  not  properly
      found a claim under Art 8 (see GS & EO & others v SSHD) but also could
      not, in itself, satisfy the requirement  in  para  276ADE(1)(vi)  that
      there be  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  integration  into  their
      country of return...."

8. In granting permission to appeal (on ground 2 only) Upper Tribunal  Judge
Grubb did not consider the late application to the First tier for  leave  to
appeal.


The Hearing


9. Mr Brurrett, counsel for  all  three  appellants,  raised  a  preliminary
issue. He drew my attention to the refusal of leave to appeal by the  First-
tier, and argued that because the grant of permission to appeal made by  the
Upper Tribunal on 4 April 2016 did not  consider  the  reasons  for  a  late
application to the First-tier, then I must now consider whether or not  time
should be extended to allow consideration of this appeal.

10. Mr Duffy had not had prior  notice  of  this  preliminary  point.  After
discussion, I continued this hearing until 2pm to enable Mr  Duffy  to  take
instructions and to enable both parties  to  focus  on  rule  21(7)  of  The
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

11. Rule 21 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 says

      "(7) If the appellant makes an application to the Upper  Tribunal  for
      permission to appeal against the decision  of  another  tribunal,  and
      that other tribunal refused to admit the appellant's  application  for
      permission to appeal because the application for permission or  for  a
      written statement of reasons was not made in time-


           (a) the application to the  Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to
           appeal must include the reason why the application to the  other
           tribunal for permission to appeal or for a written statement  of
           reasons, as the case may be, was not made in time; and


           (b) the Upper Tribunal must only admit the  application  if  the
           Upper Tribunal considers that it is in the interests of  justice
           for it to do so."


12. I drew parties agents attention to Boktor and  Wanis  (late  application
for permission) Egypt [2011] UKUT 00442 (IAC) in  which  the  Tribunal  held
that where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted,  but
in circumstances where the application is out of  time,  an  explanation  is
provided, but that explanation is  not  considered  by  the  judge  granting
permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal appeal  -  out  of  time)  Bulgaria
[2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the clear wording  of  rule  24(4)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005, the grant  of  permission  to
appeal is conditional,  and  the  question  of  whether  there  are  special
circumstances making it unjust not to extend time has to be considered.

13. I am aware that in Samir (FtT Permission to appeal:  time)  [2013]  UKUT
00003 (IAC) it was held that the  Upper  Tribunal  may  extend  time  on  an
application for permission to appeal, even if the  application  was  out  of
time and an application for permission made to a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal had not been admitted.


14. Mr Duffy candidly conceded that he was in some difficulty. He  explained
that permission to extend time had been sought  entirely  on  the  basis  of
ground 1 of the grounds of appeal, which has effectively been  dismissed  by
Upper Tribunal Judge Grubbs decision on 4 April 2016. He suggested  that  as
the permission to appeal identifies an arguable ground of  appeal,  then  it
would be unjust not to extend time. He was not able  to  explain  why  there
had been a delay in submitting the application for permission to  appeal  to
the First-tier.

15. Mr Brurrett drew my attention to [13] of Boktor  and  Wanis  and  argued
that the strength of the grounds alone is not a ground for extending time.

Analysis

16. It is beyond dispute that the delay in submission to the  First-tier  of
the application for leave to appeal was not considered when the  Upper  Tier
granted leave to appeal on 4 April 2016. In line with Boktor and Wanis,  the
grant of leave to appeal made on 4 April 2016 is only  a  conditional  grant
of leave to appeal. The question of extension of time must be decided.

17. Despite allowing Mr Duffy time  to  seek  instructions  and  prepare  to
address me on extension of time, no reason is given for the delay nor is  an
argument properly directed at rule 21(7) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008                              placed  before  me.   Rule
21(7)(b) is in mandatory terms. I have no material  before  me  to  indicate
that it is in the  interests  of  justice  to  admit  the  application.  The
application coyly refers to the delay by saying

      "The application to the First Tier was regrettably slightly late owing
      to an administrative error."

18. I still do not know what that administrative error was, nor  do  I  know
what caused the administrative error.  I  cannot  say  that  it  is  in  the
interests of justice to admit the application.  On  the  information  placed
before me, the only finding I can make is that the application to the First-
tier was late. I do not know why, so I cannot  say  that  the  interests  of
justice require an extension of time.

19. I therefore refuse to extend time in this case. It follows that  as  the
appeals of the appellants were allowed by the Judge, those decisions stand.


Signed                                                              Date 12
May 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
