
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49361/2014
                                                               IA/49366/2014
                                                               IA/49370/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th February 2016                 |On 18th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                   ms Olayinka Fadayomi (first appellant)
          master Daniel Olajide Abiola Fadayomi (second appellant)
            miss Favour Olamide Peace Fadayomi (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Lams (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Walker (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Manuell, promulgated on 18th June 2015, following  a  hearing  at
    Richmond on 9th June 2015.  In the determination, the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal of the Appellants, who subsequently applied  for,  and  were
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family of a mother with  two  children.   All  are
    citizens of Nigeria.  The mother, the first Appellant, was born on 12th
    December 1967.  The son, the second Appellant, was  born  on  24th  May
    2008.  The daughter, the third Appellant,  was  born  on  23rd  January
    2006.  All appeal against the decision of the Respondent  Secretary  of
    State dated 19th November 2015, to refuse their applications for  leave
    to remain in the UK on the basis of their family and private life.  The
    applications were refused by reference to  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is as follows.  The first Appellant, the  mother,
    claims that she entered the UK as a visitor on  25th  April  2004,  but
    there was no Home Office record of such entry.   She  had  applied  for
    leave to remain on 21st May 2010 and this application  was  refused  on
    23rd September 2010.  There was no further right of  appeal.   The  two
    children were then born in the UK and their claim is that they have  no
    ties with Nigeria, live and are settled in the UK, and their  education
    here would be disrupted, resulting in unjustifiably  harsh  consequence
    to them if they had to relocate back to Nigeria with their mother.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge observed how the children were close to their grandmother,  a
    British citizen, aged 86, with whom they lived.   The  first  Appellant
    took care of her mother, who was in poor health.  The  first  Appellant
    also had a brother, who was also a British citizen, living in  the  UK.
    They are all a close family.  The  second  and  third  Appellants,  the
    children, attended the same school as their cousins,  and  their  lives
    would be devastated if they were to leave this social  environment  and
    return to Nigeria.

 5. The Appellants also claim that the third Appellant, the  son,  had  now
    lived in the UK for over seven years.  However, as the judge  observed,
    none of the Appellants had any leave to remain  in  the  UK.   And  the
    Tribunal concluded, on the basis of the lack of evidence  submitted  by
    the first Appellant, that she could only have entered the UK illegally,
    as the Secretary of State asserted.  The children were innocent victims
    of their mother's dishonest conduct and improvidence.   The  judge  had
    regard to the photographs which showed that the two children had  grown
    up and socialised within their mother and their grandmother's  culture.
    They go to the  African  Christian  Church.   They  had  above  average
    ability and were doing  well  at  school.   The  Appellants  had  close
    emotional ties to their elderly grandmother and she had ties with them.



 6. The judge then went on to have  regard  to  the  cultural  context  and
    observed that the oldest child, the son, was only 9 years of  age,  and
    had yet to establish "even a limited or partial degree of  independence
    from her mother" (paragraph  17).   The  judge  observed  that  he  was
    dealing with a culture which has "very strong emphasis  on  the  family
    and parental obedience.  Put  another  way,  an  importance,  it  is  a
    culture  less  focused  on  the  individual  and  more  on  the  group"
    (paragraph 17).

 7. Nevertheless, the amount of time that the children had spent in the  UK
    was as a direct result  of  the  mother's  dishonesty  (paragraph  21).
    Regard was had to paragraph 117B(6) of the 2002 Act, and the judge gave
    consideration to the leading Article 8 cases (paragraph 23) and went on
    to conclude that nothing was being taken away from  the  Appellants  as
    they had never had any right to settle in the UK, and given  that  many
    persons wishing to settle in this country lawfully  have  been  refused
    permission to  extend  their  stays  because  they  have  accepted  the
    decision and have left the United Kingdom as required, it would not  be
    right to allow this first Appellant to  acquire  an  advantage  due  to
    having remained here illegally, in the full knowledge of the fact  that
    she was not meant to be in this country, on the basis that the children
    would do rather better in this country than back in Nigeria.

 8. The judge went on to have regard to the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  [2013]
    UKUT 00197 and decided that this was a case where  the  children  could
    properly return to Nigeria with their mother.

 9. The appeals were dismissed.

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that the judge used  a  more  exacting
    test than is required  under  the  law.   The  judge  had  also  formed
    conclusions based upon cultural stereotyping when he had said that  the
    focus is on the family group rather than on individuals  in  a  culture
    such as that of the Nigerian community.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by the Upper Tribunal on 19th  October
    2015.

12. A Rule 24 response was entered on 3rd November 2015 on the  basis  that
    the first Appellant had made no attempt to explain how she had  entered
    the UK and the judge  was  correct  in  saying  that  she  had  entered
    unlawfully.  The judge then embarked  on  a  careful  analysis  of  the
    situation and concluded that the  Rules  could  not  be  met  and  that
    decision was unassailable.  The judge also had  proper  regard  to  the
    best interests of the children and  concluded  that  removal  would  be
    proportionate.

13. At the hearing before me  on  5th  February  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Lams of Counsel, and the Respondent  was  represented
    by Mr Walker.  Mr Lams submitted that he would rely upon his up-to-date
    skeleton argument, which he handed up for  the  Tribunal's  assistance.
    He submitted that the judge at paragraph 17 of  the  determination  had
    embarked   upon   cultural   stereotyping   which   had   tainted   the
    determination.  He also submitted that the first Appellant, the mother,
    had not waited until the children had been in the UK  for  seven  years
    before making her application, because she did so in 2010 and that  was
    then rejected.  The children had been in the  UK  now  for  over  seven
    years and Section 117B(6) said that Section 117B(6) had  recently  been
    considered in the  case  of  Treebhawon  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  (see
    Treebhawon [2015] UKUT 00674).  The determination made  it  clear  that
    Section 117B(6) is a freestanding provision.   The  children  had  been
    here for over seven years.  The informal practice known as  the  "seven
    year Rule" had  now  been  transposed  into  the  Rules.   He  drew  my
    attention to the relevant parts of  Treebhawon  namely,  paragraph  18,
    which referred to the fact that, "in cases  where  its  conditions  are
    satisfied, the public interest does not require the  removal  from  the
    United Kingdom of the  person  concerned.   In  this  respect  also  it
    differs from its siblings, which contained no  compatible  instruction"
    (paragraph  18).   Mr  Lams  submitted  that  the   "public   interest"
    consideration does not necessarily mean, that the automatic  result  is
    to require the removal of the children from his  country.   He  further
    took me to paragraph 19 of the determination, which referred to "one of
    the most vulnerable cohorts in a society, namely  children"  (paragraph
    19).  The Tribunal had gone on to say that "the focus is based  on  the
    needs and interests  of  these  vulnerable  people.   Furthermore,  the
    content of this public interest differs markedly from the other  three,
    all of which are focused on  the  interests  of  society  as  a  whole"
    (paragraph 19).

14. For his part, Mr Walker submitted that the  judge  had  considered  the
    matter appropriately, because he had observed (at  paragraph  26)  that
    the child Appellant's best interests "are to be with their mother".  He
    went on to note that, "their main private life interest at  this  stage
    is to continue their education which will be possible in Nigeria.  They
    are young and adaptable enough to make new friendships at a new  school
    and elsewhere" (paragraph 26).  These conclusions were findings of fact
    that were open to the judge.  Moreover, the judge also  had  regard  to
    the well-established Article 8 cases (paragraph  23)  and  had  applied
    them faithfully.  There was no error of law.

15. In reply, Mr Lams drew my attention to  the  first  skeleton  argument,
    which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which  highlighted  the
    particular features in relation to these children,  and  observed  that
    they were fully integrated into British  society  now,   such  that  it
    would not be proper to require them to leave this  country.   This  was
    not a case of joint parents.  There was only a single mother,  and  the
    only other adult in the children's family was the grandmother, who  was
    a British citizen, and with whom they also had very strong connections.
     The Appellant had a brother, also  a  British  citizen,  with  British
    citizen children, who were cousins to the Appellant children,  and  who
    were inseparable.  Nigeria had no home for them, and no familiarity for
    them.  The oldest child was now 10 years of age and had  actually  made
    an application for registration as a British citizen, to which  he  was
    entitled, and this would also make  the  decision  disproportionate  to
    remove them.   He asked me to allow the appeal.

16. I have given careful consideration.



No Error of Law

17. I have given careful consideration to all the documents before  me  and
    to the oral submissions and I am  satisfied  that  the  making  of  the
    decision by the judge did not involve the making of an error on a point
    of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007) such that I  should  set  aside
    the decision.

18. I come  to  this  conclusion  notwithstanding  Mr  Lams'  well-compiled
    skeleton arguments before me and his oral  submissions.   The  fact  is
    that the judge here did take into account the  best  interests  of  the
    children, their welfare in this country,  including  their  association
    with their cousins and their  grandmother,  whilst  at  the  same  time
    taking into account the fact  that  the  mother  had  been  in  the  UK
    illegally, with no right to remain.

19. The case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874 establishes  that  the
    assessment of the best interests of the children "must be made  on  the
    basis that the facts are as they are in the real world" and that  if  a
    parent has no right to remain "then  that  is  the  background  against
    which the assessment is conducted"  and  that  "the  ultimate  question
    would be: is it reasonable to expect the child  to  follow  the  parent
    with no right to remain to the country of origin?" (see paragraph  58).
    In this case, the judge observed that it was reasonable simply  because
    the primary private life interests of the children was in  relation  to
    their education and that education would continue  in  Nigeria  because
    they were young and adaptable enough to make new friendships at  a  new
    school  and  elsewhere.   They  had  not  established  an   independent
    existence of their own and would go with their mother.

20. The references to the cultural context are not such as to have led  the
    judge into error.  It was an observation that the judge made,  but  not
    one that  he  gave  controlling  weight  to,  given  the  comprehensive
    assessment of the factual situation that the judge embarked upon in the
    body of the determination.  Another judge  may  well  have  come  to  a
    different decision.  However, it could not be said that given the  high
    threshold for requirement of "perversity" that this  decision  amounted
    to an error of law.

Notice of Decision

21. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination is extant.

22. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016

