
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49106/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 23 May 2014                                |On 27th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                             NAVEED AHMAD MAJEED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr Nazir
For the Respondent:      Mr Mullen

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan,  born  on  4  January  1984.   He
   appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  against  a  determination  by  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge P A Grant-Hutchison,  promulgated  on  19  February  2014,
   dismissing his appeal against refusal of a residence card.

2) The grounds of appeal to the UT are as follows:

    ...
   1. Only issue involved was whether or not the appellant  has  retained  a
      right of residence following  his  divorce  from  Radca  Mihaylova,  a
      Bulgarian national, under regulation 10 of the  Immigration  (European
      Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006.   The   Respondent   refused   the
      application on two grounds: (i) there was no  evidence  that  the  EEA
      national was a qualified person and that the appellant  was  therefore
      residing in accordance with the Regulations at the point  of  divorce;
      (ii) that there was no evidence that since the date of the divorce the
      appellant has been  a  worker,  a  self-employed  person  or  a  self-
      sufficient person.


      The judge accepted it that  there  was  evidence  to  prove  that  the
      appellant was working since the date of divorce.  Thus the only  issue
      left was the first one and he dismissed the appeal.


      The submissions, with respect, are:


      It appears that the appellant satisfied all the conditions  stated  in
      the paragraph 10, except that the Respondent refused  the  application
      and the judge dismissed the appeal under  Regulation  10(5)(b),  which
      reads:


      A person satisfies the conditions of this paragraph if:
      (b)  he  was  residing  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with
      Regulations at the date of the determination.


      ... the Respondent and the judge did not mention the relevant sub-rule
      which they were determining.


      ... the Judge erred when  he  dismissed  the  appeal  in  three  short
      sentences (paragraph 12 of the determination):


      However the Appellant has failed to prove that he  was  married  to  a
      qualified person at  the  relevant  time.   I  accept  that  during  a
      marriage break up it may be difficult for him to obtain proof that the
      qualified person was indeed working - yet it is of importance that  he
      does so.  This is the essence of the Appellant's case.


      The Judge erred  in  law  when  he  ignored  the  evidence  which  was
      submitted to the Respondent.  In the Reasons for Refusal Letter it  is
      mentioned  that  the  appellant  did  provide  evidence  of   National
      Insurance Contributions for 11 October 2009 to 10 July 2010, a Copy of
      a Tax Calculation Overview for  the  year  ending  5  April  2010  and
      current account Bank statements for 2009, 2010 and 2011.


      If the above evidence is seen in conjunction with the comments by  the
      Judge that during a marriage break-up it  may  be  difficult  for  the
      appellant to obtain relevant  proof  that  the  qualified  person  was
      working, then the only conclusion that could  be  drawn  is  that  the
      appeal should have been allowed.


      One wonders whether it is possible to ask the  wife  just  before  the
      divorce decree to provide the wage slips.


      ... there  is  no  express  provision  under  Regulation  10  that  an
      applicant should provide  evidence  to  prove  that  the  ex-wife  was
      working on the date of the divorce.  Secondly, as the judge  said,  it
      is difficult to obtain.


 2. The judge also  erred  when  he  did  not  consider  with  reasons  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights under the new Immigration Rules.


    It is not in dispute that the appellant has been  in  the  UK  since  7
    September 2005.  He was a lawful entrant  and  is  not  an  overstayer.
    Furthermore, as many years have since elapsed since he left his country
    he cannot be expected to have any social, family and cultural ties with
    his country ... at least the Judge should have touched these issues and
    his omission renders the determination unsustainable.


3) Mr Nazir said the judge failed to  give  reasons  for  finding  that  the
   appellant had not shown that his former wife was exercising treaty rights
   at the date of the divorce, and failed to refer to  the  evidence  before
   him.  At page 75 of the appellant's bundle in the First-tier Tribunal was
   a self-assessment statement from HMRC addressed to the appellant's former
   wife, dated 14 May 2013.  This shows that she  appealed  against  a  late
   filing penalty for the tax year to 5 April 2011.  The date of divorce was
   19 November 2013.  The evidence suggested that  the  appellant's  ex-wife
   had also made tax returns for the years  2011/2012  and  2012/2013.   The
   error was such that the decision should be reversed.

4) Mr Mullen accepted that the judge did not refer specifically to the  HMRC
   letter of 14 May 2013, but he said that  was  not  material.   The  other
   evidence in the bundle was of earlier dates, and showed only  that  small
   amounts had been due in respect of national insurance in 2009  and  2010.
   There was no evidence of economic activity of the appellant's ex-wife  to
   any meaningful level at  any  date.   None  of  the  documents  suggested
   economic activity beyond the tax year 2010/2011.  The latest document  to
   which the appellant could refer (14 May 2013)  showed  a  zero  balancing
   payment due for the year 2011/2012, which meant no activity.  At best the
   appellant's ex-wife might have been a qualified person to year  ending  5
   April 2011, but not thereafter.  There was simply no evidence on which an
   outcome in favour of the appellant might be sustained.

5) Mr Nazir  in  reply  submitted  that  the  evidence  did  show  that  the
   appellant's ex-wife had been working,  even  if  at  a  low  level.   The
   appellant encountered a common difficulty of obtaining evidence  from  an
   unco-operative former spouse, but such evidence as there  was  tended  to
   show that she had continued to be a qualified person.

6) At this stage, Mr Nazir  acknowledged  that  further  evidence  would  be
   required to establish the  appellant's  case.   He  said  that  there  is
   evidence now available which was  not  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
   which the appellant has obtained "through an intermediary".  Mr Nazir was
   unable  to  explain  specifically  how  the  further  evidence  had  been
   obtained, or why it had not been available at an earlier date.

7) I reserved my determination.

8) There was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal by which  the  judge
   could reasonably  have  held  that  the  appellant's  former  spouse  was
   exercising free movement rights in the UK at the time of divorce.

9) Even if there is some evidence by which the  appellant  might  prove  his
   case now, it has not been shown why  that  evidence  was  not  previously
   available, or that it could not reasonably have  been  available  by  the
   time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  It seems that Mr Nazir  appears
   on an agency basis for a representative in Manchester.  I have noted that
   there is on the file a set of documents of 41 pages, some of  which  seem
   to be designed to go to economic activity of the appellant's  ex-wife  at
   dates later than shown by the documents before the FtT.   However,  there
   is no supporting application under Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure
   (Upper Tribunal) Procedure Rules 2008,  and  no  information  within  the
   documents from which such an application might be inferred.

10) The appellant has the option  of  making  a  fresh  application  to  the
   respondent.  Mr Nazir acknowledged that, but said that  in  the  meantime
   the appellant had no valid residence card and that it might  be  a  time-
   consuming process.  Those are not points  which  can  help  to  establish
   error of law in the First-tier Tribunal.

11) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                27 May 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
