
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49343/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 October 2014                         |On 4 November 2014             |
|Prepared 27 October 2014                   |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                        Mrs Beatrice Ohanumma Obegoro
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hay, Counsel instructed by Samuel Louis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant, a national of Nigeria, date of birth 13  February  1952,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated  5  November  2013  to
    make removal directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and
    Nationality Act 2006 and to refuse to vary leave to remain as a visitor
    for the purposes of private medical treatment.

2.   The appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R  G  Walters  (the
    judge) who on 14 July 2014  dismissed  the  appeal  with  reference  to
    paragraphs it would seem certainly 52 and 54 of the  Immigration  Rules
    HC 395 (as amended).

3.   The grounds to the First-tier Tribunal had  included  a  claim,  albeit
    briefly stated, with reference to Article 8 of the ECHR being  a  basis
    to remain in the alternative.

4.   The judge dealt with removal  directions  and  dealt  with  the  appeal
    under paragraph 54 of the Immigration Rules.  The judge  did  not  deal
    with any Article 8 ECHR claim albeit it had been raised as I have  said
    in the grounds to the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   An examination of the Record of Proceedings of 24 June 2014,  at  which
    Mr Hay did not appear but a Mr Ukonu, legal  representative  of  Samuel
    Lewis Solicitors,  showed  submissions  but  it  is  clear  that  those
    addressed the factual issues relating to the  immigration  decision  on
    the intended arrangement for treatment to continue for the Appellant in
    the United Kingdom.  There is nothing  to  indicate  in  the  carefully
    noted Record of Proceedings any other submissions being advanced  other
    than under the Rules.

6.   I can find nothing to indicate  any  submissions  made  by  either  the
    Appellant's or the Respondent's representatives addressing Article 8 of
    the ECHR.  The judge,  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  failed  to
    produce the necessary evidence to meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    54(ii)(d) in adducing full details of  the  probable  duration  of  the
    Appellant's treatment and the judge so found at  paragraph  23  of  the
    determination.

7.   Whilst Mr Hay sought  to  persuade  me  that  two,  possibly  three  e-
    letters, when read together, ought to deliver the conclusion as to  the
    probable duration of the treatment.  I disagree  with  him  insofar  as
    that the correspondence indicates that there are aspects  of  treatment
    either which can no longer be effective at all, in which case there  is
    no duration of treatment, and other elements which involved  eye  drops
    and assessment which are ongoing.  The relevant medical evidence  never
    sought to address probable duration and it  is  simply  not  enough  to
    infer that there was none because  there  was  no  stated  end  to  the
    duration of treatment: In those circumstances  it  would  quite  simply
    have been perfectly easy to have set that out  in  correspondence.   An
    abiding omission in this case is in fact  the  lack  of  correspondence
    from the qualified medical consultant involved  setting  out  what  the
    probable duration of treatment was for each complaint as required under
    the Rules and at least some assessment of the  costs  of  treatment  if
    that was to continue.

8.   I do not accept, as Mr Hay argued, that there was evidence that  showed
    compliance  with  the  Rules.   As  was  highlighted  in   Mr   Jarvis'
    submissions the thrust of the arguments now being put by the  Appellant
    are essentially that the Appellant should  permanently  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom  rather  than  remain  for  the  purposes  of  finishing
    treatment and then going back to Nigeria.    Be that as it may and that
    being at odds with paragraph 51 of the Rules I do not need  to  resolve
    that matter now.

9.   I find no error of law in the way the judge addressed paragraph  54  of
    the Rules or indeed Removal Directions under Section  47  of  the  2006
    Act.

10.  It is correct that the judge did fail to refer to  the  correct  gender
    of a  witness  who  gave  evidence:  Who  was  not,  as  he  said,  the
    Appellant's daughter-in-law  but  rather  the  Appellant's  son-in-law.
    Similarly his summary of the evidence of the son-in-law, to this extent
    in paragraph 20 of the determination, again illustrates that the  judge
    has confused, not I think the person involved, but the gender  of   the
    witness.  The errors are not acceptable but I do not  find  they  makes
    any material difference to the assessment of compliance with paragraphs
    52 and 54 of the Rules and outcome relating to the probable duration of
    the treatment being omitted.

11.  The next point taken by Mr Hay, who  did  not  settle  the  grounds  of
    appeal, was that Article 8 ECHR had not been properly addressed, indeed
    it is fair to say the judge makes no reference to it  whatsoever  as  a
    ground of appeal.

12.  It is clear that if a party has raised grounds and indicates  they  are
    all pursued then the First-tier Tribunal Judge is obliged to deal  with
    those grounds whatever their merits may be.  However, it is apparent in
    this case that Mr Ukonu, the legal representative, did not pursue  that
    matter nor is there evidence from him in the usual way to  be  expected
    by way of a witness statement confirming that he raised the matters  in
    issue.  It is not said by reference to a  notebook  or  contemporaneous
    note that Article 8 ECHR was  pursued before the judge.

13.  In these circumstances I am left with the position that Article  8  did
    not fall to be considered.  It seemed to me the case of  Sarkar  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 195 was of assistance because it points out that if  a  matter
    is not pursued or if such reasonable inference can be  drawn  from  the
    presentation of the appeal then it does not fall  upon  a  judge  as  a
    matter of approach to necessarily deal with it.  No doubt it  would  be
    better if the judge included in a determination that a  matter  was  no
    longer pursued or that confirmation had been given from the Appellant's
    representative of those matters: This  would  plainly  be  a  safe  and
    better course to follow but it does not mean that  there  has  been  an
    error of law simply through the judge failed to deal with the Article 8
    issue as originally raised when as a fact it was not pursued.

14.  Whilst there may have been matters that could have been argued, I  make
    no judgment upon them I find that the judge made no arguable  error  of
    law in failing to deal with the Article 8 claim as it had  been  raised
    in the original grounds to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  reaching  that
    conclusion I have of course carefully considered  the  implications  of
    the case of R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982 and E & R [2004]  QB  1044  CA
    and as it applies the case  of  Karanakaran  [2007]  (reference  to  be
    checked).  Insofar as that indicates what is expected of an Immigration
    Judge in determining the live issues before the Tribunal.

15.  It is plain from the arguments and the evidence before the  judge  that
    the Appellant was not relying upon family life protected rights  within
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Similarly it  is  not  it  seems  to  me  being
    asserted that the Appellant  was  exercising  any  fundamental  rights,
    which Article 8 was intended to address  in terms of  the  rights  they
    wish to exercise here.  Rather they were simply a manifestation of  the
    broader fact that the Appellant has had a private life of  her  own  in
    the United Kingdom.  It is of course right to say she only came to  the
    UK on the basis and expectation of a limited stay for the  purposes  of
    treatment: She had with the intention to return home at the  conclusion
    of that treatment.  The treatment now seems  to  have  extended  itself
    because of particular needs but I do not find  that  is  any  sense  of
    enlarged private life rights nor does she have a right to  remain  here
    nor a right to treatment here.

16.  I fully  take  into  account  that  the  Appellant  has  not  had  free
    treatment.  I am prepared to assume she would not  have  or  seek  free
    treatment but that is almost immaterial to the issue of whether or  not
    the Respondent's decision, on the  basis  upon  which  application  was
    made, is disproportionate.  Quite simply nothing in the  argument  even
    gets close to identifying the public interest or the importance  to  be
    ascribed to it nor in the statements of the Appellant and  her  son-in-
    law does that matter get addressed as it needed to be if there  was  to
    be shown  on a balance of probabilities that Article 8(1)  rights  were
    engaged and that the Respondent's decision amounted  to  a  significant
    interference with those rights.

17.  I do not express any view on  the  availability  of  treatment  or  the
    quality of treatment to be found outside the United Kingdom.  Whilst  I
    have sympathy for the Appellant's situation the fact of the  matter  is
    that the proper application of Article 8 ECHR is not done  on  a  'near
    miss' or 'sympathetic' basis but is done so long as  those  rights  are
    properly engaged and the questions posed in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27  and
    Huang [2007] UKHL 27 are addressed.  This similarly begs  the  question
    of whether or not there are the circumstances which would  engage  with
    Article 8 outside of the Rules: Which has not been an  issue  canvassed
    before me. Upon the face of it it  does  not  appear  to  me  that  the
    Appellant gets close to identifying a material matter  not  covered  by
    the rules or the kind of compelling circumstances expected  to look  at
    Article 8 outside of the Rules.  In those circumstances I conclude that
    the omission of reference to Article 8 ECHR was not a material error of
    law.

18.  The appeals on immigration grounds, under Section 47 of  the  2006  Act
    and in relation to Article 8 ECHR stand dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

No anonymity order was made and none is necessary, appropriate or sought.

Signed                                  Date: 30 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

