
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49484/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 July 2014                                  |On 11 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                             mrs Nirmaljit Kaur
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Sharma, Counsel, instructed by Charles Simmons
                    Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the decision  by  the
    respondent to refuse her application for leave to remain in the  United
    Kingdom on family life  grounds  outside  the  Rules.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity order, and I do  not  consider  that
    such an order is warranted for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of India, whose date of  birth  is  4  June
    1958.  She entered the United Kingdom on 15 May 2013 with  valid  entry
    clearance as a visitor.  Her visit visa ran from 17 April 2013 until 17
    October 2013.  On 4 October 2013 Charles Simmons Immigration Solicitors
    submitted an application for leave to  remain  on  her  behalf.   In  a
    covering letter, they said that the  appellant  wished  to  extend  her
    current  leave  for  a  further  period  based  on  her   compassionate
    circumstances and rights afforded under Article 8.  She was a dependant
    of her son, Mr Harpreet  Singh,  and  her  daughter-in-law.   Prior  to
    coming to the UK she was living with her husband who died on  28  March
    2013.  She was dependent on her son and daughter-in-law for  her  daily
    activities, and there was no immediate family she could turn to on  her
    return to India.

 3. The appellant was suffering from osteoarthritis.  She was  in  constant
    pain and had several health problems, particularly with both  her  knee
    joints.  She continued to have medical treatment  for  this  whilst  in
    India.  She also suffered from blood pressure  problems.   Due  to  her
    illness she had reduced mobility and was unable to look  after  herself
    and carry out  her  daily  activities.   She  was  in  the  process  of
    obtaining all her medical records to substantiate this.

 4. In an accompanying witness statement, Mr Singh said  that  he  and  his
    wife had been supporting  his  parents  financially.   His  father  had
    provided physical and emotional support to his  mother  whilst  he  was
    alive.  Following the death of his father, his mother had been residing
    in India alone.  She had no other family members  in  India  she  could
    turn to and she had been unable to take care of herself.   He  and  his
    wife had sponsored his mother to come to the UK on a visit visa.

 5. On 7 November 2013 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for refusing
    the application.  Her policy was to consider granting leave outside the
    Rules where particularly compelling circumstances existed.   Grants  of
    such leave were rare, and were given only for  genuinely  compassionate
    reasons.  The appellant had  not  made  an  application  as  an  "adult
    dependent relative" and as such she could not be considered under these
    Rules.  In any case, any such application would fail on the basis  that
    entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent  relative  was  a  mandatory
    requirement for a further in country grant of such.   The  family  life
    she  claimed  to  enjoy  with  her  adult  children  and  grandchildren
    therefore did not constitute family life in the application  which  she
    had made.  Her relationships with her settled family in  the  UK  could
    continue through other communication methods from abroad.  In  view  of
    the  above,  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that   her
    circumstances were such that discretion should be exercised outside the
    Rules.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant's appeal came before Judge R  L  Walker  sitting  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross on 24 March  2014.   Mr  Sharma  of
    Counsel appeared on behalf of the appellant, and Mr  Peter  of  Counsel
    appeared on behalf of the respondent.  The judge received oral evidence
    from the appellant, her son and her daughter-in-law.  In his subsequent
    determination, he summarised the appellant's case at paragraph 12.  She
    could not reside alone in India because of  her  deteriorating  health.
    She had no help or support available in India.  She had been cared  for
    by her son and daughter-in-law since her husband's death.  They  helped
    her with her daily activities, including cooking, feeding, cleaning and
    keeping herself hygienically clean.  Her son  and  daughter-in-law  had
    the financial wherewithal and the accommodation to look after her.

 7. The judge's findings of fact and credibility are set out  in  paragraph
    17 onwards.  Mr Peter had  produced  at  the  hearing  a  copy  of  the
    appellant's VAF.  This showed that an application for  the  visit  visa
    was made online on 28 March 2013, which  was  the  same  day  that  the
    appellant's husband died.  The  evidence  of  the  appellant  was  that
    originally both she and her husband were applying for visit visas,  but
    following his death the application was changed to cover herself  only.
    Nonetheless, the VAF referred to her husband as being alive.   It  also
    referred to her being supported by her husband, and  being  financially
    dependent on him and that her husband received rental income from  land
    of 40,000 rupees per annum.

 8. The judge observed that neither she nor her son were  able  to  explain
    why her husband's details were still in the  VAF,  notwithstanding  the
    fact that he had passed away.  The appellant physically  attended  some
    days later in order to submit her [signed] application  and  to  comply
    with the  biometric  requirements,  but  this  misinformation  was  not
    corrected.  Also, the appellant's son was in India at the time, and was
    assisting her.  His evidence  was  he  did  not  go  with  her  on  the
    appointment to confirm the application.  If the son  did  not  go  with
    her, then this had some bearing on a separate  aspect  of  the  appeal,
    which was the appellant's claim  that  she  needed  constant  care  and
    attention, and could do little for herself.

 9. The  judge  went  on  to  find  in  paragraph  19  that  the  incorrect
    information being submitted in the VAF amounted to deception.   Whether
    the appellant herself was aware of this is  not  known,  but  certainly
    those helping and advising her would have been fully aware.

10. At paragraph 20, the judge addressed the evidence  of  the  appellant's
    various health problems.  He found that the  various  reports  did  not
    include any clear diagnoses or  prognoses  and  he  found  that  little
    evidential weight could be replaced upon the reports from India,  other
    than showing that medical help  and  services  were  available  to  the
    appellant in India.

11. At paragraph 21, the judge held that  the  evidence  today  showed  the
    appellant had a home in India, where she had the services of a maid who
    had worked in the household for several years.  In addition she and her
    late husband had land which was let in order to produce an income.   He
    found that the appellant would therefore be in a  comfortable  position
    in India with her home, staff, income and savings.

12. At paragraph 22, the judge found  that  the  level  of  care  that  the
    appellant claimed to need had been exaggerated.  Her witness  statement
    went as  far  as  saying  that  she  needed  help  in  keeping  herself
    hygienically clean.  But her son's evidence was she had  been  able  to
    shower herself.  As far  as  her  mobility  was  concerned,  the  judge
    observed her walk into court unaided and to move  seats  unaided.   The
    appellant was not old.  She might well  be  overweight  and  with  some
    health problems, but  so  far  as  her  care  and  medical  needs  were
    concerned, these were just as available to her in India as  they  would
    be in the UK.  The appellant stated that her last  family  member,  her
    brother, had died in December 2013.   She  did  not  however  make  any
    reference to her brother's family, and in particular  to  his  children
    who would be her nephew and niece.

13. In view of the matters referred to above, and the  fact  the  appellant
    was unable to confirm that she had a return  airline  ticket  when  she
    arrived in the UK, the judge found that it had been  her  intention  on
    entry, and no doubt that of her son, that she would  remain  here.   He
    could understand her wishing to be with her son  and  his  family,  but
    nonetheless she had attempted to circumvent the Immigration Rules  with
    what could only be described as deception.

14. At paragraph 26, he held that Article 8 could not  be  engaged  as  any
    interference was going to be limited and certainly not of such  gravity
    to enable such engagement.  At paragraph 28 he said he  carried  out  a
    careful balancing exercise and had  taken  into  account  all  relevant
    circumstances,  and  he  found  that  in  all  the  circumstances   the
    respondent's  decision  was  a  proportionate  one.   He  concluded  at
    paragraph 29:

         The appellant has whatever  she  needs  in  India  apart  from  her
         declared wish to live with  her  son...The  difficulties  that  the
         appellant  is  going  to  experience  on  returning  to  India  are
         surmountable and not exceptional in any way.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

15. The appellant's solicitors settled her application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  They argued that there were three errors
    of law in the determination.   Firstly,  the  learned  judge  had  made
    fundamental errors of fact.   Secondly,  the  consideration  under  the
    Rules was improper; and thirdly the  consideration  of  her  Article  8
    rights was inadequate.  With regard to the  latter,  it  was  submitted
    that he set too high  a  threshold  for  whether  Article  8  had  been
    engaged.  There was no requirement to  show  insurmountable  obstacles.
    The error in the judge's approach was compounded by the fact  that  the
    judge had failed to consider the remaining three steps  in  the  Razgar
    test.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

16. On 13 May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge P J G White granted permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         2.   Having had regard to grounds for permission to appeal  in  the
             determination, I am satisfied that in  reaching  her  decision
             the judge arguably made the following errors of law:-

             (a)  Whilst the judge at paragraph  25  of  the  determination
                  refers to Gulshan, it is arguable the judge's approach  to
                  the issue  of  human  rights  does  not  accord  with  the
                  approach set out in Gulshan, in particular the  judge  has
                  not engaged with Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE  of  the
                  Immigration Rules.

             (b)  The judge at paragraph 26 states that 'Article  8  cannot
                  be engaged as any interference is going to be limited  and
                  certainly not of such gravity  to  enable  this'.   It  is
                  unclear whether the judge is stating that Article 8 is not
                  engaged in relation to the appellant's  private  life,  or
                  family life, or both.

             (c)  It is unclear why the judge having stated in paragraph 26
                  that 'Article 8  cannot  be  engaged'  has  considered  it
                  necessary  to  consider   the   proportionality   of   the
                  interference in paragraph 27 onwards.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me, Mr Sharma submitted that the judge had  erred
    in failing to consider Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE, but that his  error
    in this regard was not material.  He sought to  develop  ground  1.  He
    submitted that it had been irrational of the judge to make a finding of
    deception against the appellant.  At best, there had been  a  negligent
    failure  to  disclose  the   change   in   the   appellant's   domestic
    circumstances.  Mr Sharma took issue with the finding that the level of
    care she claimed to need had been exaggerated, as the  judge  had  seen
    the appellant using a walking stick to move around.  It  had  not  been
    put to the appellant that she had extended family members remaining  in
    India.  Furthermore, it was  not  a  Kugathas  dependency  relationship
    between the appellant and her extended family  members  in  India,  and
    therefore she could not be treated as enjoying family  life  with  such
    extended family members for the purposes of Article 8.

18. In summary, the judge had failed to give proper weight  to  factors  in
    the appellant's favour, and had given undue  weight  to  factors  which
    counted against her, so as  to  come  to  an  irrational  and  perverse
    outcome.  There had to be mens  rea:  the  appellant  had  to  have  an
    intention to deceive.

19. In reply, Mr Nath submitted that the judge's finding of  deception  was
    entirely warranted on the evidence that was before him.

Discussion

20. The judge's approach to the Article 8 assessment does not  disclose  an
    error of law.  If the judge had been minded  to  allow  the  Article  8
    claim outside the Rules, it probably would have been necessary for  him
    to follow a two stage approach, beginning with an analysis of the claim
    under Appendix FM and Rule 276ADE.  But as he was not minded  to  allow
    the Article 8 claim outside the Rules, it was  not  necessary  for  the
    judge to conduct a two stage assessment.

21. The threshold for the engagement of private life rights  is  relatively
    low, but it was nonetheless open to the judge to find that the proposed
    interference with the  appellant's  private  life  rights  was  not  of
    sufficient gravity as to engage Article 8.  The  same  applies  to  the
    finding on family life.  In so finding, the judge  was  reflecting  the
    balance which is struck by the new Rules.  Having found that  questions
    1 and 2 of the Razgar test should be answered against the appellant, it
    was not necessary for  the  judge  to  go  on  to  consider  the  three
    remaining Razgar questions.  But it was prudent for him to do so.

22. The appellant's real challenge  is  not  to  the  architecture  of  the
    judge's Article 8 assessment, but to the judge's  adverse  findings  of
    fact which underpin the conclusion that the appellant is  not  entitled
    to Article 8 relief.

23. It was not perverse of the judge to find that the appellant and her son
    had sought to circumvent the Immigration Rules by deception.   Although
    not specifically referred to by the judge  in  his  determination,  the
    plain implication of  the  son's  witness  statement  is  that  he  had
    sponsored his mother's visit visa application  in  the  full  knowledge
    that she was now a widow and would henceforth be living alone in India.
     The timing of the online application and its contents, the  fact  that
    there was ample opportunity to correct the  misrepresentations  in  the
    application before a  signed  copy  was  presented  in  person  by  the
    appellant, and the fact the son had not purchased a return  ticket  for
    his mother were all matters  reasonably  relied  on  by  the  judge  as
    supporting the finding of deception.  The  son  attempted  to  pin  the
    blame on the agents who drafted the VAF, but this excuse does not stand
    up to scrutiny.  For the evidence of the appellant was that  originally
    both she and her husband were applying for visit visas, and it was only
    after his death that the application was changed to cover herself only.
     So when instructing the agents to  change  the  application,  the  son
    would have informed  the  agents  why  the  application  needed  to  be
    changed, namely because the appellant's husband had died.  Accordingly,
    as found by the judge, certainly those helping advising  the  appellant
    would  have  been  fully  aware  that  the  appellant's   VAF   falsely
    represented that the husband was still alive.

24. At paragraph 20 of the determination, the judge noted that some of  the
    medical reports gave the appellant a date of birth of 4  June  1960  as
    opposed to the date of birth given in the  VAF  of  4  July  1958.   Mr
    Sharma submitted that it was procedurally unfair for the judge to  make
    this observation, as it had not been put to  the  appellant  in  cross-
    examination.  But while noting the discrepancy, the judge does not make
    much  of  it.   He  does  not  draw  an  adverse  inference  about  the
    appellant's credibility from this  particular  discrepancy.   His  main
    reason for attaching little evidential weight to  the  various  medical
    reports from India is that they did not include any clear diagnoses  or
    prognoses. Conversely, they showed that medical help and services  were
    available to the appellant in India. This undermined the claim that the
    appellant needed to be looked after in the UK.

25. With regard to paragraph 22 of the determination, I consider  that  the
    judge has given adequate reasons for concluding that the level of  care
    that the appellant claimed to need had been exaggerated.  The fact that
    the appellant used a walking stick to walk into court does not  detract
    from the broad thrust of the judge's reasoning.

26. With regard to paragraph 23, it is not  apparently  disputed  that  the
    appellant has extended family members living in India.  The judge makes
    a specific finding that the appellant's brother, who died  in  December
    2013, had a son and daughter living in India. This evidence could  only
    have come from evidence tendered by or on behalf of the appellant,  and
    therefore there was no procedural unfairness in the  judge  relying  on
    this evidence.  The judge was also  not  thereby  suggesting  that  the
    appellant could move in with her nephew and niece.  All the  judge  was
    indicating was that it was not true that the appellant  had  no  family
    left in India.

27. In conclusion, the judge has given adequate and sustainable reasons for
    finding that the appellant  does  not  qualify  for  Article  8  relief
    outside the Rules.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

