
S-T
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49178/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 March 2016                       |On 25 April 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                NANCY NDUNGU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Magne, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant has requested an  anonymity  direction  to  protect  the
      identity of the relative whom she is visiting in the UK. I refuse this
      application  for  two  reasons.  Firstly,  the  public   interest   in
      proceedings being open to the public prevails owing to the remote  and
      speculative nature of the risk identified. Secondly, there is no  need
      to identify the person concerned in any event.


   2. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on 20 March 1978. She entered
      the UK on 10 May 2014 as a family visitor with leave  to  enter  valid
      until 15 October 2014. On 14 October 2014 she made an  application  on
      form FLR(O) requesting further leave  as  a  visitor.  She  wanted  to
      extend her stay for family reasons.


   3. The application was refused for reasons set out in a letter  dated  19
      November 2014 which can be summarized as follows. Paragraph 44(ii)  of
      the Immigration Rules, HC395, provided that one  of  the  requirements
      for an extension of stay as a visitor was that the applicant  had  not
      already spent, or would not as a result of an extension of stay spend,
      more than six months in total in the UK. The appellant, having arrived
      on 10 May 2014, had passed the six months limit on 10 November 2014.


   4. The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by Judge of the First-
      tier Tribunal Boyd on 22 July 2015. The respondent was  unrepresented.
      The appellant was represented by Mr Magne who explained to  the  judge
      that the respondent had made an error  in  calculating  the  six-month
      period. The appellant's passport showed she had left the UK on 23  May
      2014 and returned on 19 July 2014. The intervening period  should  not
      have counted. The appellant could have been granted leave to up to the
      expiry of her visa (see article 2(4)  of  the  Immigration  (Leave  to
      Enter and Remain) Order 2000).


   5. The judge accepted that the appellant had not been in  the  UK  during
      that period and the respondent had miscalculated.  He  calculated  the
      appellant could have been granted leave in compliance  with  paragraph
      44(ii) until 2 January 2015. Noting  that  date  had  now  passed,  he
      wrote:


         "18. Accordingly, therefore, the appeal is allowed  to  the  extent
         that the appellant should have been awarded  an  extension  of  her
         Visa from its date of expiry up to a maximum of 26  weeks  but  the
         appellant is entitled to no further  extension  of  Leave  as  that
         extension period has now expired."


   6. However, the judge concluded his decision as follows:


         "The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules."


   7. In her grounds seeking permission to appeal the  appellant  complained
      that the judge's findings were  contradictory.  As  a  result  of  the
      finding in the first  sentence  of  paragraph  18  the  appellant  was
      entitled to a finding that the decision was not in accordance with the
      law. Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted  by
      Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul.


   8. The representatives made submissions on the  issue  of  whether  Judge
      Boyd's decision contained a material error of  law.  I  have  recorded
      these in full in  the  record  of  proceedings  and  taken  them  into
      account. It is not necessary to set them out.


   9. I find Judge Boyd's decision does contain contradictory  findings  and
      must be set aside. In the circumstances, which  are  not  in  dispute,
      that the appellant had left the UK, she was entitled to re-enter for a
      further six-months or until the expiry of her visa, if earlier. Having
      made an  in-time  application,  the  respondent  should  have  applied
      paragraph 44(ii) on the basis of the short time spent in the UK  since
      her last arrival in July 2014. Having  identified  the  error  in  the
      respondent's calculations, the Judge should have allowed the appeal as
      not in accordance with the law. Instead  he  purported  to  go  on  to
      dismiss the appeal.


  10. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and substitute the
      decision which  should  have  been  made.  It  will  now  be  for  the
      respondent  to  give   proper   consideration   to   the   appellant's
      application.


NOTICE OF DECISION

     The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law and  its  decision
    dismissing  the  appeal  is  set  aside.  The  following  decision   is
    substituted:

    The appeal is allowed to the extent the decision made by the respondent
    was not in accordance with the law.

              Signed                Date 14 March 2016




                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal




