
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49420/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 August 2014                               |On 1 September 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                             MR MUHAMMAD JUNAID
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Aslam, Counsel instructed by Bedfords Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is recorded
      as 7 December 1984.   On  12  November  2013  his  application  for  a
      Residence Card as confirmation of a right  to  reside  in  the  United
      Kingdom  pursuant  to  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
      Regulations 2006 was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
      Appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard on 17 March 2014 by Judge of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd.  In a determination promulgated on
      31 March 2014 the appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

   2. Judge Boyd did not find the evidence of the Appellant credible and  in
      particular, though he found present dependency and membership  of  the
      Sponsor's (his uncle) household, he did not find the prior  dependency
      or  prior  membership  of  the  Sponsor's  household  as  required  by
      Regulation 8(2) of the 2006 Regulations and as explained by the  Upper
      Tribunal in the case of Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg 8(2)  [2012]  UK
      UT79.

   3. Additionally  the  judge  did  not  go  on  to  consider  whether  the
      Appellant's Article 8 claim, if any could succeed.  That  was  because
      both parties in the First-tier Tribunal agreed that the issue did  not
      arise in the absence of any removal directions.

   4. On the findings that the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
      Regulation 8(2) the  Appellant  made  application  for  permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal appealed as well as on the basis that the
      judge made findings which were not pertinent to the  appeal  that  was
      before him but more particularly related to the issue of human rights;
      it being submitted that those findings ought not to have been made.

   5. The application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
      initially refused but on renewal to the Upper  Tribunal,  on  23  June
      2014, Judge Chalkley, granted permission.  He did not think that there
      was any great merit in either of the grounds but went on to say,  "The
      parties cannot agree to exclude a judge from considering an Article  8
      appeal where there are no removal directions and despite the  lack  of
      directions, he should have considered it.  Permission  is  granted  on
      the grounds set out in the application as well."  In other words Judge
      Chalkley granted permission on a basis not raised by the Appellant  in
      the grounds.

   6. Mr Aslam on behalf of the Appellant immediately took me  to  paragraph
      22 of the determination of Judge Boyd.  It reads as follows:

           "The background to this appears to be quite simply that this  is
           a case of migration.  The Appellant came to the  United  Kingdom
           on a visit visa and overstayed.  It is my impression that he had
           no intention of returning to his home country of Pakistan.   His
           reason for not returning is extremely weak and vague and I place
           no reliance upon  it.   He  has  siblings  and  his  parents  in
           Pakistan but since coming to the  United  Kingdom  he  has  been
           receiving medical treatment.  He has therefore been a  financial
           burden upon the state in the United Kingdom. The implication  is
           that the Appellant migrated to the United  Kingdom  not  because
           there was any problem in  Pakistan  but  for  medical  treatment
           which he would receive on the NHS at no cost.  No  evidence  has
           been produced that his Sponsor has met the costs of any  medical
           treatment he has received.  I would again refer  to  the  United
           Accountancy Services letter at document 76 where it  was  stated
           that the Appellant would not be claiming support from the state.
            This has proved to be incorrect."

   7. Mr Aslam was concerned that the judge effectively had made  a  finding
      that the Appellant had come to the United Kingdom in order to  receive
      medical treatment and it was  submitted  that  the  entire  claim  was
      deemed to be without merit on the basis that the  Appellant  had  used
      the National Health Service in respect of  his  disability  with  that
      being the motivating factor in coming to the United Kingdom.

   8. Initially, Mr Aslam submitted that there was no  evidence  before  the
      judge that the Appellant had sought any treatment  although  Mr  Aslam
      had to modify that submission when it was  pointed  out  to  him  that
      there was evidence that the Appellant had made  use  of  the  National
      Health Service though there was no sufficient evidence that it was  in
      consequence of his disability. Mr  Aslam's  submission  was  that  the
      observations made by the  judge  impacted  on  his  finding  that  the
      Appellant and Sponsor had not resided together in the  same  household
      prior to coming to the United Kingdom.

   9. I agree with Judge Chalkley that there is in fact little merit in  the
      submission.  The findings in relation to the issue as  to  whether  or
      not the Appellant and Sponsor were members of the  same  household  is
      dealt with at paragraph 20.  The reasons for making  the  finding  are
      adequately explained.  It was noted that  the  Sponsor  left  Pakistan
      when the Appellant was only about 7 years of  age.   The  judge  found
      that there was simply insufficient  evidence.   The  judge  recognised
      that there was evidence to support the Appellant in  the  form  of  an
      affidavit as well as the evidence of the Sponsor and Appellant but the
      judge was not prepared to afford to that evidence sufficient weight in
      the absence of documentary evidence, all the more so when even putting
      the Appellant's case at its highest it would have been 19 years  since
      the Appellant and Sponsor were members of the same household.

  10. Clearly the case of Moneke (EEA - OFMS) Nigeria [2011] UK UT00341 does
      not assist the Appellant.  In that case it was held that membership of
      a household has the meaning set out in KG (Sri Lanka) [2008] EWCA  Civ
      13 and Bigia and Others [2009] EWCA Civ 79; that is to say it  imports
      living for some period of time under the  roof  (not  necessarily  the
      same roof) of a household that can be said  to  be  that  of  the  EEA
      national for a time  when  he  or  she  had  such  nationality.   That
      necessarily required that whilst in possession of such nationality the
      family member has lived somewhere in the world in the same country  as
      the EEA National, but not necessarily in an EEA state.   Even  at  the
      time when putting the Appellant's case  at  its  highest  (though  not
      found to have been the case) the Sponsor would not have  been  an  EEA
      national when the Appellant and Sponsor might have been living in  the
      same household.  However, as I have already observed the judge did not
      find that they had ever been part of the same household and I  do  not
      find that the findings are affected in any way by the  speculation  on
      the part of the judge that the Appellant might have come to the United
      Kingdom in order to receive treatment;  the Appellant was simply found
      to be a poor witness.  He was found at paragraph 22 to be vague in his
      reasons for not returning to Pakistan and he had been  found  to  lack
      credibility  quite  apart  from  the  issue  in  relation  to  medical
      treatment in the assertion that he would not be claiming support  from
      the state which was proved to be incorrect and I  refer  here  to  the
      final sentence of paragraph 22.

  11. I come to the view that this is exactly the sort of  appeal  envisaged
      by the Court of Appeal in the case of VW (Sri Lanka) [2013]  EWCA  Civ
      522 in which the Court of Appeal observed at paragraph 12:

           "Regrettably, there is an  increasing  tendency  in  immigration
           cases, when a First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  given  a  judgment
           explaining why he has reached a particular decision, of  seeking
           to burrow out industriously areas of  evidence  that  have  been
           less fully dealt with in others and then to use this as a  basis
           for saying the judge's decision is legally flawed because it did
           not deal with a particular matter more fully.  In  my  judgment,
           with respect, that is  no  basis  on  which  to  sustain  proper
           challenge to a judge's finding of fact..."

  12.  It  may  in  this  case  the  Appellant  has  sought  to  burrow  out
      industriously an area where the judge has dealt rather more fully with
      an area but the point remains the same.  What  I  do  observe  however
      were this matter were to come back before another tribunal, it  should
      be underlined that the judge did not make a finding of fact  that  the
      Appellant had come to the United Kingdom  in  order  only  to  receive
      medical  treatment,  but  was  speculating  in  the  absence  of   any
      satisfactory explanation what the Appellant  to  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom.  Certain it was that the judge did not accept that there  was
      a prior dependency or prior membership of a household.

  13. It seems to me on the points upon which permission was granted, whilst
      it is clearly preferable for all matters to be dealt with in  the  one
      appeal, it is clear that the Appellant did not abandon any claim under
      Article 8 but that  both  parties  had  agreed  a  way  in  which  the
      Appellant's  status  in  the  United  Kingdom  would   eventually   be
      determined and the  procedure  to  be  adopted  and  followed  if  the
      appellant does not leave voluntarily.  If the judge had been asked  to
      deal with Article 8 ECHR and had refused to do so it seems to me  that
      it is arguable that he would have erred.  But where both parties agree
      and indeed continue to agree before me that there was no error of  law
      then it would, in my judgment, be rather odd for me then  to  find  an
      error of law; I do not do so.  Whether the Appellant is now unlawfully
      in the United Kingdom given the findings of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      and which I uphold is not a matter upon which I am invited to  make  a
      finding but if the Appellant reserves his position pending  a  removal
      decision and the Secretary of State accepts  the  Appellant  would  be
      given a right of appeal then it seems to me it is  a  matter  for  the
      parties.  Whether the Secretary of State decides to make a decision on
      the matter sooner rather than later  is  entirely  a  matter  for  the
      Secretary of State.

Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Designated First Tier Tribunal Judge
(Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal)

