
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49164/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th August 2014                             |On 1st September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                              OLEXIY YAROVENKO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones of Counsel instructed by Cavendish Legal
Group
For the Respondent:    Mr A Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 10th June 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein gave permission to the
    appellant to appeal against the determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Paul  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds against the  decision  of
    the respondent to refuse a residence card as the  family  member  of  a
    qualified person in accordance with the provisions of paragraph  17  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

Error on a Point of Law

 2. Judge Goldstein granted permission on the basis that  it  was  arguable
    that Judge Paul had failed to take account of material evidence  before
    him with the consequence that he  made  mistakes  of  fact  leading  to
    unfairness.

 3. The grounds of application argue that the judge: failed  to  take  into
    consideration the contract of employment for the  sponsor;  took  issue
    with matters not raised at the hearing and thus deprived the  appellant
    of the opportunity to address them; wrongly took into account  evidence
    relating to the appellant's employment when  considering  that  of  the
    sponsor; and made  unfounded  allegations  of  dishonesty  against  the
    appellant's representatives.  It  is  also  submitted  that  the  judge
    failed to follow the guidance set out in  Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439 when considering statements of account from Barclays Bank.

 4. I heard submissions from both representatives in relation to the  error
    issue.

 5. Mr Jones argued that the judge had committed errors  of  fact.  It  was
    wrong for him to give no weight to the sponsor's contract of employment
    which clearly showed that she was working and that money had been  paid
    into her bank account.  There was also no basis upon  which  the  judge
    could have concluded that the Barclays bank  statements  could  not  be
    relied upon.  The respondent had not proved  that  the  documents  were
    fraudulent.   The  judge's  conclusions  in   paragraph   13   of   the
    determination were  wrong  as  the  transfer  credit  advice  gave  the
    identity of the bank and its location.

 6. As to the allegations against solicitors,  Mr  Jones  argued  that  the
    judge was wrong to infer  any  irregularity  into  the  fact  that  the
    appellant was employed by a company which had its registered office  at
    the same address as representatives  without  giving  the  parties  the
    opportunity to respond.   The  same  could  be  said  for  the  judge's
    questioning of payments from an account with a bank in Latvia when  the
    company was trading from Scotland.  If the  judge  had  concerns  about
    these matters then an adjournment might have been appropriate to enable
    the appellant to respond.

 7. Whilst Mr Jones conceded that the appellant had not put bank statements
    before  the  judge  even  though  those  these  had   been   given   to
    representatives, the judge did have the credit slips showing payments.

 8. Mr Kandola confirmed that the respondent relied upon the terms  of  the
    response which argued that, apart  from  the  contract  of  employment,
    there was no other documentary evidence to show that the appellant  was
    working as claimed and the judge was not in error  in  concluding  that
    the appellant had not discharged  the  burden  of  proof.   He  further
    contended that insufficient financial information had been provided  to
    show that the appellant was in receipt of pay.  He also argued that the
    judge's comments about the coincidence in addresses (paragraph 16)  was
    not critical as it related to the employment of  the  appellant  rather
    than the sponsor.   Further,  the  judge  had  found  documents  to  be
    unreliable (paragraph 17) rather than to be false.

 9. In conclusion Mr  Jones  argued  that  any  allegation  of  impropriety
    against  representatives,  as  suggested  by  paragraph   16   of   the
    determination, had to be raised with Counsel at the hearing.

Conclusions

10. At the end of the hearing I announced that I  was  satisfied  that  the
    determination showed errors on points of law in relation to the judge's
    credibility findings such that the appeal should be heard afresh by the
    First-tier Tribunal following the provisions of paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statements for the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the
    Senior President of Tribunals dated 25th September  2012.   My  reasons
    for those conclusions follow.

11.  At  paragraph  12  of  the  determination  the  judge  describes   the
    circumstances surrounding the sponsor's employment as  "very  curious".
    That appears to be because the company for which she worked as a  self-
    employed person had its offices in Scotland but made  payments  from  a
    bank account in Riga  in  Latvia,  the  sponsor's  home  country.   The
    determination does not show  that  the  judge  raised  the  issue  with
    representatives  in  order  to  give  the  appellant  and  sponsor  the
    opportunity to respond.  Certainly the payment of funds from a  foreign
    account does not, of itself, mean that the appellant's  evidence  about
    her employment should not be believed.  Although, in paragraph 12,  the
    judge also  found  the  sponsor's  evidence  about  the  provenance  of
    invoices to be less than satisfactory, no specific reason is given  for
    that conclusion save that when giving evidence the sponsor appeared  to
    be "a little uncertain to  begin  with"  (paragraph  7).   The  judge's
    conclusions about all of these matters  are inadequately reasoned.

12. As to the conclusions of the judge in relation to the  transfer  credit
    advice, he describes  this  also  as  "curious"  because  it  does  not
    identify the precise bank and its location.  But  the  document  itself
    gives the full postcode of the Leicester branch of the  bank  where  it
    was issued. This was a mistake of fact.

13. The judge also reached his credibility findings on the basis  that  the
    contract of employment  produced  by  the  appellant  for  Easy  Street
    Commodities Ltd  had  a  registered  address  which  was  that  of  the
    representatives.  The judge does not explain why  this  causes  him  to
    disbelieve  the  appellant  save  to  say  that  the  matter  is  again
    "curious".  The judge's conclusions are no more  than  speculation  and
    are  inadequately  reasoned  in  circumstances  when  a   contract   of
    employment could be considered as good evidence of such employment.

14. The judge's failure to give adequate reasons for findings  on  material
    matters and to give the appellant the opportunity to respond to  issues
    which were not raised at the hearing and the mistake of fact amount  to
    errors on points of law.

15. As the errors mean that fresh findings of fact must  be  made  in  this
    appeal a fresh  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  appropriate
    following paragraph 7(2) of the Senior President's Practice  Directions
    of 25 September 2012.





DIRECTIONS

 1. This appeal is to be heard afresh by the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor
    House on 11th February 2015.

 2. The hearing should not be before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Paul.

 3. A Latvian and a Russian interpreter will be required  for  the  hearing
    which is estimated to last two hours.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
