
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49260/2014
                                                               IA/49263/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28th September 2015               |On 30th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

     DEEPIKA LOOMBA    First Appellant
     SUSHIL MADAAN     Second Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms A Imamovic of Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. In this appeal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant before  the
    Upper Tribunal.  However, for the sake of consistency and the avoidance
    of confusion, I shall continue to refer to the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. On  25th  June  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lever  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Somal  in  which  she  allowed  the  appeal  on
    immigration grounds against the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant  under  the  points-
    based system for the first appellant and as a dependant spouse for  the
    second appellant.

 3. Judge Lever granted permission noting  that  the  respondent  contended
    that the judge had not applied the date of application as the  relevant
    date for consideration of the evidence and had allegedly failed to give
    adequate reasons for conclusions.  Permission was granted because Judge
    Lever considered both grounds to be  arguable  pointing  out  that  the
    judge had only briefly examined the evidence and it  was  not  entirely
    clear what the judge had meant by saying that "the  Presenting  Officer
    accepted that all required points had been achieved".

Error on a Point of Law

 4. At the hearing before me I heard submissions in relation to  the  issue
    of an error on a point of law which I now summarise.

 5. Ms Johnstone confirmed that the respondent  relied  upon  the  grounds.
    These indicate  that  the  judge  gave  the  wrong  self  direction  in
    paragraph 5 of the decision by saying that she could consider  all  the
    relevant circumstances at the date of  hearing  when,  in  points-based
    system cases, the relevant date was the date of application.   Further,
    the grounds contend that no findings of fact had been made in  relation
    to two of the points raised in the respondent's refusal in relation  to
    paragraph 245DD(h), namely: that the appellant  genuinely  intended  to
    invest the money referred  to  in  the  business  and  that  the  money
    referred to was genuinely available and would  remain  available  until
    spent by the business.  Ms Johnstone reminded me that the relevant date
    for consideration of evidence was 24th June 2014 when  the  application
    was made.  She drew attention to paragraphs 11 and 12 of  the  decision
    in which the judge refers to  evidence  which  clearly  post-dated  the
    application, notably the  production  of  advertising  information  and
    listings for the business.  The judge had also  failed  to  tackle  the
    issue of the genuineness of the business.

 6. Ms Johnstone also made reference to the skeleton argument submitted  by
    Ms Imamovic at paragraph  15  in  which  the  latter  stated  that  the
    respondent had been afforded the benefit of the interview record of the
    appellant which post-dated the application.   Ms  Johnstone  emphasised
    that the interview had taken place before the  refusal  decision.   She
    then sought to distinguish between the issue of the genuineness of  the
    business and the respondent's apparent acceptance, on  page  6  of  the
    refusal letter, that the  appellant  had  been  awarded  all  necessary
    points in respect of the application.  She believed that the  case  did
    not fall within the decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Ahmed  (PBS:
    admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 365 (IAC) in which the Upper  Tribunal
    had concluded that the non-points-scoring aspect and  the  requirements
    for points are inextricably linked.  She expressed the view that it was
    possible to be satisfied with the point's aspect but not the issue  now
    raised namely, the genuineness of the business.

 7. Ms Imamovic drew my attention to her comprehensive  skeleton  argument.
    She also indicated that she accepted that the judge had  erred  in  the
    self direction given in paragraph 5 of the decision but  she  submitted
    that it was not material.  In summary, her contentions are these.   She
    argues that the appellant could  benefit  from  the  exception  to  the
    limits on evidence set out in Section 85A(4)(d) of the 2002 Act as  the
    genuineness issue was not related to the  acquisition  of  points.   In
    this respect she contends that the decision of the Tribunal in Ahmed is
    contrary to the "structure"  of  Section  85A.   That  is  because  the
    refusal letter in this appeal makes it clear  that  the  appellant  had
    been awarded all the points required  and  that  consideration  of  the
    genuineness of the business was not constrained by the restrictions  in
    Section 85A(4)(a).  She also contends that Ahmed does not preclude  the
    giving of subsequent oral evidence.

 8. I expressed the view to Ms Imamovic that there appeared to be no  scope
    to distinguish the present case from the conclusions of the Tribunal in
    Ahmed. However, I indicated that the judge may have  been  misled  into
    thinking that the apparent confirmation  in  the  respondent's  refusal
    letter that the appellant scored all the points  required,  meant  that
    the issue concerning the genuineness of the business was open to her to
    consider separately and in the  light  of  all  the  evidence  produced
    including that which post-dated the application.   Ms  Imamovic  agreed
    that the respondent's decision appeared to be  out  of  step  with  the
    point made in Ahmed that a non-points-scoring  aspect  of  the  refusal
    (i.e.  issues  such  as  the  genuineness  of  the  business)  and  the
    requirements for points are inextricably linked.  In  this  respect  Ms
    Imamovic also agreed that sub-paragraph (n) of paragraph 245DD  of  the
    Immigration Rules suggested that the  respondent  had  overlooked  that
    point.  The sub-paragraph reads:

         "(n)  If  the  Secretary  of  State  is  not  satisfied  with   the
             genuineness of the application in relation to a points-scoring
             requirement in Appendix A, those points will not be awarded."

    As the respondent stated in the refusal that all  the  points  required
    were awarded the decision would appear not to have been  in  accordance
    with the law because, if the genuineness of the business was in  issue,
    the points could not have been awarded.

 9. On that basis I also suggested that Ms  Imamovic's  argument  that  the
    judge  was  entitled  to  consider  evidence   which   post-dated   the
    application by virtue of sub-paragraph (d) of Section 85A(4) also falls
    away.

10. At the end of submissions the representatives agreed that if I were  to
    find a material error on a point of law it would be open to me  to  re-
    make the decision by allowing the appeal on the limited basis that  the
    decision should be remitted back to the respondent to make  a  decision
    which was in accordance with the law as explained in Ahmed.

Conclusions

11. I have little hesitation in reaching the conclusion that  the  decision
    shows a material error on a point of law.  That is because the  judge's
    approach to the evidence adduced was wrong.  The self  direction  given
    in paragraph 5 suggests that the judge was not aware of the  evidential
    constraints imposed by Section 85A(4)(a) of the 2002  Act.   The  judge
    was also in error in applying evidence  which  clearly  post-dated  the
    date of application relating to the genuineness of  the  business.   As
    Ahmed makes clear (paragraph 7) the assessment of the genuineness of an
    application is related to the acquisition of points under  the  points-
    based system and the two matters are inextricably linked.  The  judge's
    decision was therefore materially flawed because she was  not  entitled
    to consider the later evidence. Further, the judge did  not  apply  her
    mind to the possibility that the respondent's indication in the refusal
    that the appellant had scored all necessary points was an error if  the
    genuineness of the proposed business was being contested. As the errors
    are material the decision is set aside.

Re-Making the Decision

12. Despite Counsel's submissions to the contrary, I am not satisfied  that
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ahmed can be regarded as, in  any
    respect, unauthoritative.  It is clearly the case that,  in  a  points-
    based system application, the assessment  of  the  genuineness  of  the
    application, particularly business proposals,  must  be  seen  together
    with the acquisition of  points.   That  established  proposition  does
    suggest that, in the  circumstances  of  this  case,  the  respondent's
    refusal decision is not in accordance with the law.   I  refer  to  the
    matters which are raised under the heading "Non-Points-Scoring  Reasons
    for Refusal" of the refusal decision of 13th November  2014.   In  that
    section  the  respondent  expresses  concerns  about  the   appellant's
    intentions to actively run a business, the authenticity of the business
    contract,  the  genuineness  of  an  advertising  campaign,  inadequate
    experience and,  in  consequence,  the  genuineness  of  the  business.
    However, under the heading "Points-Scoring" the respondent has  awarded
    all available points in respect of each relevant attribute when this is
    contrary to paragraph (n) of paragraph 245DD of the Rules which  states
    that if the Secretary of State is not satisfied with the genuineness of
    the application in relation to a points-scoring requirement in Appendix
    A (attributes) those points will not be awarded.

13. From the above I have to conclude that the  respondent's  decision  was
    not in accordance with the law.  I am therefore obliged  to  allow  the
    appeal but to the limited extent that the decision is remitted back  to
    the respondent to reconsider the application.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on a  point  of  law.
I set aside the decision and re-make it by allowing the appeal but  only  to
the limited extent stated above in paragraph 13.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014 and I do not consider an anonymity direction is necessary  before
the Upper Tribunal nor was one requested.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
