
[pic]
IAC-TH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49299/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 September 2015                 |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    miss Christelle Teclaire Ngueti Loko
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. J. Trussler, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a respondent appeal but I shall henceforth refer to the parties
    in the original terms detailed in the decision of Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Row following a consideration by him of  this  appeal  on
    papers.

 2. The appellant is a national of Cameroon who appealed against a decision
    of the respondent to refuse to issue her with a residence card  as  the
    extended family member of an EEA national  under  Regulation  8(2)  and
    Regulation  17(4)  of  the   Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations")  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
    refusal letter of 26 November 2014.

 3. Following consideration of the appeal Judge Row allowed  it  under  the
    EEA Regulations.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on 6 May 2015.  Paragraph 7 of  his  written
    reasons for granting permission identifies the nub of the appeal before
    me.  It states:-

         "7.  I have considered the decision and reasons; I have  considered
             the respondent's submissions.  I find that the respondent  has
             established that there is an arguable  error  of  law  in  the
             judge's  decision  for  the  first  reason  outlined  in   the
             respondent's application with  regard  to  the  acceptance  of
             challenged photocopies of  significant  evidential  documents.
             Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal is granted on  that
             point."

 5. Ms. Holmes relied on the grounds seeking  permission  to  appeal.   She
    referred me to the respondent's refusal letter where it states:-

         "Additionally  this  department  cannot  be   satisfied   of   your
         relationship  with  the  EEA  national.   You  have  provided  your
         original birth certificate and the EEA  national's  original  birth
         certificate.  You have  then  provided  photocopies  of  two  birth
         certificates, one belonging to the EEA national's  parent  and  the
         other belonging to your  parent.   This  department  cannot  accept
         photocopies of valuable documents such  as  birth  certificates  as
         evidence of a relationship.  Therefore  your  application  is  also
         refused with reference to Regulation 17(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration
         (EEA) Regulations 2006 which states ...".

    Ms Holmes carefully checked the respondent's file as in the  course  of
    the hearing it was suggested that the originals of the two documents in
    question had been lodged with the respondent at the time of the  making
    of the  application.   However,  although  her  file  showed  that  the
    originals of  the  appellant  and  her  EEA  national  partner's  birth
    certificates had been so filed and  returned  to  them,  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that this was the position in relation to  the  two
    certificates in question.  Ms. Holmes argued that the judge had  failed
    to deal with this issue raised within the respondent's  refusal  letter
    and accordingly should not have attached the  weight  that  he  did  to
    photocopied birth certificates resulting in him finding that the burden
    of proof had been met to the required standard and thereby allowing the
    appeal.

 6.  Mr.  Trussler  pointed  to  the  fact  that  the  originals,  on   his
    instructions, had been filed with the application but, unlike the birth
    certificates of the  appellant  and  her  EEA  national  partner  there
    appeared to be no evidence to suggest that they had  been  returned  to
    the appellant's representatives.  He was unable to produce the original
    certificates today and acknowledged that on  careful  consideration  at
    what was before Judge Row,  the  respondent's  anxieties  as  expressed
    within the Reasons for Refusal Letter had not been met.

 7. I find that to be the position.  It was incumbent upon the appellant to
    prove her case to the required standard.  An anxiety  had  been  raised
    within the refusal letter which had not been met.  Her response to that
    refusal letter should have been to provide the  original  documentation
    to Judge Row, thereby meeting the expressed anxiety.  Having failed  to
    do so at that juncture the judge was only able to decide the appeal  on
    the documentation before him.  He has materially erred  in  failing  to
    deal with this issue as raised by the respondent and in the absence  of
    original documentation, as asserted by the respondent,  the  judge  has
    materially erred in allowing the appeal.  The appellant did  not  prove
    her case to the required standard and  accordingly  the  appeal  should
    have been dismissed.

Decision

 8. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision.

    I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 22 September 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 22 September 2015.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
