
[pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49014/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th March 2016                           |On 14th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        MR oluwagbemiga anthony idowu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr O Ogunbiyi (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to  the  Appellant  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  the
    Secretary of State.  I shall refer to the Respondent before  the  Upper
    Tribunal as the Claimant.  This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal, brought with permission, against a decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Martins herein after "the  judge")  allowing
    the Claimant's appeal against a decision of 14th November 2014 refusing
    to vary his leave to enter the UK and deciding to remove him by way  of
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.

 2. By way of brief background, the Claimant who was born on 29th June 1988
    is a national of Nigeria.  He entered the UK on 26th September 2007  as
    a  student  and  subsequently  extended  that  leave.   Eventually,  he
    submitted an application for leave to remain on the grounds of marriage
    to a UK national and it was that application, and  its  refusal,  which
    led to the above decision and the subsequent appeal to the  judge.   It
    is also right to point out  that  the  adjudication  process  has  been
    somewhat convoluted with there having been a  previous  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal which I shall say something about, albeit  briefly,
    below.

 3. The Claimant was represented before the  judge  but  the  Secretary  of
    State was not.  The judge, when considering the  Article  8  arguments,
    noted that the application which had led to the decision under  appeal,
    had been made on 22nd December 2011  which  was  prior  to  significant
    changes which had been made to the Immigration Rules on 9th July  2012.
    Of course, there have subsequently been certain further  changes.   The
    judge considered that, given that the application had been  made  prior
    to the changes to the Immigration Rules, she had to base  her  decision
    upon the Immigration Rules as they stood in December 2011 and that this
    meant, in consequence, that when she came to consider Article 8 she had
    to undertake what is sometimes referred to as a "freewheeling"  Article
    8 assessment which would be unencumbered by the content of  what  might
    be described as the Article  8  related  Immigration  Rules.   On  that
    basis, she allowed the Claimant's appeal,  having  concluded  that  the
    Article was engaged and that, although any interference with Article  8
    rights would be lawful and  in  pursuance  of  a  legitimate  aim,  the
    interference would not be proportionate.  In this context, she accepted
    that the Claimant had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  with  his
    British citizen wife who had lived all her life in the UK, that he  had
    been lawfully resident in the UK at all material  times  and  that  the
    interference with his family life would be disproportionate even if  it
    simply meant his having to return to return  to  Nigeria  in  order  to
    apply for and obtain entry clearance.

 4. The Secretary of State obtained permission to appeal on the basis  that
    following the judgment in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74,  the  Secretary  of
    State  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules as they stood at the time the relevant  decision  was
    made.  Permission was also granted on the basis that, in any event, the
    judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  public   interest   requirements
    identified under Section 117B  of  the  [Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002].

 5. In light of the grant of permission there  was  a  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal (before me) with the  intention  that  the  question  of
    whether or not the judge had erred in law would be addressed.  However,
    Mr Diwnycz indicated that  he  did  not  seek  to  pursue  any  of  the
    arguments in the grounds lodged on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.
    He also pointed out that the Secretary of State  had,  in  the  earlier
    appeal  against  the  same  decision,  conceded  that  the   Claimant's
    application ought to be considered on the basis of the law as it  stood
    in December 2011.  Mr Diwnycz said that the Secretary  of  State  would
    stand by that concession/undertaking.

 6. Mr Diwnycz is known to  me  and  is  a  very  experienced  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.  He is  indeed  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.  He was, of course, representing the Secretary of State before
    me.  He told me that he did not wish to  pursue  the  grounds  and,  it
    seems to me, in those circumstances,  if  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    offering no argument and is, in effect, not seeking to  rely  upon  the
    grounds, then there is no basis upon which I can or  should  set  aside
    the decision of the judge.  Accordingly, I conclude that the judge  did
    not err in law and that the decision shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision did not involve an error of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not disturb the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

