
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49108/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 December 2017                           |On 12 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              Fabrice Mesongolo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Chapman, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Fabrice Mesongolo, was born  on  20  January
    1984 and is a male citizen of the Democratic Republic of  Congo  (DRC).
    He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J H H Cooper) against the
    decision of the Secretary of State to deport him to  DRC.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal in a decision which is dated 26 August 2017, allowed  the
    appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals, with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The parties agree that the appellant was subject to the  provisions  of
    Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  (as
    amended):

         Article 8: additional considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign
         criminals

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4) Exception 1 applies where-

         (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most  of
         C's life,

         (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United  Kingdom,
         and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  C's  integration
         into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.

         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public  interest
         requires   deportation   unless   there   are    very    compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be  taken
         into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision to
         deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that  the  reason  for
         the decision was the offence or offences for which the criminal has
         been convicted.

 3. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal turned  on  the  question  of
    whether there existed "very significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's
    integration into DRC".  In addition, the Secretary of State  challenges
    the judge's finding in respect of  paragraph  399A(b)  of  HC  395  (as
    amended) which concerns  the  appellant's  integration  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  As regards integration  into  DRC,  the  Secretary  of  State
    asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  pay  proper  attention  to   the
    possibility of the appellant receiving financial assistance  under  the
    Facilitated Returns Scheme  and  from  family  members  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It was accepted by the Secretary of State that the  appellant
    is a person of low IQ  but  that  he  did  not  face  very  significant
    obstacles dissimilar from others of a low  IQ  returning  to  DRC.   As
    regards cultural and social integration  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    Secretary of State argues that the judge has paid too  great  attention
    to the length of residence of the appellant in the United Kingdom  (see
    Bossade (Section 117A-D - interrelationship with Rules) [2015] UKUT 415
    (IAC)).  Further, the Secretary of State asserts that the  judge  erred
    at [87] by finding that the appellant's deportation would "amount to  a
    disproportionate interference with Article 8 rights  not  only  of  the
    appellant but also of his partner ... and  his  mother  and  siblings".
    Exception 1, as it appears in Section 117C(4),  does  not  concern  the
    human rights  of  partners  or  other  family  members  and  by  making
    reference to those rights, the judge had departed from the confines  of
    the statute and had erred in law.  The judge had also made no  specific
    finding in respect of exception 2 to the effect that there would be  an
    unduly harsh outcome for the appellant's partner if she remained in the
    United Kingdom without the appellant.

 4. In his oral submissions, Mr Bramble  challenged  the  judge's  reliance
    upon expert evidence provided by Dr  Kodi.   Dr  Kodi  had  dealt  with
    difficulties which the appellant might encounter upon return to DRC  as
    a returning foreign offender.  Mr Bramble referred to Dr Kodi's  report
    at [7], where the expert had stated that the appellant  did  not  "have
    any work experience or skills".  That observation was at odds with  the
    finding of  the  judge  at  [62]  that  the  appellant  has,  with  the
    encouragement  and  support  of  others,  "set  up  his   own   fitness
    training/personal training business".

 5. I shall deal with that oral submission first.  I do not find  that  the
    judge was wrong to  rely  upon  the  expert  evidence  for  the  reason
    submitted by Mr Bramble.  As Ms Chapman pointed  out,  the  expert  had
    recorded  in  his  report  that  the  appellant  had  experience  as  a
    bodybuilder [1] and worked as a personal trainer [6].  The expert  was,
    therefore, aware of the appellant's business activities, if they may be
    described as such.  In my opinion, Dr Kodi's report may  be  read  with
    the understanding that, whilst the expert was aware that the  appellant
    had found work as a personal trainer, he did not posses work experience
    or skills such as would be of any use to him in DRC.  I do not consider
    that  Dr  Kodi's  expert  evidence  is  in  any   way   diminished   by
    inconsistency, as Mr Bramble submits, and I find that Judge Cooper  was
    entitled to attach weight to the report.

 6. Secondly, as regards the alleged error at [87], I find that  the  judge
    may have lapsed into a technical error  by  taking  regard  to  factors
    which lay outside the consideration of Section 117C but I find that any
    errors are not sufficiently serious to  undermine  the  decision  as  a
    whole.  I do not consider the judge's remarks at [87] form part of  the
    ratio of the decision.  In essence, the judge has simply remarked  that
    the appellant's removal would adversely affect the lives of  others  in
    addition to the appellant.  That observation was open  to  him  on  the
    evidence even if it may not  properly  have  played  any  role  in  his
    analysis of the Section 117C factors.

 7. Otherwise, the grounds of appeal challenge the judge's decision on  the
    basis that he has failed to show that the  appellant  has  crossed  the
    high threshold of proving "very significant obstacles"  to  integration
    in DRC.  Whilst I am aware that giving a large number of reasons for  a
    decision does not make that decision right in law, the fact remains, as
    Ms Chapman pointed out, that the judge has given a very detailed series
    of reasons for finding that very significant obstacles do exist.  Those
    reasons (ten in all) are set out in Ms Chapman's Rule 24  statement  at
    [4.2]. I do not consider any of the reasons given by the  judge  to  be
    either irrational or perverse.  As Ms Chapman also points  out  in  her
    Rule  24  statement,  "an  elevated  threshold  as  applicable  in  the
    determination of the facts in the light of the  threshold  requires  an
    evaluative assessment by the Tribunal".  Given  that  it  was  for  the
    Tribunal to evaluate the evidence and give  clear  and  cogent  reasons
    and, in light of the fact that there is no submission by the  Secretary
    of State that,  on  the  particular  facts,  the  decision  itself  was
    perverse, I have struggled to find any errors in the  reasons  provided
    by Judge Cooper which  might  vitiate  his  decision.   The  judge  has
    carefully analysed  the  evidence  and  has  given  clear  reasons  for
    concluding that very significant obstacles do exist.  Another Tribunal,
    faced with the same facts, may have come to a different conclusion  but
    that is not the point.  Contrary to what is stated in the Secretary  of
    State's grounds, none of the reasons given by the judge can be properly
    described as slight whilst, taken as a whole, the  reasons  plainly  go
    beyond establishing that this appellant would face only  mere  hardship
    or inconvenience upon return to his country  of  nationality.   In  the
    circumstances, I have concluded that I should not  interfere  with  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal and the Secretary of State's appeal
    is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.

 9. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 3 January 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
