
[pic]
IAC-UT

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 February 2016                      |On 18 March 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MSA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr  I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Woolf and Mrs  J  A  Endersby)  allowing  an
    appeal by the applicant on articles 3 and 8 grounds against a  decision
    by the respondent  made  on  3  December  2014  refusing  to  revoke  a
    deportation order. In this decision I will refer to the parties as they
    were before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant and
    the Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

2.   There is a lengthy and chequered background to this  appeal  which  can
    briefly be summarised as follows. The appellant claims that he was born
    on 11 November 1974 and is a former resident of the West  Bank  in  the
    Occupied Palestinian Territories. He entered the UK on his account on 9
    February 2004  and  claimed  asylum  the  same  day  as  a  Palestinian
    National. His asylum claim was refused and an appeal  was  subsequently
    dismissed. On 12 July 2007 the  appellant  was  convicted  at  Grantham
    Magistrates Court of  using  a  false  instrument,  a  French  identity
    document, and was sentenced to 12  months  imprisonment.  A  notice  of
    decision to make a deportation order was sent to  the  appellant  on  9
    January 2008, by which time the respondent had  information  suggesting
    that the appellant was in fact  an  Egyptian  national.  The  appellant
    appealed against this decision but subsequently withdrew his appeal.

3.   A deportation order was made on 25 June 2008.  The  appellant  declined
    the offer of the facilitated removal scheme and remained  in  detention
    until 19 March 2010 when he was granted bail.  Meanwhile,  in  November
    2009 the appellant had been interviewed by the Egyptian authorities who
    advised the respondent that they could  not  confirm  that  he  was  an
    Egyptian citizen or  initiate  further  checks  in  Cairo.  An  earlier
    attempt to obtain travel documentation from  the  Palestine  Delegate's
    Office in February 2009 had also  been  unsuccessful  as  was  a  later
    application made in December  2009.  On  30  July  2010  the  appellant
    applied to revoke the deportation order. His application was refused on
    17 October 2013 but this decision was withdrawn in May 2014 to consider
    the  appellant's  route  of  return  and  his  medical  condition   but
    maintained in the further decision on 3 December 2014.

4.   The appellant appealed against this decision and  the  history  of  the
    appeal proceedings prior to the full hearing on 21 July 2015 is set out
    at [10]-[14] of the First-tier Tribunal's decision. The respondent  had
    been directed to provide written details of the  route  and  method  of
    proposed return of the appellant to the West  Bank  on  the  assumption
    that he was a Palestinian from the West Bank and having regard  to  his
    particular mental health problems. The respondent failed to comply with
    this direction and was unable to  give  any  adequate  explanation  why
    [16]. Doubtless taking into account the previous difficulties  set  out
    at [11]-[13] in persuading the respondent to comply with  the  previous
    direction, the tribunal took the view that any further delay would  not
    be in the interests of justice and the  appeal  proceeded  on  21  July
    2015.

The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The respondent's case is fully set out in  the  decision  letter  of  3
    December 2014. She did not accept that the appellant was a  Palestinian
    and took the view that he was only  claiming  to  be  so  in  order  to
    frustrate the deportation process. It was her view  that  he  was  most
    likely an Egyptian national. However, she went on to  consider  whether
    removing him to the West Bank would lead to a breach of either  article
    3 or 8 but found firstly that the high threshold of showing a breach of
    article 3 was not reached and secondly, that he  was  not  entitled  to
    remain on article 8 grounds. It was the respondent's  view  that  there
    were no sufficiently compelling circumstances justifying revocation  of
    the deportation order.  The appellant's case put simply was that he was
    a Palestinian National and that returning him there would be in  breach
    of article 3 or 8 in the light of his mental health  problems  and  the
    real risk of serious harm including suicide on return.

6.   Having summarised the evidence at  [19]-[28]  and  the  submissions  at
    [29]-[46], the tribunal then set out its  findings  on  nationality  at
    [53]-[73] and on returnability and mental health issues  at  [74]-[99].
    It found that the appellant was in all probability from the West  Bank.
    It summarised its finding at [73] as follows:

         "Whilst the appellant has not been  consistent  about  his  family
        circumstances and has been in many respects obstructive in relation
        to  providing  or  obtaining  sufficient  information  so   as   to
        facilitate his return,  we  are  satisfied  after  considering  the
        evidence in totality the appellant is in all probability  from  the
        West Bank in the Occupied Territories."


7.   So far as mental health and returnability was  concerned  at  [90]-[91]
    the tribunal said:

         "The prospect of his having to go through Israeli  checkpoints  is
        in our judgment a significant indicator  that  he  is  at  risk  of
        serious harm during any such encounter. We are satisfied that it is
        likely that he would present as rather threatening and  strange  if
        challenged about his movement through such checkpoints  given  that
        he believes the Israelis have planted  something  in  his  head  in
        order to control him. We are also satisfied that  it  is  extremely
        likely that the current situation in the West Bank would be  likely
        to induce extreme distress and anxiety. We are not  satisfied  that
        the appellant would be in  a  position  to  avail  himself  of  any
        assistance from medical health professionals in the West Bank.


        We have had regard to the guidance in J v SSHD [2005] mentioned  by
        the respondent in the  refusal  letter.  At  paragraph  85  of  the
        refusal letter the respondent said that escorts would accompany the
        appellant at risk to the point of arrival in the country of  return
        (emphasis  added).  We  have  been  given  no  information  by  the
        respondent that indicates that this will be practicable given  that
        the appellant is undocumented. We are not satisfied that  the  risk
        the appellant would take his own life  would  be  obviated  by  any
        measures the respondent would take in removing the appellant to the
        West Bank."

8.   Accordingly, the appeal was allowed on article 3 grounds. The  tribunal
    went on to consider article 8. In this context it said that it did  not
    condone his offence but it was one which did not  pose  any  threat  of
    physical harm to the public and that the public  interest  in  pursuing
    deportation was outweighed by the very likely severe  consequences  for
    his mental and physical welfare. The tribunal was also  persuaded  that
    the time had come  when  it  was  not  possible  to  foresee  that  the
    respondent  would  ever  be  in  a  position  to  give  effect  to  the
    deportation order and after considering the judgment of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Abdullah v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 42 held that this was a case where the continuing interference
    with the appellant's physical and  moral  integrity  by  maintaining  a
    state of limbo in his immigration status was  no  longer  justified  or
    proportionate [98]. The appeal was therefore also allowed on article  8
    grounds.

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

9.   The respondent's grounds of appeal argue that the  tribunal  failed  to
    give adequate reasons why a number of relevant matters were  found  not
    to outweigh the evidence that  the  appellant  was  Palestinian.  These
    include the fact that the appellant had a willingness to use deception,
    his ability or inability to answer basic questions in relation  to  the
    West Bank, the acceptance at face value of the expert  report  from  Dr
    Kelly that very few  Palestinians  could  recall  their  identity  card
    number, the failure to take into account the  evidence  supporting  the
    contention that the appellant was Egyptian and the failure to  take  to
    consider the Occupied Palestinian  Territories  OGN  that  obtaining  a
    travel document should not be taken into account when  considering  the
    merits of an asylum or human rights claim. It  is  submitted  that  for
    these reasons the tribunal materially  erred  by  concluding  that  the
    appellant  was  from  the  West  Bank  and  as  a  result  the   entire
    determination was contaminated.

10.  The respondent then seeks to challenge  the  tribunal's  assessment  of
    the appellant's situation in  the  West  Bank.  It  is  argued  that  a
    holistic assessment was required. Reliance is placed on  Bensaid  v  UK
    [2001] ECHR 82 where it was held that the  risk  that  the  applicant's
    condition would deteriorate and the fact  that  he  would  not  receive
    adequate care in support would not  be  a  breach  of  article  8.  The
    tribunal had  failed  to  explain  how  the  appellant's  circumstances
    reached the very high threshold set under article 3 and failed to  take
    into account recent jurisprudence and in particular GS  (India)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 40. The  tribunal  had  placed  too  much  weight  on  reports
    provided by the appellant  and  materially  erred  because  the  entire
    reasoning on whether the appellant would seek medical assistance in the
    West Bank was based on the assumption that he  would  be  unwilling  to
    avail himself of  any  assistance  from  medical  health  professionals
    there. Further, the tribunal failed to identify and explain the reasons
    why the appellant could  not  return  to  the  West  Bank  and  receive
    treatment there and, generally, had failed to give adequate reasons for
    disagreeing with the respondent's analysis in the decision letter.

11.  Mr Jarvis  submitted  that  there  were  concerns  about  the  lack  of
    documentation of the appellant's claim  and  lack  of  clarity  in  the
    tribunal's findings. He argued that the  tribunal  had  been  concerned
    about matters not arising out of protection  issues.  The  question  of
    travel documents amounted to a technical obstacle to return  which  did
    not affect the merits or otherwise of an asylum or human rights  claim.
    The tribunal had failed to consider  Bensaid.  He  submitted  that  the
    tribunal had failed to draw all the threads of  the  evidence  together
    adequately both in respect of the  issue  of  nationality  and  in  the
    assessment of article 3.

12.  Ms Easty relied on her rule 24 response. She argued that  the  tribunal
    had considered all relevant evidence as to nationality and had come  to
    properly  reasoned  conclusions.   In   substance,   the   respondent's
    challenges amounted to asking for reasons  for  reasons  or  sought  to
    challenge the weight given to particular aspects  of  evidence  by  the
    tribunal. The challenge to the tribunal's findings about the impact  of
    the appellant's medical condition on return was an attempt to  re-argue
    issues which had been resolved by the tribunal. She submitted that none
    of the arguments relied on in the grounds disclosed any error  of  law.
    The tribunal had analysed the evidence and reached a decision  properly
    open to it.

Assessment of Whether there is an Error of Law

13.  I must consider whether  the  tribunal  erred  in  law  such  that  its
    decision should be set aside. The respondent does not satisfy  me  that
    there is any such error. When considering the issue of nationality  the
    tribunal noted that the position of the  respondent  had  changed  over
    time. In a letter to the appellant's solicitors dated 1 September  2011
    it was said that a decision had been made to accept that the  appellant
    was a Palestinian National and that a  report  of  Dr  Kelly  had  been
    considered in that decision. However, at the hearing the  reports  from
    Dr Kelly put forward in support of the appellant's  case  were  put  in
    issue. Dr Kelly's expertise is set out at [56]  and  he  had  concluded
    that the information given by the appellant about life in the West Bank
    was entirely consistent with his knowledge of the region  and  that  in
    his experience only someone who had spent a considerable amount of time
    in the West Bank would be likely to know the level of detail  given  by
    the appellant.

14.  The tribunal noted the challenges made by the respondent to Dr  Kelly's
    conclusions  and  acknowledged  that  there  were   sophisticated   and
    nefarious means by which a person could obtain assistance  from  others
    in preparing a witness statement. Dr  Kelly  had  said  that  very  few
    Palestinians could recall their identity card numbers  whereas  it  was
    the respondent's case that the PGDO had advised that every  Palestinian
    should know their ID number or  be  able  to  confirm  it  by  extended
    families/contacts in Palestine.

15.  The tribunal considered the evidence  produced  by  the  respondent  to
    support  the  contention  that  the  appellant  was  from  Egypt.   The
    respondent through the British  Embassy  in  Cairo  telephoned  several
    Egyptian numbers on a mobile phone found in the appellant's  possession
    [67] and was given details about a family member  who  had  disappeared
    two  years  previously.  The  tribunal   considered   the   appellant's
    explanation at [68] and was entitled to note that  there  had  been  no
    positive visual identification by any family member in Egypt.

16.  When assessing the appellant's nationality the tribunal also took  into
    account what was described as significant evidence in  support  of  the
    appellant's claim to come from the West Bank set out in a transcript of
    an interview carried out by the respondent on 6 January 2015 where  the
    interviewing officer recorded that he had concluded to a high degree of
    probability that the appellant was a Palestinian National as claimed.

17.  It was for the tribunal to assess the varying strands of  evidence  and
    decide whether the appellant had discharged the onus of showing that he
    was a Palestinian. I am satisfied that it reached a conclusion properly
    open to the reasons given. This was a question of fact for the tribunal
    to assess. The respondent's grounds on this issue  do  not  satisfy  me
    with any relevant matters were left out of account or that there is any
    proper basis for  a  challenge  on  legal  grounds  to  the  tribunal's
    findings of fact.

18.  I now turn to consider article 3. In summary, I am not  satisfied  that
    the grounds disclose any error of law undermining the findings  of  the
    tribunal. There is no substance in the argument that the tribunal erred
    by not considering Bensaid. Each case  must  be  assessed  on  its  own
    circumstances. The fact that in  that  case  no  breach  was  found  of
    article 3 or 8 does not mean that it was not open to  the  tribunal  to
    find a breach in this appellant's circumstances.  The  judgment  in  GS
    (India) does not affect the issue which was before the  tribunal  which
    was whether the appellant in his particular circumstances was  able  to
    meet the requirements set out in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

19   The tribunal gave specific consideration to whether the  appellant  was
    either feigning or exaggerating his problems [75] but was  entitled  to
    comment that his case bore no resemblance to the type of case where the
    tribunal is presented with one psychiatric report based entirely on the
    applicant's account. There were a  number  of  reports  which  led  the
    tribunal to have no reason to  doubt  that  the  appellant  had  mental
    health  problems  as  described  and  diagnosed  by   various   medical
    professionals [76]. The evidence showed that the appellant had  "florid
    delusional beliefs" and it was the opinion of Professor Katona that the
    fact that he revealed them in  greater  detail  than  he  had  done  in
    previous assessments probably reflected the fact that  his  psychiatric
    condition was worsening rapidly and he was no longer able to  hide  his
    abnormal beliefs [78].

20.  I am satisfied that in these circumstances the  tribunal  was  entitled
    to conclude that there would be a  risk  of  serious  harm  during  any
    encounter with the authorities at Israeli checkpoints for  the  reasons
    given at [90]. It was required to take into account the guidance in J v
    SSHD and was entitled to find that the risk the  appellant  would  take
    his own life would not be obviated by any measures the respondent would
    take when removing the appellant. In this context it  should  be  noted
    that the respondent had been directed to the file information about the
    route  and  method  of  the  proposed  return  of  the  appellant  with
    particular regard to his mental health problems but had  failed  to  do
    so. The respondent had had the opportunity of filing  evidence  on  the
    issue but had failed to  do  so.  The  practicalities  of  return  were
    matters the tribunal had to consider when assessing article 3  in  this
    case.

21.  The grounds relied on by the respondent are in substance an attempt  to
    re-argue the appeal. They do not satisfy me that there is any error  of
    law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal in  its  assessment  of  the
    findings under article 3. In any event, the appeal was also allowed  on
    article 8 grounds but the grounds of appeal made no challenge to  those
    findings which were on the discrete ground of  granting  article  8  on
    limbo grounds in accordance with the judgment of the Court of Appeal in
    Abdullah. Mr Jarvis did seek  to  raise  a  challenge  but  I  was  not
    prepared to permit this. It was a late challenge raised at this hearing
    not having been raised in the grounds. In any event I was not satisfied
    that the tribunal had erred in law when considering article 3.

Decision

22.  For these reasons I am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law and  its  decision  to  allow  the  appeal  stands.  .  No
    application has been made to vary or discharge the anonymity order made
    by the First-tier Tribunal. Accordingly, it remains in force.





Signed   H J E Latter

H J E Latter                                          Date: 2 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge


