
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49255/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2014                             |On 5 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                            MAYUR ARUNBHAI MISTRY
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Amgbah, UK Law Associates, Ilford
For the Respondent:    Ms Alice Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a National of India born on 17 May 1986.  He  appealed
    against the decision of the Respondent of 12 November 2013 refusing  to
    grant him a Residence Card as confirmation of a right to reside in  the
    United Kingdom as the spouse of an EAA  National,  Mrs  Inana  Veronica
    Ungureanu, who is a Romanian National exercising her treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom.  His appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal, P A Grant-Hutchison on 16 May 2014.  He dismissed the  appeal
    in a Determination promulgated on 6 June 2014.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First Tier Tribunal McDade  on  24  June  2014.
    The grounds of application state that  the  Judge  may  have  erred  in
    considering whether or not the parties intend to cohabit as this is not
    a requirement under the Regulations. They state that the Judge may have
    misdirected himself by making an adverse finding on a matter  on  which
    the Regulations did not require proof.

The Hearing

 3. The Appellant`s representative submitted that  he  is  relying  on  the
    permission.  He submitted that the Judge  made  a  decision,  based  on
    whether the parties intend to cohabit and this is not in  the  relevant
    EAA Regulations.  He submitted that if that was the Judge`s  focus  and
    his decision is based on that point, his decision  is  flawed.   I  was
    referred to paragraph 17 of the Determination in which the Judge states
    "In all the circumstances  of  this  case  I  find  that  they  do  not
    genuinely intend to cohabit".  The representative submitted  that  this
    is a major point and the Judge's decision appears to  depend  on  this.
    The representative submitted that he  is  also  relying  on  the  other
    grounds of application.  The Judge has referred to  the  Appellant  not
    informing the Secretary of State of his change of circumstances but the
    grounds of application state that he was not required to do this.   The
    grounds also refer to paragraph 16 of the Determination  in  which  the
    judge refers to credibility issues. They state that the Judge has  used
    too high a standard of proof.  The grounds go on to refer  to  the  EAA
    National and the Appellant having a child together and state that there
    must therefore be a commitment to the marriage.

 4. The Presenting Officer made her submissions submitting that  the  Judge
    was entitled to raise these credibility points and that the standard of
    proof used was not too high.  She submitted that the Judge was entitled
    to come to the conclusion he did regarding credibility.

6.   She submitted, however, that she cannot argue against the  sentence  in
    paragraph 17 of the Determination relating to the parties not genuinely
    intending to cohabit.   She submitted that because of  the  credibility
    issues the  Judge  was  entitled  to  state  that  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant`s wife  was  pregnant  may  not  show  a  commitment  to  the
    marriage.

7.   I find that because of paragraph 17  of  the  Determination,  when  the
    Judge comments on whether the Appellant is going to  cohabit  with  the
    Sponsor, there is an error of law as this issue seems to  be  what  the
    Judge's decision is founded on.

8.   I suggested a Second Stage Hearing there and then stating that I  would
    be  preserving  the  findings  of  fact  in  the  First  Tier   Judge`s
    Determination.

9.   The Presenting Officer submitted that she has nothing to  add  if  that
    is the case and that my decision should be based on what was before the
    First Tier Judge.

10.  The Appellant`s representative submitted that he  too  intends  relying
    on the facts and evidence before the First Tier  Judge.   He  submitted
    that because this is an EAA Regulation case, post decision evidence  is
    relevant and in this case  very  important  and  that  the  Appellant`s
    current circumstances have to be taken into account when I am  deciding
    whether the marriage is one of convenience or not.  He  submitted  that
    there is a clear commitment to the marriage because  of  the  pregnancy
    and the marriage is not one of convenience.

Determination

11.  It is clear that the Regulations do not require the parties to  cohabit
    for an application to be successful.

12.  I have considered all the evidence in this case and have  gone  through
    the findings of the First  Tier  Judge.   At  the  First  Tier  Hearing
    submissions were made by the Respondent about  the  Appellant's  wife's
    pregnancy. The Presenting Officer submitted that this does not mean the
    burden of proof has been discharged, when the  other  circumstances  of
    this case are considered.  The  submissions  raise  credibility  issues
    about where the Appellant`s wife has been living, how long ago she left
    the UK to go to Romania, the fact that her other child was born in 2002
    but the Appellant stated that he thought that child was 15 or 16  years
    old at the date of Hearing.  Credibility issues were also raised  about
    the Appellant's landlord and whether the  Appellant`s  wife  knows  his
    name.  Contradictory evidence was given about where the  Appellant  and
    the sponsor were living and the fact that the Appellant`s wife was self
    employed was not made clear  to  the  Respondent.   These  points  were
    answered when the Appellant`s representative made his  submissions  and
    the evidence and the submissions were carefully assessed by the  Judge.



13.  The Judge accepts that the Appellant and his wife were married  legally
    but he refers to the Appellant`s lack of candour and although the  Home
    Office did not require to be informed  of  the  Appellant`s  change  of
    circumstances before he made his application in April  2013  the  Judge
    makes the important point that the Appellant`s human rights application
    in July 2012 made no reference to him having a partner and was based on
    his private life only.  This is significant.

14.  The  Judge  goes  on  to  consider  the  lack  of  credibility  in  the
    Appellant's wife's    evidence.  Although the Appellant signed  a  form
    to state he was living at a certain address he gave evidence that  that
    was not the case.  This must reduce his credibility.

15.  In paragraph 17 the Judge states that the  fact  that  the  Appellant`s
    wife is  pregnant  does  not  necessarily  show  a  commitment  to  the
    marriage.  He was entitled to come to  this  conclusion  based  on  the
    credibility issues.  It is in this paragraph  that  he  refers  to  the
    Appellant and his wife not genuinely intending  to  cohabit.   This  is
    unfortunate, as in terms of the Regulations  they  do  not  require  to
    cohabit but it is clear that what the Judge means is  that  because  of
    the credibility issues and the  apparent  lack  of  commitment  to  the
    marriage the application cannot succeed.

16.  The Judge goes on  to  deal  with  the  fact  that  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied.  Although he does not state  why
    he has considered the claim outside the Rules  he  has  done  so.   His
    findings under Article 8 are coloured by his credibility  findings  and
    the fact that he finds there is no genuine family life.  With regard to
    the  Appellant`s  private  life  he  takes   into   consideration   the
    Appellant`s immigration history and his use of deception.

17.  Not only does the Judge dismiss the  claim  under  the  Rules  he  also
    dismisses the claim on human rights grounds.

18.  Based on what was before the Judge I find that  there  is  no  material
    error of law in the Judge`s Determination.  He not only found that  the
    Appellant and his wife do not genuinely intend to cohabit, he  did  not
    believe the evidence of either the Appellant or his wife. He found that
    the sponsor's  evidence  did  little  to  corroborate  the  Appellant`s
    evidence and that because of a lack of credibility the marriage is  not
    genuine and subsisting. He found that the  fact  that  the  Appellant`s
    wife is pregnant does not mean a commitment to the  marriage  when  the
    other circumstances of the case, in particular the  credibility  issues
    are taken into account.

Decision

19.  There is no material error of law in the Judge's determination.

          The First Tier Judge`s Determination promulgated on  6  June  2014
    will stand.

           The  Appellant's  appeal  has  been  dismissed  under  the   2006
    Regulations and on human rights grounds.

          No Anonymity direction has been made.










Signed                                  Date



Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



