
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49409/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 10 October 2016                       |on 11 October 2016                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RS
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent: Miss E Norman instructed by J M Wilson Solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge McGarr (the Judge) promulgated on the  31
        July 2015 in which the Judge allowed the  appeal  on  human  rights
        grounds outside the Immigration Rules.






Background


     2. RS is a national of India born on the 15 April 1980 who arrived  in
        the United Kingdom in August 2003. RS's immigration history is  set
        out at [1-2] of the decision under challenge.
     3. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  finding
        RS not to be a credible witness.
     4. The Judge found at [53] that it is undisputed that RS is the father
        of the child J and that he has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental
        relationship with the child who is under the age of 18, in  the  UK
        and a British citizen. The key  issue  identified  was  whether  it
        would be unreasonable or not to expect J to leave the UK.
     5. At [55] the Judge found:


        "Whilst I find that the Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship with J, I also find that such has been the Appellant's
        conduct  -  a  very  poor  immigration  history,   where   he   has
        deliberately evaded the immigration authorities and  process,  that
        weighing all the evidence in the balance the Appellant cannot  rely
        upon EX.1 as a basis to remain in the UK.  However grave  the  step
        may be, I find that J can remain with his mother who has  been  his
        primary carer and who has  the  support  of  her  family.   However
        tragic it is that the sponsor has multiple sclerosis,  as  well  as
        other medical conditions, I have no evidence before me  as  to  the
        prognosis of her condition though as I have previously  stated  she
        is under the care of medical specialists in the UK.


     6. The Judge dismissed the appeal under the Rules but  also  found  at
        [57] that J's situation created a  compelling  reason  or  arguable
        good case to consider Article 8 outside the  Rules.  It  was  found
        that family life recognised by  Article  8  ECHR  exists  with  the
        child. At [62], following a reference to  section  117B(6)  of  the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the Judge finds:


         "J is a British citizen and therefore a qualifying child.   I  have
         already found that the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship with J.  The issue then is whether  it  would
         be reasonable to expect J to leave the United Kingdom.   J  is  now
         aged 9, is a British citizen and has lived in the UK throughout his
         short life.  He attends school.  He has never been to India and has
         no ties there, though there is evidence in the papers  that  he  is
         keen to visit  his  "grandparents"  -  the  Appellants  parents  in
         India."


     7. At paragraph 63 the Judge concludes:


         "No further guidance is offered so far as what is  considered  "not
         reasonable" to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.   With
         this in mind I am driven to the irresistible conclusion that as the
         Appellant is not subject to deportation but  rather  administrative
         removal and that J is a British citizen who has known only the  UK,
         is educated here, it would not be reasonable to expect him to leave
         the UK.  Therefore I find on this narrow basis only the Appellant's
         removal from the UK would not [be] proportionate."


     8. The Secretary of State relies upon  two  heads  of  challenge.  The
        first asserts the Judge failed to give an explanation for  why  the
        case fell 'outside the Rules'. It is submitted that  the  facts  of
        this case all  fall  within  the  ambit  of  the  rules  making  it
        unnecessary to consider the same under Article 8 ECHR.
     9. The Judge did consider this  issue  at  [57]  and  found  that  the
        child's situation created compelling reasons  for  considering  the
        matter further. The Judge noted J's mother's medical condition  and
        the nature of the relationship between RS and J. If,  as  submitted
        by Ms Aboni, RS was unable to succeed under EX.1 as a result of the
        inability to satisfy the eligibility  requirements  the  Judge  was
        prevented from considering and allowing the appeal, if appropriate,
        on EX.1(a)(cc)(i) on the basis it would not be reasonable to expect
        the child to leave the UK, EX.1 not being a freestanding provision.
        The Judge refers to the decision in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39  and
        the need to consider the human rights of third parties affected  by
        the decision. No arguable legal error has  been  made  out  in  the
        decision to consider the matter outside the Immigration Rules.
    10. Grounds two assert the Judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
        material matters. This grounds had no arguable merit. A reading  of
        the decision under challenge shows clearly why the Judge  found  in
        favour of RS. The assertion the Judge failed  to  engage  with  the
        public  interest  has  no  arguable  merit.   As  the   Judge   was
        considering Article ECHR outside the  Rules  it  was  necessary  to
        consider the statutory provisions set out in  section  117  of  the
        2002 Act, and in particular section 117 B(6) which is the following
        terms:


         "In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where -


   a) The person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  a
      qualifying child, and
   b) It would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the  United
      Kingdom.


    11. It is not claimed before me that the Judge misdirected  himself  in
        law in placing reliance upon this section. The assertion the  Judge
        failed to consider the public interests adequately is not made  out
        as the wording of the section sets out the weigh to be given to the
        public interest in such cases.
    12. Ms E Normal relied upon the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
        Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 00674 (IAC)  at
        paragraph 21 where it is stated:


         21. In contrast, the  two  "considerations"  contained  in  section
         117B(4) and (5) are somewhat different from the other four, in  the
         following respects. First, they  make  no  mention  of  the  public
         interest. They are, rather, concerned with facts and factors which,
         while bearing on the proportionality assessment under Article  8(2)
         ECHR, shift the focus from the ambit  of  the  public  interest  to
         choices and decisions which have been made by the person or persons
         concerned in their lives and lifestyles. Second, there is a  degree
         of tension between a court or tribunal having regard to a specified
         factor, as a matter of obligation (on the one  hand)  and  (on  the
         other) giving effect  to  a  Parliamentary  instruction  about  the
         weight to be given thereto. Indeed, in  giving  effect  to  section
         117B(4) and (5), the court or tribunal concerned is not, in  truth,
         performing  the  exercise  of  having  regard  to  these  statutory
         provisions.  Rather,  the  Judge  is  complying  with  a  statutory
         obligation, unconditional and unambiguous,  to  give  effect  to  a
         parliamentary instruction that the considerations in  question  are
         to receive little weight."


    13. The Judge refers to the lack of guidance but the  Court  of  Appeal
        have now provided guidance in relation to  the  assessment  of  the
        reasonableness of expecting a child to leave the United Kingdom  in
        MA (Pakistan) v Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  &
        Anor [2016] EWCA Civ  705  in  which  the  Court  found  that  when
        considering whether it was reasonable to remove a child from the UK
        under the Immigration Rules r.276ADE(1)(iv)  and  the  Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  s.117B(6),  a  court  or  tribunal
        should not simply focus on the child but should have regard to  the
        wider public interest considerations,  including  the  conduct  and
        immigration history of the parents. The decision in  MA  (Pakistan)
        was handed down in early July 2016.
    14. The Judge noted the immigration history of RS and found  it  to  be
        very poor. The situation of the child's mother, a British  citizen,
        was also considered. It has not been made out that the Judge failed
        to consider all relevant issues and  so  the  weight  give  to  the
        evidence was a matter for the Judge.
    15. Whilst the Secretary of State may  think  the  decision  is  unduly
        generous this Tribunal cannot interfere unless it  has  been  shown
        the Judge has made an error of law  material  to  the  decision  to
        dismiss the appeal. It has not been shown the decision to allow the
        appeal is outside the range of reasonable  decisions  open  to  the
        Judge on the evidence.


Decision

    16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    17. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make that order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 10 October 2016

