
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
IA/49288/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House, London                                Determination
Promulgated
On 16 April 2015                                                        On
5th May 2015



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                MUHAMMAD ASIM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                               Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant: Mr M Ilahi, Rana & Co Solicitors
For the respondent: Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellant is Muhammad Asim, a national of Pakistan. He appealed to
   the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State
   dated 29 August 2013 to refuse his application for leave to remain  as
   a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) under the Points Based System.  Judge  of  the
   First-tier Tribunal David C  Clapham  dismissed  his  appeal.  He  now
   appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

2. On 9 October 2014 I set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
   for the following reasons;



  . Although the grounds submit that the appellant  did  not  attend  the
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal Mr  Ilahi  acknowledged  that  the
    appellant had not advised the Tribunal of his change of  address  and
    that there was  no  issue  being  taken  in  relation  to  the  first
    paragraph of the grounds of appeal.

  . In the reasons for refusal letter the respondent  indicates  that  no
    points were awarded under Appendix A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to funds. The  appellant  provided  bank  statements  and  a
    letter from the National Bank of Pakistan as evidence of the required
    funds and the respondent said that those documents had been  excluded
    from consideration of the application because;

           "We have attempted to verify  the  documents  detailed  above,
           using standard procedures, but have been unable to do so."

  . The First-tier Tribunal Judge referred to  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter and the requirements of paragraph 39B(c)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and concluded that the respondent was entitled  to  proceed  as
    she did and dismissed the appeal.

 Error of Law

  . Paragraph 39B(c) of the Rules  deals  with  specified  documents  and
    provides;

      39B.
      ...
      (c) If the Entry Clearance Officer or Secretary of State has
      reasonable cause to doubt the genuineness of any document submitted
      by an applicant which is, or which purports to be, a specified
      document under these Rules, and having taken reasonable steps to
      verify the document is unable to verify that it is genuine, the
      document will be discounted for the purposes of this application.

  . I consider that paragraph 39B(c) requires a two  stage  process.  The
    respondent must show that she had 'reasonable  cause'  to  doubt  the
    genuineness of a document  and  then  secondly  that  she  has  taken
    'reasonable steps' to verify the document.

  . Mr Whitwell, who appeared for the Secretary of State at the error  of
    law hearing,  submitted that the statement in the reasons for refusal
    letter that the respondent had  attempted  to  verify  the  documents
    using the standard procedure was enough to satisfy paragraph  39B(c).
    However  Mr  Ilahi  submitted  that  it  is  not  obvious  from   the
    respondent's bundle what caused her to doubt the  genuine  nature  of
    the documents or what steps were taken to verify them.

  . I am satisfied that the assertion in the reasons for  refusal  letter
    is insufficient to show reasonable cause  or  that  reasonable  steps
    were taken to verify the documents. The Judge  erred  in  failing  to
    engage properly with paragraph  39B(c)  and  in  failing  to  examine
    whether the respondent had shown reasonable cause or that  reasonable
    steps were taken. Had he done so he would have been bound to come  to
    the conclusion that she did not.

3. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  its  entirety.
   Mr Whitwell submitted documents at the error of law hearing  from  the
   respondent's file which went to the reasons for investigating the bank
   documents. I granted Mr Ilahi's application for an adjournment to seek
   evidence to rebut the respondent's assertions and evidence.

4. At the resumed hearing Mr  Ilahi  submitted  a  new  letter  from  the
   National Bank of Pakistan dated 10 April 2015. Mr Melvin relied on the
   documents previously submitted.

5. The documents submitted by the respondent include a case note dates 26
   June 2013 which states that the application was being referred to  the
   'genuineness team' as the overseas bank statements show large  amounts
   of money being transferred over a short period of time and there was a
   concern about the sudden increase in funds. A case note  from  3  July
   2013 records a first enquiry which was an  attempt  to  telephone  the
   bank branch on the telephone number which appears on the bank  letter.
   It is recorded that the number is invalid and that emails were sent to
   two contacts in the Bank. The final case note is dated 16 August  2013
   which records that an email was sent to the Bank with  scanned  copies
   of documents attached but that no reply had been  received  within  28
   days.  The  case  was  recorded  as  having  been  concluded  with  an
   'inconclusive' result.

6. The further evidence submitted on the appellant's behalf is  a  letter
   dated 10 April 2015 from the Bank and is in almost identical terms  to
   the letter dated 2 November 2012 except that it is stated that he  has
   35691900 PKR instead of the 31691900 PKR held in November 2012.

7. Mr Melvin submitted that the new letter does nothing  to  address  the
   Secretary of State's concerns; it does not address why  there  was  no
   reply from the compliance department of the Bank.  He  submitted  that
   there is no evidence the appellant has written to the National Bank of
   Pakistan demanding to know why they have not provided the Home  Office
   with the confirmation sought or seeking remuneration for their failure
   to do so.

8. Mr Ilahi submitted that  the  case  notes  do  not  amount  to  direct
   evidence that the respondent has tried to  verify  the  documents.  He
   submitted that in the absence of the emails and evidence of  reminders
   to the Bank the respondent had not  shown  that  she  took  reasonable
   steps to verify the documentation.

9. As set out above paragraph 39B (c) of the Immigration Rules involves a
   two stage process. I am satisfied on the basis of the case notes  that
   the significant increase  in  the  appellant's  bank  balance  between
   August and September 2012 of around 227,000,000 PKR is  sufficient  to
   demonstrate cause on the part of the respondent for her  doubt  as  to
   the genuineness of the bank documents.

10. In those circumstances the respondent was  required  under  paragraph
   39B (c) to take reasonable steps to  verify  that  the  documents  are
   genuine. Mr Ilahi submitted that the actions taken by  the  respondent
   do not amount to reasonable steps. The  case  note  records  that  one
   phone call was  made  but  that  the  number  was  invalid.  Mr  Ilahi
   questioned how this number was invalid when it is stated that  it  was
   verified from the internet. He submitted that  the  respondent  should
   have sent a reminder when there was no response to the email and  that
   the emails should have been produced. However the two email  addresses
   used have been reproduced and I am satisfied on the basis of the  case
   notes that emails were sent to the recipients.

11. I  am  satisfied  that  the  actions  take  by  the  respondent  were
   reasonable. A telephone call and two emails to  the  Bank  amounts  to
   reasonable steps. The appellant has been aware that this  is  the  one
   issue to be determined since the hearing in October 2014. He  had  the
   documents submitted by the respondent at  the  last  hearing  and  has
   therefore had ample opportunity to obtain evidence to rebut the claims
   made in the case notes. He has chosen instead to produce a  letter  in
   almost identical terms to that previously produced.

12. On the basis of the evidence  before  me  I  am  satisfied  that  the
   respondent has complied with the requirements of paragraph 39B (c) and
   that the bank documents should in these  circumstances  be  discounted
   for the purposes of this application. The appeal therefore falls to be
   dismissed.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error on a point of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by dismissing it.

Signed
                       Date: 1 May 2015


A  Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal













