
[pic]
IAC-TH-CP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49714/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4th November 2014                          |On 17th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                              Mr Hayford Oteng
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Okyere-Darko (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                        DETERMINATION ON ERROR OF LAW

1.   It is convenient to refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  The appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  to
    issue him with a residence card  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McDade ("the judge") in a determination promulgated on  4th  July
    2014.

2.   In refusing the appellant's application, the Secretary of  State  found
    that the appellant had not shown that he fell within  regulation  7  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the  2006
    Regulations") as there was insufficient evidence to show  that  he  was
    married to the Belgian citizen he  relied  upon.   In  particular,  the
    Secretary of State was not satisfied that the  proxy  marriage  between
    the appellant and his sponsor was registered  in  accordance  with  the
    Ghanaian Customary Marriage and  Divorce  Law  enacted  in  1985.   The
    Secretary of State went on to assess the appellant's case that,  if  he
    could not bring himself within regulation 7, he  could  show  that  his
    relationship with his partner was a durable one, within the meaning  of
    regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   In  this  context,  the
    respondent concluded that there was insufficient evidence showing  that
    the appellant and his sponsor resided together as a couple at the  same
    address prior to the date of the customary marriage and  so  the  claim
    that they were in a durable relationship was not made out.

3.   The judge noted that he had heard oral evidence from the appellant  and
    his wife but found that this "did not go to the heart of  the  matter".
    Having weighed the evidence, and having  taken  into  account  guidance
    given in Kareem [2014] UKUT 24, the judge concluded that  the  evidence
    did show a genuine customary marriage, conducted by proxy, in Ghana and
    allowed the appeal on this basis.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

4.   The respondent applied for permission to appeal,  contending  that  the
    judge  had  misdirected  himself  and  had  misinterpreted  the   Upper
    Tribunal's decision in  Kareem.   The  judge  was  required  to  assess
    whether the marriage relied upon by the appellant was recognised in the
    law of his spouse's state, Belgium.  The author of the grounds asserted
    that there was no evidence adduced by the appellant  showing  that  the
    marriage was recognised in Belgium.  The evidence before the judge  did
    not show that the appellant met the requirements of regulation 7 of the
    2006 Regulations.

5.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  3rd  October  2014,  the  judge
    granting permission observing that there may have  been  a  failure  to
    consider whether the marriage was recognised in the law of Belgium.

The Rule 24 Response Made by the Appellant

6.    On  23rd  October  2014,  a  response  was  made  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors.  It was accepted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  make  a
    finding regarding the validity of the marriage in Belgian law  but,  on
    the other hand, there was evidence before  the  judge  on  this  point,
    contained in the bundle  of  documents  before  him.   The  appellant's
    solicitors noted that the judge made no finding on  the  durability  of
    the appellant's relationship with his partner or  in  relation  to  the
    requirements of  regulation  8(5)  of  the  2006  Regulations.   Again,
    evidence was adduced on this aspect of the case and the  appellant  and
    his sponsor were cross-examined.  The judge was required  to  determine
    whether  the  decision  to  refuse  the  residence  card  breached  the
    appellant's rights in community law and so he was  required  to  assess
    the durable relationship claimed to exist.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr Bramble, for the Secretary of State,  said  that  the  issue  was  a
    narrow one.  Further guidance from the Upper Tribunal in TA and  Others
    [2014] UKUT 316 qualified how Kareem should be applied.  It  was  clear
    that the judge had to find whether the marriage was recognised  in  the
    law of Belgium.  He failed to deal with  this.   The  evidence  in  the
    appellant's bundle included a letter from the  Belgian  embassy  (which
    appeared in translation at  page  L5)  but  this  did  not  reveal  the
    questions put to the embassy for answer.  It appeared to  be  the  case
    that Belgian law would recognise the customary marriage by  proxy  only
    subject to certain conditions.  What was required was  confirmation  by
    the Belgian consulate in Ghana but there was  no  evidence  before  the
    judge showing any recognition on this basis.  The net result  was  that
    the judge had clearly erred in law.

8.   The appellant's Rule 24 response raised the durable relationship  point
    but this would only be relevant if an error of law were found, in which
    case the determination showed  that  it  would  be  best  to  send  the
    decision back to the First-tier Tribunal, for  proper  fact-finding  in
    relation to the marriage and the durable relationship.

9.   Ms Okyere-Darko  accepted  that  the  judge  had  made  no  finding  in
    relation to Belgian law.  The evidence at L5 in the appellant's  bundle
    was before him.  She also accepted that the document from  the  Belgian
    embassy was not conclusive but it did shed light on the  position.   It
    was clear that Belgian law made provision for the recognition of  proxy
    marriages.  She handed up a copy of  Article  30  of  the  Civil  Code,
    referred to in the letter from the Belgian embassy.  What was  required
    was authentication by the Belgian consulate, to check that the marriage
    complied with Ghanaian law.  On this basis, there was  evidence  before
    the judge that the marriage would be validated and recognised.  At page
    B9 in the appellant's bundle  was  a  letter  from  the  Ghanaian  high
    commissioner confirming that the marriage was  properly  registered  in
    Ghana and so there was no impediment to validation  or  recognition  by
    the Belgian authorities, although that particular step had not yet been
    taken.  Ms Okyere-Darko also agreed that the judge had made no findings
    on the durable relationship between the appellant and his sponsor, even
    though evidence was put before him on this point.  Both  the  appellant
    and his sponsor were cross-examined and submissions were made.  It was,
    perhaps, the case that the judge  thought  that  his  determination  in
    relation to regulation 7 was sufficient.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  The decision contains material errors of law and  must  be  set  aside.
    Although prepared by a very experienced judge, the short  determination
    (the operative part is barely one side long) contains  no  findings  of
    fact in relation to recognition of the customary marriage, conducted by
    proxy, in Belgian law.  It is clear from Kareem and also  from  TA  and
    Others that findings are required in this context.   The  determination
    in TA was dated 14 June 2014, two weeks before the appeal was heard  by
    the judge and three and a  half  weeks  before  the  determination  was
    promulgated.  It may not have been in the public domain by the time the
    judge prepared the case.  If so, he cannot be faulted  for  failing  to
    take it into account.

11.  The determination also contains no findings in relation to the  durable
    relationship claimed to exist between the appellant  and  his  sponsor.
    The Secretary of State dealt with this part of the case in her decision
    letter and evidence was given by the appellant and his sponsor  at  the
    hearing.  Ms Okyere-Darko is probably  right  in  suggesting  that  the
    judge felt no need to consider regulation 8(5) as he believed that  his
    analysis of the marriage was sufficient.  Sadly, this is simply not so.

12.  The absence of evidence of the recognition of the marriage  in  Belgian
    law fatally undermines the judge's conclusion that the requirements  of
    regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations were met and he  has  not  engaged
    with the alternative case put by the appellant and  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State under regulation 8(5).

13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing material errors  of
    law, is set aside.  It will be remade on the first available  date,  at
    Taylor House.  There will be a de novo hearing and all the  issues  are
    at large.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and will be  remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal, at Taylor House, on the first  available  date.   A
Twi  interpreter  will  be  required  and,  subject  to  any  further   case
management at Taylor House, two hours will be sufficient.



Signed        Date 14th November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

