
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49924/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 August 2014                             |On 1 September 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              ERIC ASIEDU-OFEI
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr B Owusu (Solicitor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   It will be convenient to refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant is Mr Eric Asiedu-Ofei and  the
    respondent is the Secretary of State.  The appellant's appeal against a
    decision to refuse to issue him with a residence card  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Metzer  ("the  judge")  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 6 June 2014.  The appellant relied  upon  his  customary
    marriage to a Dutch citizen, conducted in Ghana in the autumn  of  2012
    and registered in that country on 8 November that year.

2.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and from his wife  and
    took into account a report prepared by Professor Woodman regarding  the
    formalities of Ghanaian customary marriages.  He also  had  before  him
    evidence from the Embassy of the Netherlands and a letter from a  Dutch
    lawyer, regarding recognition of customary marriages in Dutch law.  The
    judge found that the evidence showed that a  valid  customary  marriage
    had taken place, which fell to be recognised as a legal  marriage.   He
    found it unnecessary to make findings  regarding  whether  or  not  the
    appellant and his wife were in a  durable  relationship  but  concluded
    that the evidence showed that the  relationship  between  the  two  was
    serious and committed and that they had resided together  since  August
    2012.

3.   The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal.   There  were
    two grounds.  In the first, it was contended that  the  judge  did  not
    properly apply  guidance  given  in  Kareem  [2014]  UKUT  00024.   The
    relevant EEA law was the law of  the  Netherlands  and  the  judge  had
    failed to make proper findings in this context.  In a second ground, it
    was contended that there was procedural irregularity capable of  making
    a material difference.  The Presenting Officer's minute, recording  the
    proceedings, showed that the judge appeared to be rushed.  Evidence was
    given by the appellant while  his  wife  was  present  in  court.   The
    Presenting Officer wished to ask questions but concluded  that  it  was
    too late to do so, once the appellant had given his evidence. This  was
    unfair to the Secretary of State.  The Presenting Officer assumed  that
    the lady at the back of court was a party or witness in another case.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 26 June 2014.

5.   In a Rule 24 response from the appellant's solicitors, the  appeal  was
    opposed.   The judge correctly applied guidance given  in  Kareem,  and
    his approach was also fully consistent  with  TA  and  Others   (Kareem
    explained) [2014] UKUT 316.  So far as the hearing  was  concerned,  it
    was made clear on  the  appellant's  behalf  at  the  outset  that  the
    Tribunal  was  concerned  with  legal  matters,  best  dealt  with   in
    submissions.  It was only after the appellant gave  his  evidence  that
    the Presenting Officer indicated that she would have wanted to call his
    wife.  There was no unfairness.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Walker said that there was no reference to Kareem  in  the  body  of
    the determination or to the Dutch Civil Code.  The Secretary  of  State
    had properly focused on  Kareem.   It  was  clear,  however,  that  the
    decision in that case was before the  judge  and  he  mentioned  it  in
    paragraph 12 of the determination.  The judge also failed to  expressly
    mention evidence in the appellant's supplementary bundle, from Holland.
     So far as the second ground was concerned, the  appellant's  wife  was
    present in court.

7.   Mr Owusu said that there was no procedural irregularity.  The  Rule  24
    response set out the appellant's stance that  the  judge  properly  and
    fairly determined the appeal, largely on the basis of  the  documentary
    evidence and submissions on the law.  So far as Kareem  was  concerned,
    the judge did not err.  He clearly had in mind paragraphs 27 to  31  of
    Kareem, in which the relevant parts of the Dutch Civil  Code  were  set
    out. It was fair to observe that the judge might have  set  things  out
    more fully but it was implicitly in paragraphs 12 to 14  that  he  also
    had in mind paragraph 68 of Kareem.  Even if  the  judge  did  err,  in
    falling to set things out  fully,  the  error  was  not  material.   At
    paragraph 14, the judge found that he  was  not  required  to  make  an
    express finding on durable relationship but he concluded, in any event,
    that the relationship was well-founded and serious.

8.   In a brief response, Mr Walker said that the decision in VHR  from  the
    Upper Tribunal on unmeritorious grounds might fall  to  be  considered.
    It was  accepted  that  the  judge  was  not  required  to  go  through
    absolutely everything.  Paragraph 13 contained a brief summary  of  the
    evidence and that paragraph, when read carefully, showed that the judge
    took into account both the evidence regarding the customary marriage in
    Ghana, in the light of the report  from  the  expert,  and  came  to  a
    conclusion that the  marriage   was  a  recognised  one  and  therefore
    "legal".

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   So  far  as  the  second  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  grounds  are
    concerned, I find that no material error has been shown.  I  have  read
    the minute from the Presenting Officer carefully.  The proceedings  may
    have appeared rushed, as is sometimes unfortunately the  case.   Having
    read the determination, it is apparent that the judge made findings  of
    fact that were open to him on the evidence, regarding the  relationship
    between the appellant and his wife.  Much of the case was borne by  the
    documentary evidence, particularly relating to the  customary  marriage
    in Ghana and the Dutch Civil Code.  The Rule 24  response  contains  an
    appropriate observation that the appellant's case was advanced from the
    outset on the basis that the documentary evidence and submissions would
    lie at the heart of the case and be sufficient to determine the appeal.
     The Presenting Officer was given an opportunity to  put  questions  to
    the appellant's wife and although best practice of  course  would  have
    required her to remain outside court during the  appellant's  evidence,
    in the particular circumstances I find that no material error has  been
    shown.

10.  So far as the first ground is  concerned,  the  judge  had  before  him
    evidence from a Dutch lawyer and from the Embassy of  the  Netherlands.
    In the latter, attention is drawn to the provisions of the Dutch  Civil
    Code which were set out  in  Kareem.   So  long  as  there  is  nothing
    incompatible with Dutch public order, a valid marriage under the law of
    the state where it took place is recognised in  the  Netherlands  as  a
    valid marriage.  The letter from the Dutch lawyer is, perhaps,  couched
    in rather cautious  terms  but  he  concludes  that  there  is  nothing
    incompatible with Dutch  public  order  in  the  appellant's  customary
    marriage in Ghana.

11.  That evidence was before the judge and the weight to  be  given  to  it
    was a matter for him.  Both representatives suggested that the  judge's
    reasoning was rather brief, or perhaps compressed, but paragraphs 12 to
    14 do set out some clear conclusions.  In the light of the evidence,  I
    find that he was entitled to conclude as he did that a  valid  marriage
    had been conducted between the appellant and his wife and,  so  far  as
    Kareem is concerned, that it was a marriage recognised in Dutch law.

12.  This case is similar in some respects to that of the  appellant  in  TA
    and Others.  In that case, the Upper Tribunal Judge found, in  remaking
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, that the evidence did not show
    recognition of the marriage in Dutch law (the sponsor in that case  was
    also a Dutch citizen).  The Upper  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  find,
    however, that the evidence did show a durable relationship between  the
    appellant and his sponsor and so it fell to the Secretary of State   to
    exercise discretion under Regulation 17(4) of the 2006 Regulations.  In
    the present appeal, even if a material error were  shown,  the  judge's
    findings of fact that the relationship between the  appellant  and  his
    sponsor was serious and committed and that  they  had  cohabited  since
    August 2012 would have led to a similar conclusion.  In the event, this
    is unnecessary.

13.  In summary, I conclude that no material error of  law  has  been  shown
    and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.  Part of  that
    decision is the fee award which followed the appeal being allowed.  The
    fee award, of course, also stands.

DECISION

  14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no material  error
      of law, shall stand.

Anonymity:   There  has  been  no  application  for   anonymity   in   these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed                                  Date 22 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



