
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/49259/2014
                                                ia/04160/2015, ia/04162/2015
                                                ia/04163/2015, ia/04166/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 January 2016                   |On 29 January 2016                   |
|Extempore                            |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondant
                                     and

                              MRS BUKOLA IZEKOR
                          MR ABIODUN ANTHONY IZEKOR
                              MS AMAZING IZEKOR
                             MASTER ZION IZEKOR
                               PRECIOUS ISEKOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Claimants


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants:     Mr Graham, instructed by UK Immigration Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hussain promulgated on 30 July  2015  in  which  he
    allowed the appeals of Mr and Mrs Izekor and their children who I refer
    to as the claimants against the decision of the Secretary of  State  to
    refuse their applications for leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 2. When the matter came before Judge Hussain, he  noted  that  a  previous
    appeal had been allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lester  and  a
    direction given for the Secretary of State to reconsider her  decisions
    on the basis that, as the applications had been made prior  to  9  July
    2012, they should not have been made on the basis of  the  Rules  which
    came into force on that date.  It is not disputed by the  parties  that
    Judge Hussain erred in light of the decision in Singh &  Khalid  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74 in considering that the Secretary of  State  had  erred  in
    applying what is normally referred to as the new Rules, that  is  those
    brought into force with effect from 9 July 2012.   What is in issue are
    two matters which are interrelated.

 3. The first issue, was this decision material in that  the  Secretary  of
    State contends that  the  entirety  of  the  judge's  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules is flawed as it starts from the
    incorrect premise that the Rules do not apply and by necessity fails to
    take into account the Rules which is of course a  consideration  to  be
    taken into account when assessing whether any breach of  Article  8  is
    proportionate?

 4. The second related issue is whether and to what extent the  grounds  of
    appeal which are framed primarily  in  terms  of  a  challenge  to  the
    judge's approach to the Immigration Rules encompasses  that  challenge.
    Ms Willocks-Briscoe submits that the Secretary of State's challenge  to
    the materiality of the error is implicit within the grounds in that  it
    flows logically from it and/or that it is Robinson obvious.

 5. Mr Graham for the claimants submits firstly that it is not  encompassed
    in the grounds and second, that even if it were, the judge has  allowed
    the appeal pursuant to Article 8 for reasons which were open to him and
    on the basis of the evidence.

 6. I turn first to the extent to whether the issue of materiality  can  be
    taken into account.  It is clearly admitted and I have  no  doubt  that
    the judge did in the light of the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in
    Singh & Khalid err significantly  in  failing  properly  to  apply  the
    Immigration Rules in this case appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. While it is correct that no express challenge is made to the First-tier
    Tribunal judges findings with respect to Article 8 in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, it is nonetheless asserted in the  grounds  that  the  error  -
    failing to apply the immigration rules is material.

 8. I do not consider that the case law relating  to  Robinson  is  of  any
    application here.  The ration in Robinson was based on  the  protection
    aspect, that is  to  say  that  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  of
    protection with regards to refugees implies that extra points may  need
    to be taken into account in order to comply with that duty.  It  cannot
    rationally be said that any such considerations apply to the  Secretary
    of State when she fails properly to plead her cases.

 9. In this case, it is alleged that the error is material.   That  is  set
    out in the grounds.  I consider that this is  sufficiently  pleaded  in
    order for me to take into account  the  extent  to  which  the  judge's
    findings which he reached in respect of Article 8 are ones open to him.
     I consider that on the basis of the case law  starting  with  Singh  &
    Khalid and indeed the case law that  flows  from  the  decision  of  Mr
    Justice Sales in Nagre that it is established law that when considering
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules the starting point must be  the
    Immigration Rules and the extent to which they apply. That requires the
    correct Immigration Rules to be applied. Whilst I note  Mr  Graham  has
    submitted in this case that the judge had  those  in  mind,  I  am  not
    satisfied that that is so.  It is clear from the judge's decision  that
    he expressly rejected that submission particularly in what is  said  at
    paragraph 28.

10. In conclusion therefore I am  satisfied  that  the  judge's  error  was
    material in that he did not  appear  to  have  taken  into  account  in
    assessing Article 8 the relevant provisions of the  Immigration  Rules.
    The fact that he went on to consider Section 117B of the  2002  Act  is
    not in my view of assistance.  Any assessment of  the  public  interest
    would of necessity involve an assessment of what is provided for in the
    Immigration Rules but this was not done.  Accordingly  I  am  satisfied
    that the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain did involve  the
    making of an error of law and I set it aside.

11. As extensive additional findings will need to be made, I  am  satisfied
    that it is in this case appropriate to remit the decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal to remake its decision afresh.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remit the decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  make  a  fresh
    decision on all issues.

 3. I make no anonymity order.


Signed   Date: 27 January 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

