

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/49855/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3 December 2014                         |On 9 January 2015          |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:     Mr Burnett (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


       1. The appellant ('the SSHD') appeals against a  decision  of  First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Seifert dated 12 September 2014 in  which  the
          respondent's appeal was allowed under Article 8 of the ECHR.







Procedural history


       2.  In  a  decision  dated  27  October  2014  Judge  Baird   granted
          permission to appeal on the basis that it was  arguable  that  the
          Judge failed to apply the current law and guidance  on  Article  8
          and in addition reached an untenable finding at [53].

       3. The matter now comes before me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
          determination contains an error of law.

Hearing

       4. At the hearing Mr Whitwell focused his criticism of the  decision
          on two issues.  First, he submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to
          direct himself to the important fact that the respondent did  not
          meet the  Immigration  Rules.   Second,  he  submitted  that  the
          Judge's findings  at  [53]  are  inconsistent  with  the  correct
          approach under section 117B(4) of  the  Nationality,  Immigration
          and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

       5. Mr Burnett argued that it was implicit from MM (Lebanon)  v  SSHD
          [2014] EWCA Civ 985 that there was  no  requirement  to  consider
          whether the appropriate threshold to consider Article 8  was  met
          in a non-deportation case and in addition, the Judge was entitled
          to the findings reached at [53].

       6. I reserved my decision at the end of  the  hearing  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

Discussion

       7. Consistent with Mr Whitwell's submissions I have  considered  the
          two matters said to demonstrate an error of law in the decision.

   1) The significance of the Rules not being met when determining Article 8


       8. This is a case in which the parties were in clear agreement  that
          the only issue in dispute was whether  or  not  the  respondent's
          appeal should be allowed pursuant to Article 8 outside the Rules,
          it having been accepted that the Rules could not be met.   It  is
          clear from the decision that the respondent accepted  the  SSHD's
          position that he could not meet the Immigration  Rules  and  only
          relied upon Article 8 [40].  It is to be regretted that the Judge
          has not even summarised his approach to the  relevant  Article  8
          legal framework prior to making findings.  The Judge has  however
          summarised the parties' submissions [41-49] and  it  is  implicit
          from reading the determination as a whole that the Judge accepted
          that it was necessary to approach  Article  8  in  light  of  the
          guidance regarding the public interest considerations in sections
          117A-B of the 2002 Act (as amended).

       9. Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  the  Judge  should  have  expressly
          acknowledged that the Immigration Rules could not be met  and  in
          failing to do so  the  Judge  committed  an  error  of  law.   Mr
          Whitwell relied upon Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  558  as
          applied in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558 to  support
          his submission.  Both  of  these  cases  required  the  court  to
          consider the correct approach to Article 8 where a  consideration
          of the Rules remained an issue to be determined first.

      10. In the instant case all parties approached the case on the  basis
          that the Rules were not met.   This  included  the  more  general
          Rules and the part of the Rules said to reflect Article  8.   The
          Judge therefore had one issue to determine - Article 8 outside of
          the Rules.  In my judgment it was  clear  to  all  including  the
          Judge that the Immigration Rules could not be met and  this  must
          have been in mind when the Judge went on to  consider  Article  8
          outside of the Rules.   The Judge cannot be criticised for taking
          this approach.  This is not  a  deportation  case  and  therefore
          proportionality 'was more at large' - see  MM  (Lebanon)  v  SSHD
          [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and needed to be assessed albeit by reference
          to  the  s117B  public  interest  considerations.   Indeed,  both
          representatives approached the case and made submissions  on  the
          basis that it was appropriate for the Judge to consider Article 8
          and as such it was not necessary for the Judge  to  consider  any
          threshold question regarding Article 8 or remind himself that the
          Rules could not be met.

      11. The Judge's findings may be generous but I am not satisfied  that
          in failing to expressly remind himself of that which was  obvious
          - the respondent cannot meet the Rules - he has not erred in law.

   2) Section 117B(4)


      12. I now turn to Mr Whitwell's second  and  final  submission  based
          upon section 117B(4) of the 2002 Act.  This states  that  'little
          weight should be given to-...(b) a  relationship  formed  with  a
          qualifying partner, that is established at a time when the person
          is in the UK unlawfully'.

      13. The Judge was clearly  aware  that  the  relationship  was  first
          established in 2005 when the respondent did not have leave  [16].
          That relationship broke down in late 2009 but as the Judge put it
          the SSHD 'has already acknowledged the relationship  between  the
          couple, by the grant of leave to remain to [the respondent]  from
          2009 to 2012'  [53].   The  Judge  took  into  account  that  the
          relationship was re-established in 2014 when the  respondent  was
          again unlawfully  in  the  UK  (his  discretionary  leave  having
          expired  in  2012  and  the  application  to  extend   it   being
          unsuccessful because of the breakdown in the relationship).   The
          Judge has not identified with precision what weight  he  attached
          to the relationship in light of when it was first established  or
          when it was recognised by the SSHD or indeed,  when  it  was  re-
          established.  The Judge however  was  plainly  aware  of  section
          117B(4) and reminded  himself  of  the  SSHD's  submission.   The
          legislation does not  address  the  more  unusual  scenario  that
          exists  in  this  case  -  what  weight  should  be  given  to  a
          relationship that was established when an applicant was in the UK
          unlawfully but since then the SSHD has given the applicant  leave
          based  upon  the  same  relationship?   A   person   might   have
          established  their  relationship  when  they  were  in   the   UK
          unlawfully 10 years ago but shortly after this was granted  leave
          to remain and currently has a genuine and subsisting relationship
          of a very lengthy duration.  Does  the  legislation  really  mean
          that little weight should be given in every single case to such a
          relationship?  Section 117A(2) requires  the  Tribunal  to  'have
          regard' to the considerations in section 117B.  The Judge has had
          regard to  all  the  relevant  considerations  including  section
          117B(4), and in my judgment has not committed any material  error
          of law.

      14. Whilst the Judge's decision is a generous one,  Mr  Whitwell  has
          not demonstrated that it contains an error of law.

Decision

      15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
          of law and I do not set it aside.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
4 December 2014

