
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49487/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2015                  |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                               MONOWER HOSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kimnell promulgated on 8 July 2015, permission to  appeal  having  been
    granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Zucker  on  27  October
    2015.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on  25  March  1992.   He
    first entered the United Kingdom in October 2009 with  entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid until 30 June 2011.  He obtained  a
    grant of further leave from 2 February 2012 until 27 October 2012,  and
    a yet further grant of leave from 23 February 2013  until  28  February
    2015.  However on 13 June 2014 there was  a  decision  to  curtail  his
    leave with effect from 17 August 2014.  On 15 August 2014  he  made  an
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 4  (General)  Student.   That
    application was refused on 20 November 2014 and a  Section  47  removal
    decision was also made.

3.   The application for further leave to remain was refused with  reference
    to paragraph 245ZX(o) of the Immigration Rules on the  basis  that  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant was a  genuine  student
    able to pursue his proposed course. The Reasons for Refusal Letter also
    made  reference  to  paragraph  322(3)  with  reference  to   paragraph
    245ZY(c)(iv) of the Immigration Rules - that the Appellant had breached
    his conditions of leave by pursuing a  course  that  he  had  not  been
    authorised to pursue.

4.   The Appellant did not attend the  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    today.  Although there is on file correspondence from solicitors  dated
    15 October 2015 indicating that they have been instructed to act on the
    part of the Appellant in these proceedings and inviting  correspondence
    to their address, no further communication has been received  from  the
    Appellant or his representatives by way of documentation in the appeal;
    nor has any indication been given as to reasons for not  attending  the
    hearing today.

5.   Mr Walker, however, is able to tell me that the Home Office records  in
    respect  of  the  Appellant  reveal  that  he  recently  contacted  the
    Respondent indicating that he wished to leave the United  Kingdom.   Mr
    Walker has produced the extracts from the Respondent's computerised CID
    notes which indicate that on 23 November 2015  an  email  was  received
    from  the  Appellant  saying  that  he  would  "like  to  withdraw   my
    application" and that he had "decided to  go  back  home".   The  email
    otherwise refers to him having identified an  available  ticket  for  2
    December and requesting to have his documents  including  his  passport
    returned to him, and asking if in such circumstances  it  will  be  all
    right for him to go ahead to book the ticket for 2 December.

6.   Necessarily the email does not constitute evidence that  the  Appellant
    has yet departed from the United Kingdom, and  in  those  circumstances
    his application and appeal cannot  be  considered  to  have  lapsed  by
    reason of such departure.  Nor is there any express communication  from
    the Appellant to the Tribunal indicating that he wishes his  appeal  to
    be considered as withdrawn. In those circumstances  I  continue  to  be
    seized of a valid appeal, and it is necessary therefore to proceed with
    it.

7.   I am prepared to  proceed  with  the  appeal  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant given that  he  has  offered  no  explanation  for  his  non-
    attendance and in any event, because it appears likely in light of  the
    communication to the Secretary of State,  that  he  does  not  wish  to
    participate in the appeal hearing.

8.   Notwithstanding the Appellant's non-attendance, I am of the  view  that
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside for error  of
    law.  As identified above, there were broadly  two  issues  before  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  the  first  in  respect  of  whether  the
    Appellant was a genuine student and the second in  respect  of  whether
    the Appellant had been in breach of his conditions of leave  such  that
    paragraph 322(3) was engaged.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found  in  favour  of  the  Appellant  in
    respect of the first issue but found against  him  in  respect  of  the
    second issue.  However, what the First-tier Tribunal Judge  appears  to
    have overlooked is that paragraph 322(3) of the Immigration Rules  does
    not provide for a mandatory basis of refusal but only  a  discretionary
    basis of refusal.  There has been no consideration of that  discretion.
    It is perhaps understandable that the Respondent's decision  maker  did
    not give any specific consideration to the discretionary nature of that
    paragraph in circumstances  where  it  was  then  considered  that  the
    Appellant failed under the Rules in any event.  However, once the Judge
    had rejected the Respondent's premise that the Appellant  failed  under
    the Tier 4 Rules, the discretion under paragraph 333(3) was not only at
    large but vital to the outcome of the Appellant's appeal.  It  is  also
    the case that necessarily such discretion required to be looked  at  by
    the First-tier Tribunal on the premise  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    found to be a genuine student.

10.  In those circumstances it seems to  me  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has erred in law  and  that  the  decision  in  the  appeal  must
    therefore be set aside and remade to the extent that  the  decision  is
    remitted to the Secretary of State to  consider  the  discretion  under
    paragraph 322(3), the decision otherwise not being in  accordance  with
    the law.

11.  There is a further matter that has caused me some hesitation  today  in
    the best way of dealing with the appeal in the unfortunate circumstance
    of the Appellant not seeming to wish  to  participate.   The  issue  in
    respect of the breach of condition related   to  the  Appellant  having
    pursued a course at Opal College in circumstances where he was  present
    in the UK pursuant to leave granted on the basis of a CAS in respect of
    West End College. It was the Appellant's  case  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the course at Opal College was a supplementary course and
    thereby permitted pursuant to paragraph 245ZY(c)(iv) of the Immigration
    Rules.  The Judge concluded that it was not a supplementary course, and
    that the Appellant had in fact  pursued  the  course  at  Opal  College
    instead of the course at West End College.

12.  On the face of it that  is  a  finding  of  fact  properly  within  the
    jurisdiction of the Judge  on  all  of  the  available  evidence.   The
    finding that the Appellant pursued the  one  course  "instead  of"  the
    other course is not expressly a  finding  of  fact  challenged  in  the
    grounds in support of the permission to appeal, rather the challenge is
    based upon the definition of 'supplementary course'.

13.  To that extent there is  no  direct  challenge  validly  before  me  in
    respect of that finding.  I cannot  help  observe,  however,  that  the
    Appellant had not only previously secured a CAS in respect of a  course
    at West City College, such CAS being assigned on 24 October 2012 on the
    basis in part of a course completion letter from West End College  (see
    Respondent's bundle at Annex E2), but that such a document appeared  to
    have been before the First-tier Tribunal in the Appellant's  bundle  at
    page 15.  At page 15 there is a course completion letter dated 3 August
    2012 confirming that the Appellant had completed the course at West End
    College.

14.  In the absence of an express rejection of that letter as  in  some  way
    being untruthful, it is not clear on what basis the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge was able to reach the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    pursued the course at Opal College (which culminated in a diploma award
    in August 2012) in parallel with the course at West End College, rather
    than instead of.  Such a possible error of fact might be germane to the
    issue of  whether  or  not  the  course  at  Opal  College  was  indeed
    supplementary to the course at  West  End  College  rather  than  being
    pursued instead of it.

15.  Be that as it may, it seems to  me  that  I  do  not  have  an  express
    challenge in this  regard,  and  in  the  absence  of  the  Appellant's
    attendance I am not minded, as it were, to 'make the case' for him.  It
    seems to me that these are matters that may properly be looked at again
    in the event that  the  Appellant  decides  that,  notwithstanding  his
    indication to the Secretary of State that he wishes to leave the United
    Kingdom, he nonetheless now wants to remain in the  United  Kingdom  to
    pursue further matters.

16.  In those circumstances I am content to determine  the  appeal  on  this
    basis: the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set  aside  for
    error of law in respect of paragraph 322(3); the decision in the appeal
    is remade; the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law
    for  a  failure  properly  to  consider  the  discretionary  nature  of
    paragraph 322(3), and accordingly the appeal is allowed to  the  extent
    that it is remitted to the Secretary of State.

17.  Of course if the Appellant departs the United Kingdom in the  next  few
    days then his application will lapse.  If he does not and the Secretary
    of State goes through the process of  looking  at  the  case  again  in
    respect of paragraph 322(3), necessarily the Secretary  of  State  will
    take as a premise that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellant was a genuine and capable student and the Secretary of  State
    may wish to look again at the issue of breach of conditions in light of
    the observations that I have made herein.

Notice of Decision

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained a material  for
    error of law and is set aside.

19.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The Respondent's decision was  not
    in accordance with the law for  a  failure  properly  to  consider  the
    discretionary nature of paragraph 322(3). The appeal is allowed to  the
    extent that it is remitted to the Respondent who must now determine the
    Appellant's application in accordance with the law.

20.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed   Date: 14 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal. However, I make no fee award  because  the  basis
upon which the appeal has been allowed is limited and does not  reflect  the
basis of the Appellant's case  as  advanced  before  either  the  First-tier
Tribunal or  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Moreover  the  Appellant's  interest  in
pursuing the appeal is unclear.


Signed   Date: 14 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

