
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49444/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 October 2014                             |On 10 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL G A BLACK

                                   Between

                               Hassan Mehmood

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

NO ANONYMITY ORDER
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Blundell, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This matter comes before me to consider whether  or  not  there  was  a
    material error of law. The appellant is Hassan Mehmood  whose  date  of
    birth is 25 August 1988. He is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   He  appeals
    against a  determination  before  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Clarke)
    promulgated on 9 June 2014 in which she dismissed his appeal against  a
    decision to cancel leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student under  paragraph
    321A(1) of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant's leave to remain  was
    cancelled by an immigration officer on the grounds  that  there  was  a
    change of circumstances, namely the licence of  the  college  had  been
    revoked (which was accepted) and that the appellant failed to start the
    course on time and was 6  weeks  late,  having  attended  his  sister's
    wedding and delayed his return to the  UK.   There  was  an  additional
    issue as to working in excess of  permitted  hours  but  this  was  not
    relevant to my considerations.

2.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal  notwithstanding
    that there was no evidence or bundle adduced by the respondent at  all.
    The Tribunal found "precedent facts" were  established  [7];  that  the
    course of study was due to  commence  the  day  after  the  appellant's
    sister's wedding and the appellant did not return  until  17  November.
    She concluded that there was a change of circumstances to do  with  the
    appellant's actions and not the revocation of the college licence.  She
    concluded that there was no  procedural  unfairness  therefore  by  the
    appellant not being given 60 days in which to find another college.

 Grounds for permission

3.   The grounds for permission argued that there  was  nothing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal to establish a change of circumstances  as  to  the
    appellant's absence for six weeks  prior  to  commencing  his  studies.
    There was  no  evidence  from  the  college  and  no  documentation  in
    connection with the leave application from the respondent.  There was a
    failure therefore on the part of the respondent to  establish  evidence
    of the original circumstances, which amounted to an error of law.

Permission to appeal

4.  Permission was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Judge  Osborne.  The
    application was renewed before the Upper Tribunal and granted by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor who said in his reasons:

         "It is arguable that it was not open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge to conclude, on the  evidence  available  to  her,  that  the
         Secretary of State had demonstrated the existence of the  necessary
         precedent facts required by paragraph 321A(1)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules."

Submissions

5.   In submissions  before  me  this  morning  Mr  Blundell  relied  on  OR
    (Bangladesh)[2011] UKUT 166 (IAC) in which the Upper Tribunal concluded
    that before any change of circumstances could be  established,  it  was
    necessary to establish what the original circumstances  were  and   the
    burden in that regard falls on the respondent.

6.    Mr Kandola submits that there was sufficient evidence  or  information
    before the Tribunal Judge to establish precedent facts  which  included
    the start date, the appellant's  absence  and  the  revocation  of  the
    college licence.  He submits that  the  revocation  was  sufficient  to
    amount to a change of circumstances in any event.

Discussion and decision

7.   I have decided that there was a material error of law.   There  was  no
    evidential basis  on  which  the  Tribunal  could  establish  what  the
    original circumstances were when the appellant  was  granted  leave  to
    pursue his studies.  The burden of proof was clearly on the  respondent
    but no evidence at all was produced  at  the  hearing.   There  was  no
    evidence at all on which the Tribunal Judge reached  her  findings  and
    conclusions as to the change of circumstances having regard to what she
    described as the appellant's  own  actions.   The  Tribunal  failed  to
    determine the appeal having regard to the change  of  circumstances  of
    the revocation of the sponsors licence.

8.   Accordingly I have decided to set aside that determination.

Remaking the decision

9.    There is no  challenge  to  the  fact  that  there  was  a  change  of
    circumstances by the revocation of the college  licence.    I  rely  on
    that change of circumstances and I find that the respondent ought to be
    granted 60 days leave to the appellant in which to find a new sponsor.

Decision

10.  There was a material error of law.  The determination is set aside.

11.   I remit the matter to the Secretary of State for a lawful decision  to
    be made and direct that the appellant is given 60 days' leave in  which
    to find a new sponsor.




Signed                                  Date 9.10.10


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


No fee award
No anonymity order made nor requested

