
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49332/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18 July 2016                        |On 21 July 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         mr khondoker mahbubul ahsan
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Khan, solicitor, Universal Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Rayner promulgated on  24  November  2015,  in  which  he  allowed  the
    respondent's appeal against a decision to remove him  from  the  United
    Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Kebede  on  2
    June 2016.

Anonymity

 3. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 4. The respondent is a national of Bangladesh, born on 2 January 1985.  He
    entered the United Kingdom during the year 2010 with leave to enter  as
    a Tier 4 migrant  until  30  November  2012.   Following  a  successful
    appeal, the respondent was granted further leave to remain in the  same
    capacity until 30 September 2014. On 28  April  2014,  he  underwent  a
    civil marriage ceremony with his  wife  and  on  19  August  2014,  the
    respondent sought further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a
    partner and step-father to her children from a previous relationship.

 5. The Secretary of State refused the  application,  concluding  that  the
    respondent failed to satisfy the suitability requirements  of  Appendix
    FM owing to his conduct in obtaining leave to remain by  deception.  It
    was said that a recording  of  the  tests  taken  at  Synergy  Business
    College on 18 September 2012 indicated the presence  of  a  proxy  test
    taker. Some doubt was also cast on the genuineness of the  relationship
    with his partner and mention was made of the fact that the children  of
    the marriage were not his biological children. In relation to paragraph
    276ADE, none of the requirements of the Rules were said to be  met  and
    it was noted that the respondent had resided in Bangladesh for the vast
    majority of his life. The Secretary of State did not accept that  there
    were  any  exceptional  circumstances,  which  meant  the  respondent's
    removal from the United Kingdom would no longer be appropriate  and  it
    was said that no evidence had been provided to show that the respondent
    assisted in the day to day care of his wife's children.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. Judge Rayner concluded that  the  Secretary  of  State  had  failed  to
    discharge the burden of proving the  allegation  of  deception  to  the
    required standard.  He proceeded to allow  the  appeal  under  EX.1(a),
    having found that the income requirements were not met. With regard  to
    the  EX.1(b),  the  judge  considered  there  were  no   insurmountable
    obstacles to  family  life  between  the  respondent  and  his  partner
    continuing in Bangladesh.

The grounds of appeal

 7. In essence, the grounds argue that the judge failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons in relation to a material matter. Reference  was  made  to  the
    judge's view that the respondent's evidence was far from compelling and
    the fact that a witness statement from Peter Millington was  available,
    contrary to what the judge found. It  was  also  said  that  the  judge
    failed to take into account the ETS look-up tool which showed that  the
    respondent's test result was invalid.



 8. Permission to appeal was granted for the following reasons:

    "There is arguable merit in the assertion in the grounds that the judge
    had failed to provide adequate reasoning as to  why  he  preferred  the
    appellant's evidence over the respondent's and why he  considered  that
    the respondent had failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of  proof,  when
    considering the  adverse  findings  he  otherwise  made  at  [27].  The
    respondent's grounds are  fortified  by  the  subsequent,  and  recent,
    decision in SM and Qadir V SSHD 9ETS -  Evidence  -  Burden  of  Proof)
    [2016] UKUT 00229. "

The hearing

 9. I advised the parties that the witness statement  of  Peter  Millington
    was not on the case file and was not included  in  a  small  bundle  of
    documents submitted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. Mr Khan informed me that no Rule 24 response had been produced.

11. Mr Melvin relied on the decision in SM and Qadir  as  well  as  SSHD  v
    Shehzad & Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 61. He argued that the judge should have
    found that the Secretary of State had discharged the burden of proof on
    the basis of the evidence before him and thereafter  the  burden  would
    have been on the respondent to show that deception had not taken place.
    He drew my attention to [28] of the decision and  submitted  that  that
    the error in question was material in that the  judge  raised  numerous
    concerns with the  evidence  given  by  the  respondent  during  cross-
    examination. Mr Melvin argued that the  respondent's  rebuttal  of  the
    burden was insufficient. The judge  therefore  erred  in  finding  that
    EX.1(a) was met.

12.  In  reply,  Mr  Khan  declined  to  engage  with  the  above-mentioned
    authorities but raised a new issue which had not been raised  hitherto,
    that is that the specific provision relied upon  by  the  Secretary  of
    State did not apply in  this  case.  In  essence,  the  respondent  was
    relying  upon  S-LTR  2.2(a)  which  refers   to   false   information,
    representations  or  documents  being  submitted   with   the   present
    application, whereas the disputed TOEIC certificate was submitted  with
    a previous application. He further submitted that the appeal under  the
    Rules ought to have been allowed under the Rules for this reason alone,
    or alternatively outside the Rules.

13. Mr Melvin raised no objection to the new matter raised by Mr  Khan.  He
    merely responded by pointing to the plethora of reasons provided by the
    judge  at  [28]  for  finding  the  respondent's  evidence  "far   from
    compelling."

14. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision as to error of law.









Decision on error of law


15. SM and Qadir was heard some considerable time  after  this  matter  was
    considered by Judge Rayner. At [68] of that decision, the following was
    said;


    "As our analysis and conclusions in the immediately  preceding  section
    make clear, we have substantial reservations  about  the  strength  and
    quality of the Secretary of  State's  evidence.  Its  shortcomings  are
    manifest. On the other hand, while bearing in mind that the context  is
    one of alleged deception, we  must  be  mindful  of  the  comparatively
    modest threshold which an evidential burden entails. The calls  for  an
    evaluative assessment on the part of the  tribunal.  By  an  admittedly
    narrow margin  we  are  satisfied  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged this burden. The effect of this is that there is  a  burden,
    again an evidential one, on  the  Appellants  of  raising  an  innocent
    explanation."

16. The judge therefore inadvertently erred in finding  that  the  evidence
    provided by the Secretary of State, consisting of the evidence of  Mona
    Shah, Rebecca Collings  and  the  ETS  look-up  tool  spreadsheet,  was
    insufficient to discharge the burden of  proving  that  the  respondent
    carried out deception. Furthermore, the judge erred in not appreciating
    that the burden shifted to the respondent in this case. This is all the
    more crucial given the considerable concerns the  judge  had  regarding
    the respondent's vague recollection of the test process, the fact  that
    he had not booked his own test, that he could not remember many aspects
    of the test or even when he had received notification of the accusation
    that a proxy test taker was used.


17. Notwithstanding my  above  findings,  I  have  considered  whether  the
    judge's errors were material for the reasons put forward by Mr Khan.


18. As rightly identified by Mr Khan, the decision in question relied on S-
    LTR2.2(a); which states that leave will normally be refuse  on  grounds
    of suitability if, whether or not to the applicant's knowledge,  "false
    information,  representations  or  documents  have  been  submitted  in
    relation to the application."(my emphasis) At [7] of the decision,  the
    following is said:


    "Your client submitted an application  for  further  leave  to  remain,
    FLR(O), on 19 August 2014. However, following identification  that  the
    English language test score submitted on  a  previous  application  (my
    emphasis) had been obtained by deception, the  FLR(O)  application  has
    been refused and further consideration has been given to your  client's
    Human Rights under the ECHR. Enclosed  is  Home  Office  notice  IS151a
    informing your client  of  his  immigration  status  and  liability  to
    detention and removal from the UK."


19. It is abundantly clear from reading the aforementioned extract from the
    decision, that the Secretary of State is not saying  that  the  English
    language test score which was submitted with  the  instant  application
    for further leave to remain was obtained by deception but is relying on
    a document submitted with a previous application.






20. While it would appear that the Secretary  of  State's  reliance  on  S-
    LTR.2.2(a) may be erroneous, this is  not  a  complete  answer  to  the
    appeal under the Rules.

21. The respondent relies on EX.1(a) because there are other aspects of the
    Rules he cannot meet. In MA (Pakistan), it  was  established  that  the
    reasonableness of expecting a child to leave  the  United  Kingdom,  as
    referred to in  EX.1(a)  of  Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules,
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) of the Rules and section 117B(6) of the  2002  Act
    should be approached  in  the  same  way.  Furthermore,  Elias  LJ  was
    persuaded to follow the approach taken in MM (Uganda) as follows;


    "But the critical point is that section 117C(5) is in substance a free-
    standing provision in the same way as section 117B(6) and even  so  the
    court in MM (Uganda) held that  wider  public  interest  considerations
    must be taken into account when applying the "unduly harsh"  criterion.
    It seems to me  that  it  must  be  equally  so  with  respect  to  the
    reasonableness criterion in section 117B(6)."


22. Having considered what is said in MA (Pakistan) about  decision  makers
    taking into consideration wider  public  interests  considerations,  it
    follows  that  the  issue  of  the  allegation  of  deception  requires
    consideration  by  itself,  irrespective  of   whether   the   specific
    suitability Rule in question is made out or not.


23.  I conclude that the errors made by  the  judge  were  material  and  I
    therefore set his decision aside in its entirety.  I  have  decided  to
    remit the matter as opposed to re-making the matter out of fairness  to
    the respondent who may well  wish  to  rely  on  further  evidence  and
    submissions.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Taylor House, with a time estimate of 2 hours.


Signed                                       Date: 19 July 2016
T Kamara
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
