
IAC-AH-co-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/49065/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8th January 2015                           |On 20th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              MISS Lingling Sun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of China born on 23rd  November  1981.   The
    Appellant instructed solicitors who had made application on her  behalf
    for leave to remain as the unmarried  partner  of  a  British  citizen.
    That application was refused by the Secretary of  State  by  Notice  of
    Refusal  dated  18th  February  2013.   In  refusing  the   application
    consideration was also given  to  the  Appellant's  family  life  under
    Article 8 in which it was noted fell since 9th July 2012 under Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Scott-Baker  on  24th  July  2014.    In   a   detailed
    determination promulgated on 10th September 2014 the Appellant's appeal
    was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 3. On 19th September 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Those  grounds  were  based  on  two  premises.
    Firstly the judge had failed to consider Section 19 of the  Immigration
    Act 2014 and secondly that the Tribunal had erred in the interpretation
    of "insurmountable obstacles" under EX.1.

 4. On 26th November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Chohan  granted
    permission to appeal.  Bearing in  mind  subsequent  arguments  by  the
    legal representatives to me it is relevant to set out verbatim part  of
    the judge's reason for decision in granting permission.

         "3.  It is true that the judge has failed to consider Section 19 of
             the Immigration  Act  which  is  applicable  at  the  date  of
             hearing.  However it is apparent from the  determination  that
             the issue for the judge was in respect of  paragraph  EX.1  of
             the Immigration Rules.  Section 19 of the 2014 Act only  comes
             into play, and in particular Section 117B of the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, when the  Tribunal  considers
             Article 8 of the ECHR.  That  was  not  the  case  before  the
             judge.  Therefore, it is difficult to  see  how  that  was  an
             error on the part of the judge.

         4.   However as far as paragraph EX.1 is concerned, it may be  open
             to argument that the judge had given inadequate reasons as  to
             why the Appellant  could  not  return  to  China  and  whether
             financial circumstances alone can justify allowing  an  appeal
             under the said paragraph.  The Respondent points  out  in  the
             application that the Appellant gave  evidence  to  the  effect
             that '...his family  would  be  willing  to  visit  China...'.
             Clearly, that needs to be explored further.

         5.   Hence, I find that there may well be an arguable error of  law
             for the reasons set out above."

 5. No Rule 24  apply  is  served  by  the  legal  representatives  of  the
    Appellant.  I do note that there was a request made for an extension of
    time over the Christmas period and that that was  refused.   It  is  on
    that basis that the  appeal  comes  before  me.   For  the  purpose  of
    continuity throughout proceedings Miss Sun is referred to herein as the
    Appellant the Secretary of State  as  the  Respondent.   The  Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel Mr Fripp.  Mr Fripp is the author  of
    a most helpful note  provided  to  me  on  the  law  on  insurmountable
    obstacles.   The  Secretary  of  State  appears  by  her  Home   Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Bramble.

Preliminary Point

 6. The initial submissions/discussions concentrate on whether or not Judge
    Chohan granted permission to the Secretary of State to  appeal  on  the
    basis that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Act.  The argument concentrated on  consideration  of  when
    paragraph 3 of Judge Chohan's grant of permission is  looked  alongside
    paragraph 5 had he or had he not granted permission on that  particular
    ground.  It was Mr Bramble's contention on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State that he had and it was Mr Fripp's that he had not.

 7. The three paragraphs are set out above.  It is  clear  that  permission
    was granted on the second ground i.e. that set out in paragraph  4.   I
    acknowledge that more than one interpretation could be put  on  whether
    or not permission was granted on paragraph 3.  I took the view that  it
    was.  My reasons were firstly that had  it  not  been  granted  then  I
    considered that the judge would have not used evasive words  but  would
    have been specific and secondly because the  general  premise  is,  and
    there is case law to support this, that leave will be  granted  on  all
    grounds unless it is specifically refused.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Fripp took the view that if that were the case it would in any event
    act in the Appellant's favour.  He submits that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge applied the Rule properly pointing out that it is wholly a matter
    of conjecture if the Rules were not found to be a complete code  as  to
    what would happen on a freestanding Article 8 assessment.   However  he
    points out that the Appellant speaks  English,  is  economically  self-
    sufficient and that when she started  her  relationship  which  is  the
    subject of this appeal she had leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    He consequently submits that the 2014 Act actually is of benefit to her
    position.

 9. Mr Bramble seeks to  rely  on  the  general  paragraph  in  opening  to
    "Appendix FM family members" to be found at page  1031  of  the  Eighth
    Edition of Phelan relying on opening paragraph  headed  "Purpose".   He
    points out that the Appellant's leave  expired  in  2012,  submits  the
    judge should have made a direct reference  to  Section  117(b)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that there has been no
    assessment made of the public interest.

10. Mr Fripp submits that the judge has directed herself appropriately  and
    that whether or not the relevant test is satisfied is a matter of  fact
    and that the judge had to address these issues with care and  that  the
    judge's decisions are well reasoned and should only  be  set  aside  if
    they are perverse.  He submits that on no possible interpretation could
    such an analysis be concluded.

11. On the second ground as to  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  can  gain
    relief  by  meeting  the  test  for  "insurmountable  obstacles"  under
    paragraph EX.1(b) Mr Bramble contends the  judge  has  not  taken  into
    account all the factors when making  her  fact-finding  assessment  and
    that she  has  not  made  an  assessment  as  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's partner Mr Murados would or could not travel to China.

12. Mr Fripp submits that the Secretary of State's  appeal  is  a  hopeless
    case.  He submits that the judge  has  looked  at  paragraph  EX.1  and
    refers me to his skeleton argument  on  insurmountable  obstacles.   He
    submits that the judge has made careful findings of fact at  paragraphs
    36 and 37 and has applied the appropriate test.   The  facts  that  the
    Sponsor's family are prepared to visit China does not in any way affect
    the factual position.  He submits that this is merely  simply  argument
    and disagreement by the Secretary of State and he asked me  to  dismiss
    the appeal and to maintain the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

The Law

13.   Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow  binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

14. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of the   evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent  with    truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

15. The statute

    Section 117B

    Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases


    (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
         interest.

    (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

    (4)  Little weight should be given to-

         (a)  a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
         person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration   status   is
         precarious.

    (6)  In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

        (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

        (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom.



    The Rules


    Section EX.1

    This paragraph applies if


    (a)   (i)  the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child who-


             (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of  18
                  years when the applicant was first granted  leave  on  the
                  basis that this paragraph applied;


             (bb) is in the UK;


             (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK  continuously
                  for at least the 7 years immediately preceding the date of
                  application ; and


         (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
         UK; or


    (b)  the applicant has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

Findings

16. The determination of Judge Scott-Baker is  well  constructed  and  well
    reasoned.  It is debatable looking at the  determination  where  it  is
    specifically stated at paragraph 37 "there  was  no  challenge  at  the
    hearing by Miss Dhadda (Home Office Presenting  Officer)  the  evidence
    and it was accepted by the parties that  the  only  issue  was  whether
    paragraph EX.1 was satisfied."  As to whether  Section  117B  was  ever
    argued  before  the  Immigration  Judge.   That  indeed  was  the  view
    expressed by Judge Chohan when granting permission and he concluded  it
    was difficult to see in such circumstances how a failure to consider it
    could in anyway be considered an error by the  judge.   It  has  to  be
    remembered Section  117B  identifies  circumstances  that  are  in  the
    "public interest" in Article 8 cases and gives  them  statutory  force.
    Even allowing whether or not this paragraph should or should  not  have
    been considered in this particular instance it  has  to  be  remembered
    that it effectively codifies the previous approach that was expected to
    be considered  by  Immigration  Judges  when  addressing  issues  under
    Article 8.

17. I am satisfied that so far as it is relevant  these  issues  have  been
    considered by the judge and  in  any  event  I  am  supportive  of  the
    approach adopted by Mr Fripp that this is an Appellant who is fluent in
    English, economically self-sufficient and entered her relationship at a
    time when  she  was  lawfully  within  the  United  Kingdom.   In  such
    circumstances I do not consider that the Secretary of State can benefit
    from Section 117B and that the judge has given general consideration to
    these  factors  within  her  determination  albeit  that  she  has  not
    specifically made reference to Section 117.  I do not consider that she
    was obligated to do so and I find that this submission by the Secretary
    of State to be weak and not sustainable.  Failure to make reference  to
    Section 117B does not constitute therefore any material error of law.

18. I turn next to the main submission namely that the Tribunal  has  erred
    in the interpretation of "insurmountable obstacles."  I find that  such
    contention is totally without foundation.  The judge has carried out  a
    detailed factual analysis at paragraph 36 as to the  situation  of  the
    Appellant's partner Nathan Murados and as to his personal and financial
    circumstances and what would be required of him if he had to leave  the
    UK to go and live in  China  with  the  Appellant.   Such  analysis  is
    further emphasised at paragraphs 39 and 40.  The judge has carried  out
    a full and detailed analysis of the phrase insurmountable obstacles and
    has reached findings which are not perverse but ones which  she  is  in
    fact perfectly entitled to have reached that the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph EX.1(b) of insurmountable obstacles.

19. The  law  is  very  helpfully  set  out  to  me  in  Mr  Fripp's  note.
    "Insurmountable obstacles" is not a term apart but rather an  indicator
    that  a  proportionality  analysis  is  necessary.   Requirements   for
    insurmountable obstacles were set out by the Master of the  Rolls  Lord
    Dyson in MF (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

         "We would observe that, if 'insurmountable' obstacles are literally
         obstacles which it is impossible to surmount, their scope  is  very
         limited indeed.  We shall  confine  ourselves  to  saying  that  we
         incline to the view that, for the reasons stated in detail  by  the
         UT in Izuazu at paragraphs 53 to  59,  such  a  stringent  approach
         would be contrary to Article 8."

20. I have given due consideration to the relevant  paragraph  from  Izuazu
    (Article 8 - new rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT  45  (IAC).   The  approach
    adopted therein has been considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    She has made findings of fact that she  was  entitled  to  namely  that
    there would be a very serious hardship for the Appellant's  partner  in
    continuing family life outside the UK.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    has not only made such finding but at paragraphs 36, 39 and 40 set  out
    detailed reasons as  to  why  she  finds  there  to  be  insurmountable
    obstacles in this case.  Her conclusion at paragraph 41 is one that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled to make.  There is no  error  of
    law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and   the
    submissions of the Secretary of State merely amount to little more than
    disagreement in an attempt to reargue issues  that  have  already  been
    fully and most properly aired before the First-tier Tribunal.  In  such
    circumstances I  find  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  I  dismiss  the
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 8th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 8th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

