
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49817/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                             taranjit singh toor
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, Solicitor from SMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge MacKenzie (the judge), promulgated on 24 July  2015,  in
    which he dismissed the Appellant's appeal. That appeal was against  the
    Respondent's  decision  of  25  November  2014,  refusing  to  issue  a
    residence  card  under  the  Immigration   (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the Regulations).

 2. The Appellant  had  married  a  Slovak  national  on  7  May  2014.  An
    application for a residence card was then lodged on 21 August 2014. The
    basis of the Respondent's refusal was  clear:  she  asserted  that  the
    marriage was one of convenience only, and that therefore the  Appellant
    was not the spouse of an EEA national. This  conclusion  was  based  in
    part upon answers given by the Appellant and his wife to an Immigration
    Officer on 29 April 2014. In addition, DNA evidence had shown that  the
    Appellant was not the biological father of his wife's child.

The judge's decision

 3. By the time of the hearing the Appellant's marriage to the EEA national
    had broken down, although there had been no divorce. The judge directed
    herself to Papajorgji (EEA spouse -  marriage  of  convenience)  Greece
    [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC). She found that the Respondent  had  shown  the
    existence of reasonable  suspicion  in  relation  to  the  marriage  of
    convenience issue. She then found that the marriage was in fact one  of
    convenience only. The  core  findings  and  reasons  are  contained  in
    paragraphs 22-30 of the decision.

 4. The first point taken against the  Appellant  related  to  the  answers
    allegedly  given  at  the  interviews.  There  was  no  record  of  the
    interviews before the judge. She stated that, "while it would have been
    helpful to have more detailed  notes  of  the  marriage  interviews,  I
    attach weight to the conclusion reached by  Immigration  Officer  Nixon
    that the [sic] it did not appear  that  the  parties  knew  each  other
    well." She found it to be of significance that there was a  discrepancy
    in the evidence (contained in the interviews) about when the  Appellant
    had travelled to Stoke for the wedding.

 5. In paragraph 24 the judge makes an adverse finding based upon different
    addresses stated in the evidence.  In  paragraph  25  the  judge  finds
    against the Appellant in respect of evidence purporting  to  have  come
    from his landlord. Paragraphs 26-30 relate to  the  wife's  child.  The
    judge did not accept  the  Appellant's  account  of  the  circumstances
    surrounding this important issue.

 6. The judge then goes on and considers Article 8.

The grounds of appeal, grant of permission and rule 24 response

 7. The grounds assert that the judge was wrong to have  placed  weight  on
    the Immigration Officer's evidence when the  notes  of  the  interviews
    were not themselves in evidence. It is also said that the  judge  erred
    in rejecting the landlord's evidence. Finally it is said that the judge
    erred in respect of Article 8.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on
    20 November 2015.

 9. A rule 24 response from  the  Respondent  was  received  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 3 December 2015.

The hearing before me

10. Mr Khan  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He  confirmed  that  no
    adjournment application had been made  to  the  judge  as  regards  the
    absence of the interview notes. The interviews had, he  told  me,  been
    carried out at the Registry Office in Stoke.  The  Appellant  had  then
    been detained and released the following day. He had then been  allowed
    to marry the following week.

11. Mr Kotas highlighted the failure to  seek  an  adjournment  before  the
    judge. Even if there was an error, it was immaterial in  light  of  the
    other findings.

Decision on error of law

12. I find that that there are no material errors of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.

13. I do not  know  whether  or  not  the  decision  in  Miah  (interview's
    comments: disclosure; fairness) [2014] UKUT 00515 (IAC) was brought  to
    the attention of judge.  I  rather  suspect  not.  In  any  event,  the
    President's conclusions in Miah are clear: the right  to  fair  hearing
    requires an appellant to know the  case  against  him,  and  this  will
    involve disclosure of the interviewer's  comments  (contained  in  form
    ICV.4605).

14. In the present case the opinions/comments of  the  Immigration  Officer
    were in evidence (form IS.126 at I1 of the Respondent's bundle).  Notes
    of the interviews were not. This fact might seem to render  proceedings
    unfair to the Appellant.

15. However, in my view what appears to be an error by  the  judge  is  not
    actually an error at all, or in  any  event  is  not  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal. My reasons for so finding are as follows.

16. The Appellant was fully aware  of  the  case  against  him  as  regards
    answers given in the interviews and  those  relied  upon  in  the  case
    against him. The reasons for refusal letter  clearly  states  that  the
    evidence  relating  to  the  timing  of  the  journey  to   Stoke   was
    inconsistent.  On  appeal,  the  judge  only  specifically  relies   on
    precisely  the  same  point  when  finding  against  the  Appellant  in
    paragraph 23. There  is  no  particularised  allusion  to  other,  non-
    disclosed answers. Further, having looked at the  Appellant's  evidence
    before the judge (including that given orally), I can see nothing  that
    deals with the particular point concerning the journey. As far as I can
    see there was nothing to rebut to the Respondent's assertion.

17. I would add that Mr Khan has not indicated that there might  have  been
    favourable evidence contained in the undisclosed interview.

18. In light of the above, there  was  no  substantive  unfairness  to  the
    Appellant and the judge was entitled to find as he did.

19. Those seeking to challenge decisions of the First-tier Tribunal need to
    establish the particulars of their case, with careful reference to what
    is actually said by the relevant judge (and often  the  first  instance
    decision-maker as well). This has  simply  not  been  achieved  in  the
    present appeal.

20. If I were wrong about the existence of any error, it is not material to
    the outcome of the appeal when the decision is read  as  a  whole.  The
    judge's conclusions in paragraph 24 have not been challenged  and  were
    plainly open to him. Although there a challenge to paragraph  25,  this
    has no merit. The judge was fully  entitled  to  attach  little  or  no
    weight to the landlord's evidence for the reasons given.

21. There is no specific challenge to the judge's  findings  on  the  child
    issue as it relates to the marriage of  convenience.  In  my  view  the
    judge has provided adequate reasons in support of the adverse  findings
    stated.

22. When the sustainable  findings  in  paragraphs  24-30  are  taken  into
    account, any error in paragraph 23 is rendered immaterial.

23. Mr Khan suggested at the hearing that the  judge  might  have  got  the
    burden of proof wrong. This point was not in the grounds of appeal  and
    could not be raised during the hearing. In any event, whilst  paragraph
    21 may give rise to a concern (the judge appearing to place  the  legal
    burden upon the Appellant), a  proper  reading  of  paragraph  20  and,
    importantly, paragraph 31, together with the express  consideration  of
    Papajorgji, go to show that the judge directed himself correctly.

24. There is nothing in the Article 8 point because of course the judge had
    no jurisdiction to consider it in the first place (see TY  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 1233).

Anonymity

25. No direction has been sought and none is appropriate.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed      Date:  8 February 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date:  8 February 2016

Judge H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

