

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number:     IA/49184/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 August 2014                              |On 2 October 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                                  Mark Azer
                         (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr M Symes, Counsel
For the Respondent:      Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This appeal comes before me following the  grant  of  permission  to
       appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 6 June 2014.


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt born  on  27  January  1984.  He
       arrived here as a student on 7 October 2008. Shortly before his visa
       expired, he was granted  leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  until  15
       November 2012. The marriage broke down and on 1  November  2012  the
       appellant sought leave to remain on  Article  8  grounds.  That  was
       refused on 5 November 2013.


    3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Edwards heard the appeal on  13  May  2014
       and dismissed it by way of a determination  promulgated  on  16  May
       2014.


    Appeal hearing


    4. I heard  submissions  from  the  parties  in  the  presence  of  the
       appellant.


    5. Mr Symes relied on his grounds and elaborated on the nature  of  the
       appellant's private and family life. No claim for asylum  was  being
       made. He submitted that the determination showed no appreciation for
       the extent and nature of the appellant's life here as had  been  put
       forward in the documentary evidence. The finding at  paragraph  24c,
       as regards the availability of additional evidence, was  unreasoned,
       the observations at paragraph 26 were  legally  inadequate  and  the
       reference to  the  letter  from  the  consultant  being  "peculiarly
       phrased" was irrational and unreasoned. In paragraph 27,  the  judge
       missed the point completely; the case was not that Mrs Boutros would
       be able to access health care without the  appellant  but  that  she
       looked upon him as the son she had  never  had  and  that  they  had
       developed a close bond. There was no consideration by the  judge  as
       to whether  their  relationship  involved  an  emotional  dependency
       beyond the norm. The determination was an  inadequate  consideration
       of the issues and could not stand.


    6.  Mr Walker pointed out that it had been conceded that the  appellant
       could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules. The  judge
       approached the case with Gulshan in mind. That set out a  high  test
       for an Article 8 claim outside the rules. Country guidance  did  not
       establish that discrimination faced by Coptic  Christians  in  Egypt
       reached the Article 3 test. Paragraph 24c was perhaps poorly  worded
       but the determination did not contain any material errors of law.


    7. In response, Mr Symes submitted that the strength of  the  case  was
       not at all apparent from the determination. He submitted  that  this
       was an appropriate case for remittal to the First-tier  Tribunal  as
       the issues raised by the appellant had not been properly assessed.


    8. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination which I
       now give with reasons.


    Conclusions


    9. Mr Symes is right when he says that the nature  of  the  appellant's
       case is not apparent from the determination  and  that  the  judge's
       findings are largely unreasoned. Whilst it is not at all clear  from
       the evidence, however, that the appellant's case is strong enough to
       entitle him to a grant of leave outside the rules, it  does  at  the
       very least call for a more thorough analysis than is  apparent  from
       this determination.


   10. It is plain that the appellant's performance as a  witness  did  not
       impress the judge who complains of his "long rambling answers", none
       of which are recorded in the determination or indeed in  the  Record
       of  Proceedings  which  does  not  reflect  this  complaint.  It  is
       unfortunate  that  his  representative  did  not  steer   him   more
       effectively through the  evidence  but,  notwithstanding  that,  the
       determination is a cursory consideration of several  elements  of  a
       private, if  not  family,  life  established  at  a  time  when  the
       appellant had leave to remain and an expectation that he  was  going
       to remain here for the rest of his life.


   11. I am in agreement with Mr Symes and Mr Walker that  the  wording  of
       paragraph 24c leaves much to be desired and that it shows inadequate
       reasoning. No reasons at all have  been  given  in  the  very  brief
       rejection of part of his claim at  paragraph  25.  The  'mother-son'
       relationship  he  has  with  Mrs  Boutros  has  not  been   properly
       considered and there is  no  regard  to  their  emotional  bond  and
       reliance upon  each  other.  The  judge  does  not  explain  why  in
       paragraph 26 he refers to the  consultant's  letter  as  "peculiarly
       phrased". On the face of  it,  it  is  a  letter  corroborating  the
       support the appellant has given Mrs Boutros. If the judge had issues
       with it, it was incumbent upon him to clarify what  they  were.  The
       comments in paragraph 28 are unreasoned and appear  to  reject  what
       was initially acknowledged in  the  same  paragraph.   There  is  no
       consideration of the appellant's employment, studies or  involvement
       in the South Kensington Coptic Church.


   12.   I have therefore reached the conclusion that the determination  is
       flawed due to its inadequate reasoning and the failure  to  properly
       consider the claim that the appellant put forward. I take note of Mr
       Walker's submission that the appellant could not qualify within  the
       rules and that the judge had the guidance of Gulshan in mind.  I  do
       not say that this is a strong case or that it is likely to  succeed.
       Indeed, it is difficult to win on Article 8 grounds where one cannot
       succeed under the rules. However, an appellant has the right to have
       his appeal determined properly and the determination  in  this  case
       does not adequately reflect the nature of the case  or  provide  any
       reasoned arguments for the conclusion that it  does  not  warrant  a
       grant of leave outside the rules.


    Decision


   13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  The  appeal
       shall be re-heard by another judge of the First-tier Tribunal with a
       view to re-making the decision.


    Anonymity


   14. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.


       Signed:




       Dr R Keki?
       Upper Tribunal Judge




       Date: 1 August 2014
