
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49692/2014
                                                               IA/49700/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th November 2015                |On 6th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                             y (First appellant)
                            o (second appellant)
                         (anonymity directionS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Makulu (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of the Appellants, to the Upper Tribunal, in respect
    of a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Turnock) promulgated on
    21st May 2015, in which he dismissed their appeals against decisions of
    the Respondent, made on 1st December 2014, to remove them from the  UK.
    The First-tier Tribunal made anonymity  orders  with  respect  to  both
    Appellants and I have continued those orders.

 2. I shall call the first Appellant Y and the second Appellant  O.   Y  is
    the mother of O.  O is a minor child who was born on 2nd December 2009.
     Both are nationals of Gambia.

 3. Y came to the UK on 17th September 2008 as a dependant of  her  husband
    A, who is also a national of Gambia.  She says  that  her  relationship
    with A ran into difficulties whilst the two were together  in  the  UK.
    She became pregnant with O and, after his birth on 2nd  December  2009,
    suffered from post-natal depression.  She says that, by  this  time,  A
    had become very controlling.  In June 2010 her father passed  away.   A
    suggested that Y should travel to Gambia for a short  period  to  mourn
    her late father and she did so, taking O with her.  However, when  they
    were due to return, A said to Y that she would have to leave  O  behind
    in Gambia for a time while  he  "sorted  out  his  paperwork".   So,  Y
    returned to the UK alone, leaving O with her own family.  According  to
    Y, her relationship with A  deteriorated  further.   This  led  to  A's
    family in Gambia collecting O from Y's family.  Judge Turnock explained
    that all of that in this way;

         "26. The First Appellant states that on her return  home  following
             her attendance at the birthday celebrations of a close  friend
             her husband confronted her with, 'furious  anger,  accusations
             of cheating and being disloyal'.  A few days later her husband
             asked  his  younger  brother  to  go  to  collect  the  Second
             Appellant from the First Appellant's mother, who  was  looking
             after him so that he could go and visit her husband's side  of
             the family.  The First  Appellant  states  that  she  did  not
             object to that but when the Second Appellant was not  returned
             to her mother the First Appellant realised that her  husband's
             plan was to 'snatch' her  son  from  her  family.   The  First
             Appellant states that she then started making plans  to  bring
             back the Second Appellant to the United Kingdom.   She  states
             that she was supported by friends and family who assisted  her
             to raise the necessary funds, so she could travel to Gambia to
             be reunited with the second Appellant.  During that  time  she
             states that the abuse she was suffering at home had  escalated
             to a high level because she was no longer  working  very  long
             hours to support her husband."

 4. Y did return to Gambia, collect O from A's family, and return with  him
    to the UK.  However, she says that  by  that  time,  her  marriage  had
    broken down.  She moved away from where he was living.  She applied for
    leave to remain for herself and or on the basis that  she  had  been  a
    victim of domestic  violence.   She  provided  evidence  that  she  was
    receiving support due to stress and mental health issues, that she  had
    made reports to the police regarding A's conduct towards her and that O
    was doing well at school.

 5. It was accepted  before  Judge  Turnock  that  Y  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules relating to domestic violence but
    it was contended that removal would breach her  and  O's  rights  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)  and  that,
    in  particular,  with  respect  to  O,  Section  55  of  the   Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 had relevance.  The  key  argument
    pursued, in this context, was to the effect that if  Y  and  O  had  to
    return to Gambia O would be snatched by A's family such that  he  would
    be separated from his mother.

 6. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  a  document  which  has
    been referred to as a  "legal  opinion"  was  produced.   This  opinion
    related to how matters of custody were dealt  with  in  the  courts  in
    Gambia.  Judge Turnock  admitted  the  report  for  consideration.   He
    accepted, in Y's favour, that she  had  been  the  victim  of  domestic
    violence as claimed, albeit that she could  not  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules as a result of it because she did not  have  the  form  of  leave
    required by Section E-DVILR 1.2 and 1.3. of Appendix FM to  the  Rules.
    He considered matters outside the Rules.  He said this;

         "45. The first Appellant produced an opinion  with  regard  to  the
             legal position of an estranged wife regarding custody  against
             the husband where the latter wanted full custody  of  the  son
             under Gambian law.

         46.  The opinion  stated  that  the  Children's  Act  of  2005  was
             established in  order  to  strengthen  laws  relating  to  the
             welfare of children and what is in their  best  interest.   It
             also established a children's court where amongst other things
             proceedings regarding the custody and maintenance of  children
             are held.  The children's court being  a  special  court  that
             deals with matters of children has the  jurisdiction  to  hear
             all cases concerning children irrespective of the religion the
             parents belong too.  A child in the Act is regarded as  anyone
             below the age of 18 years.  In Section 146(ii) of the  Act  it
             states,

                  'The power of the children's court under  sub-Section  (i)
                  to make an order as to the custody  of  a  child  and  the
                  right  of  access  to  the   child   may   be   exercised,
                  notwithstanding that the mother of the  child  is  at  the
                  time not residing with the father of the child'.

         47.  The  opinion  confirms  that  in  the  Gambia  'the  paramount
             consideration generally in custody matters is the interest  of
             the child, which includes taking steps to avoid  exposing  the
             child to unnecessary social trauma".  The opinion continues,

                  'however, we have not lost sight of the fact that age  old
                  customs and  misinterpretation  of  religious  precept  by
                  trado - social authorities, still hold sway and is usually
                  the first port of call by a mischievous party,  which  may
                  engender more harm before the matter gets to the  official
                  authorities'.

             This is a situation that can be avoided at all cost so long as
             the child is with a safe party and in a safe environment.  The
             opinion concludes,

                  'It is our opinion that though the  Legal  Process  is  in
                  place, however,  there  is  total  lack  of  awareness  by
                  certain persons in the hinterland where the family of  [Y]
                  and her husband comes from,  and  due  to  age  old  local
                  customs,  may  exercise  force  and   social/psychological
                  torture of her and her son if she comes back to the Gambia
                  with him.  Despite legal provisions the entrenched  belief
                  is that the custody of the male child is the  preserve  of
                  the husband, irrespective of his age'.

         48.   There  is  evidence  from  her  that  previously  the  second
             Appellant was retained for a while  by  her  husband's  family
             although he was recovered without mishap.  It is not suggested
             that the son is in any physical danger but, it  is  said,  his
             emotional well-being would be adversely affected if he were to
             be kept by his father's family.

         49.  However, the legal opinion produced makes it clear that  there
             is due process in law in Gambia and a court  could  be  called
             upon to  decide  what  it  was  considered  was  in  the  best
             interests of the child, and make an  order  accordingly.   The
             evidence presented by  the  Appellant  does  not  justify  her
             assertion that the second Appellant's  father  or  his  family
             would seek to remove the second Appellant unlawfully  and  the
             first  and  second  Appellants  have  the  protection  of  the
             courts."

 7. The judge then went on to set out the content of Section 117A and B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, and  having  done  so
    said this;

         "53. The Appellants entered the UK with  limited  leave  to  remain
             which has now come to an end.  Neither is  a  British  citizen
             with the right to remain in the UK.  They have been in the  UK
             for a comparatively short period of time and they are able  to
             relocate to Gambia where they will  be  able  to  re-integrate
             without any real difficulties and it is  not  unreasonable  to
             expect them to do that.  They will be  able  to  enjoy  family
             life in Gambia.

         54.   I  find  that  the  decision  to  remove  the  Appellants  is
             proportionate and is not  in  breach  of  their  rights  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR."

 8. So, the appeals were dismissed.

 9. An application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal followed.
     Permission was granted in these terms.

         "While this is a very careful and  detailed  decision,  it  may  be
         arguable that the FTTJ erred in failing to resolve the conflict  of
         opinion on the material matters, in that while he found that  there
         was no evidence that the Appellant's former partner would  seek  to
         remove the second Appellant unlawfully and that they would have the
         protection of the court, there was evidence before  him  indicating
         the 'entrenched belief is that the custody of the male child  is  a
         preserve of the husband, irrespective of  age.'   It  is  relevant,
         that the FTTJ accepted  that  the  second  Appellant's  father  had
         arranged for his long  term  removal  from  the  first  Appellant's
         family previously and without her consent at [26] of the decision."

10. Mr Makulu, for the Appellant, submitted the  position  was  that  if  Y
    returned to Gambia with O, then O would be taken to live with A.   What
    the judge had said at paragraph 49 of his determination could not stand
    in the face of what had been said at paragraph 26.  Indeed,  the  judge
    had failed to reach a decision as to whether the assertions  of  Y,  as
    recorded at paragraph 26,  were  accepted.   Thus,  the  conclusion  at
    paragraph 49 was unsupported by any evidence.

11. Mrs Pettersen, submitted that the judge had had proper  regard  to  the
    legal opinion before him.  He had noted the culture  rule  customs  but
    had also noted that there is an  operating  legal  system.   The  legal
    opinion does not say that people are prevented from  accessing  courts.
    The judge had reached a clear finding that although O had been retained
    by A's family for a period, he had been re-secured without any mishap.

12. Mr Makulu, being entitled to the final  word  given  that  it  was  his
    clients who were appealing to the Upper Tribunal,  suggested  that  the
    report indicated that persons from rural parts of Gambia, as  are  this
    family, do not tend to go to the courts.  Whilst the legal opinion  did
    not say that people were prevented from going to court that  should  be
    implied.  The author of the legal opinion is saying  that,  in  effect,
    that pressure is brought to bear on persons not to access  the  courts.
    The judge had not engaged with that.

13. I reserved my decision as to whether or not the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal should  be  set  aside  for  legal  error.   Having
    considered matters I have decided it should not be.  That is because  I
    have concluded that the First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  error  of
    law.  I explain why I have reached that view below.

14. The judge noted Y's account as to how she came to return to  Gambia  to
    fetch O back to the UK at paragraph 26 of the determination.   What  he
    said is set out above.  At paragraph 29 he notes that Y did return with
    O.  At paragraph 48 he accepts that O "was retained  for  a  while"  by
    A''s family, but that he was subsequently "recovered  without  mishap".
    So, he was finding that despite Y's fears that he  had  been  snatched,
    she had been able to recover him without difficulty, from  A's  family,
    when she travelled to Gambia in order to do so.  Clearly,  that  was  a
    finding open to the judge on the evidence before him.

15. The judge admitted the "legal opinion" for consideration.  The  opinion
    appears to have been authored by a lawyer in Gambia  but  the  author's
    precise experience and qualifications are not stated.  In light of that
    it might well have been open to the judge to simply reject the  opinion
    or attach little or no weight to it.  However, as Mr Makulu points out,
    he did accept and attach weight to the opinion  and  no  complaint  has
    been made about his doing so.

16. The judge carefully considered the content  of  the  opinion  including
    what it had to say about the  availability  of  the  courts  and  about
    custom and practice in rural areas which might lead to  pressure  being
    put upon persons not to access the courts.  However, I agree  with  Mrs
    Pettersen that what the judge said at  paragraphs  48  and  49  of  the
    determination was of significance.   He  noted,  as  already  commented
    upon, that O had been recovered by Y without mishap and,  at  paragraph
    49, he said that there was nothing to justify her assertion that  A  or
    A's family would seek to remove O unlawfully.  That, in  context,  must
    have been based upon her having been able to recover O, without mishap,
    from A's family, in the first place.  So, what  the  judge  was  really
    finding, in effect, was that if Y did not want O to be taken from  her,
    which of course she does not, A's family would not forcibly remove  him
    against her wishes.  It seems to me that it was open to  the  judge  to
    take that view on the material before him  and,  particularly,  in  the
    light of the history of her having recovered O in the past.  There  was
    no suggestion that, for example, A's family  had  sought  to  resist  Y
    taking O.  So, the question of her being able to access the courts  did
    not arise.  Further, and in any event, the legal opinion  did  not  say
    that family members actively prevent or succeed in  preventing  persons
    from accessing a court and, given the existence of the  courts,  it  is
    difficult to see how Y might be prevented from having recourse to  them
    if that is what she wanted to do.  The judge did not  make  an  express
    finding that A's family would not prevent her from going  to  court  in
    someway but given his acceptance that A's  family  would  not  seek  to
    remove O unlawfully, that would seem to follow.  The  report  certainly
    does make it clear that the children's court would  be  an  appropriate
    forum for matters concerning the welfare of O to be considered.

17. In light of the above it is my conclusion that the First-tier  Tribunal
    reached findings which were properly open to it on the material  before
    it.  It did not, therefore, err in law.

Conclusions

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve an error of law
    and shall stand.

19. The First-tier Tribunal made anonymity orders.  I continue those orders
    (see below).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fees are payable there can be no fee awards.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

