
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
IA/49590/2014

                                                 IA/49622/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 April 2016                          |On 26 April 2016                 |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                             (1) LEKHNATH GAIRE
                            (2) PARU SILWAL GAIRE
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss S Pinder, Counsel, instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought in  relation  to  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Miles which was promulgated on 18 August 2015.  The  two
    appellants are Mr Lekhnath Gaire and his wife, Mrs Paru  Silwal  Gaire,
    both of whom are citizens of Nepal. The appeal arises  from  the  first
    appellant's claim for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant under Rule 245DD HC 365; and the second appellant's  dependency
    claim is parasitic upon her husband's. A combined  refusal  letter  was
    issued on 20 November 2014 against which  an  appeal  was  filed.  That
    appeal was heard in August 2015 and was dismissed. The  appellants  now
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The basis of refusal is clear from the terms  of  the  refusal  letter,
    which makes reference to the credibility of  the  appellant's  business
    plans, his lack of business experience  and  his  immigration  history.
    Following an extensive summary  and  assessment  of  the  evidence,  in
    paragraph 22 of the decision, the Judge broadly accepts  the  testimony
    of the first appellant in  relation  to  these  three  main  evidential
    issues.

3.   However the Judge proceeded to dismiss the  appeal,  a  decision  which
    turned upon the consideration  and  assessment  of  the  viability  (ie
    profitability) of the first appellant's business in the context of  the
    contracts relied upon. The Judge,  at  paragraph  23,  expressed  "real
    doubts about the genuine viability of this enterprise", notwithstanding
    that many perfectly viable businesses are non-profitable  during  their
    early years of trading. However, neither in the refusal letter, nor  in
    argument before the First-tier Tribunal, did  the  Secretary  of  State
    take any point on the profitability of the first appellant's business.

4.   The difficulty with the Judge's approach was two-fold.  First,  it  was
    not in accordance with the reasoning of the Secretary of State  in  the
    refusal letter. Secondly, the issue of profitability was not put to the
    first appellant  during  the  course  of  his  evidence,  nor  was  the
    appellants' representative invited to address that  matter  in  closing
    submissions. Put shortly, the issue of profitability, as distinct  from
    viability more generally, had not been challenged by the  Secretary  of
    State, was not 'in play' in the appeal, and the  parties  (particularly
    the appellants) were not afforded the opportunity of dealing  with  the
    point.

5.    It  is  a  basic  principle  of  fairness  and  natural  justice  that
    appellants need to know clearly and unambiguously  the  nature  of  the
    case which they have to meet. It  is  trite  law,  but  was  succinctly
    articulated by Lord Mustill in R v Home Secretary ex parte Doody [1994]
    1 AC 531 at 560 (in a passage endorsed in an immigration context by the
    Court of Appeal in R(Q) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2003] EWCA Civ 364 at para 70):
         "Since  the  person  affected  cannot   usually   make   worthwhile
         representations without knowing what factors may weigh against  his
         interests, fairness will very often require that he is informed  of
         the gist of the case which he has to answer.'

6.   In this instance, regrettably, the proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not give effect  to  this  principle  of  fairness.  As  a
    consequence  the  appellants  were  disadvantaged  in  that  the  first
    appellant was not able to meet this argument whether by oral testimony,
    by  the  filing  of  additional  documentation  (with  or  without   an
    adjournment) or through submissions by his representative  directed  to
    this discrete matter.

7.   The errors  of  law  identified  and  argued  by  Miss  Pinder  on  the
    appellants' behalf both orally in front of me  this  morning  and  more
    particularly  in  her  detailed  written  grounds  must  succeed.   The
    procedural unfairness which I have set  out  leads  inevitably  to  the
    conclusion that the Judge's decision was not in  accordance  with  law.
    The Judge's finding on profitability  is  irrational  in  that  it  was
    unknown to the first appellant or his representative that the issue was
    up for adjudication. This  appeal  must  be  allowed,  and  the  matter
    remitted for a rehearing as there needs to be a determination  de  novo
    by a different First-tier Tribunal judge.

8.   As a rehearing is inevitable, I have  been  circumspect  in  expressing
    any view on the evidence, or any inferences which may be drawn from it,
    save as has been strictly necessary to dispose of this appeal.


Notice of Decision

i.   Both appeals are allowed and the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    is set aside.
ii.  Both matters are remitted to be re-heard together  before  a  different
    First-tier Tribunal judge.



No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     25 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC





