

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49233/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 26 April 2016                              |On 13 May 2016               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                               MR VIJAY KUMAR

                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Bradshaw      (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills         (Home Office Presenting Officer)






                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    This is the appellant's appeal, brought with permission, to the
Upper Tribunal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Juss
hereinafter "the judge")  promulgated on 16 March 2015 dismissing his
appeal against the respondent's decision of 28 October 2014 refusing his
asylum and human rights claims and deciding to remove him from the UK.

2.    By way of brief background, the appellant was born on
16 December 1976 and is a national of India.  It appears that he entered
the UK on 12 May 1999.  It is noted that he claimed asylum on that date.
He attended a screening interview on 22 November 1999 but did not attend a
substantive asylum interview until 14 October 2014.  It does appear that
there has been considerable delay on the part of the respondent in
processing the asylum claim.  In any event, the respondent refused the
claim on the above date and also refused to grant leave under Article 8 of
the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) either within or outside the
Immigration Rules.  It was that refusal which led to the unsuccessful
appeal before the judge.

3.    The hearing before the judge took place on 4 March 2015.  Both
parties were represented. The appellant was, in fact, represented by
Mr Bradshaw of Counsel who also appeared on his behalf before me.  Oral
evidence was given by the appellant (though only in response to questions
put by cross-examination) and by three witnesses who had been called on his
behalf.  As to the asylum arguments, it was the appellant's case that he
was at risk at the hands of members of the Khalistan group, a Sikh militant
group based in the Punjab.  He said that some members of that group had
left a bag containing guns at his father's store, that the police had
subsequently seized it and that the members of the group had wrongly
thought he had informed the police about the guns.  The appellant also
sought to argue that he had established a strong family life and private
life in the UK such that, when taken with the unexplained delay in dealing
with his asylum claim, it would not be proportionate to remove him.

4.    The judge, as noted above, dismissed the appeal.  It is entirely
clear, in reading the determination, that he did not think very much of the
asylum claim.  In the grounds it is suggested that the judge indicated to
Mr Bradshaw, at the outset of the hearing, that he viewed that claim as
being one which was unlikely to succeed.  Indeed, in the determination he
concluded that the claim was "entirely fabricated" and sought to explain
that view in paragraphs 16, 17 and 19 of the determination.  At
paragraphs 16 and 17 he said this:

      "     16.  I find that the appellant does not discharge the burden of
      proof for the reasons given.  First there is the asylum claim.  I
      consider this at the lower standard of proof.  I do not accept that
      the appellant has a well founded fear of persecution for a convention
      reason.  He claims to have been visited by two men from the
      Khalistan group who came to his father's shop and left a bag there
      containing pistols.  However, the appellant has been inconsistent
      about how many men there were, how many pistols there were, and even
      whether he was beaten up by these men at his home or not.  In the
      absence of any evidence to this effect, it cannot be assumed, as the
      refusal letter makes clear, that they were from the Khalistan group.
      But even if they were, this was a long time ago.  The Khalistan
      movement is now dead to all intents and purposes in India.  The
      appellant can turn to the State authorities for protection.  This is
      not a case for surrogate international protection.

            17.  The same must apply to the claim for humanitarian
      protection.  There is no case for saying that there is a potential
      violation of Articles 2 and 3 of the Human Rights Convention.  The
      fact is that there is a sufficiency of protection available in India
      for the appellant, even if his claim were true, which I hold it is
      not.  Moreover, internal relocation is available to him.  The claim
      which he puts, which I have held to be entirely implausible, has to be
      assessed in terms of the assessment of future fear, and there is no
      reasonable possibility on the lower standard of this fear being
      anything other than fanciful for the future.  Finally, and no less
      importantly, it is significant that the entire tenor of the evidence
      in chief and the evidence generally given by the appellant has been
      predicated on the Article 8 claim.  There is next to nothing on the
      asylum claim put before me in evidence orally."

5.    As to the Article 8 claim it is suggested, in the grounds, that the
judge took a somewhat unorthodox approach to the oral evidence of the
witnesses, calling all three of them in at the same time to adopt their
witness statements.  It is also said that there was no subsequent cross
examination.  In explaining why he was not allowing the appeal on Article 8
grounds the judge said this:

      "     20.  But in any event, there is nothing to suggest why this
      appellant, being able-bodied, and still relatively young, cannot
      return to India and reintegrate in society there.  This is an
      appellant who is single, has no children, and has no family in the UK.
       He has no medical issues.  I accept that there is the wider family
      that he associates with but this is nothing out of the ordinary in
      terms of normal family ties that one may have with uncles, aunts and
      sibling cousins.  If the appellant did pick up an 8 year old cousin
      many years ago and take him to school, that still does not take the
      relationship anything other than into the realms of a normal
      relationship.  Article 8 must also now be considered in the context of
      the public interest considerations as a result of Part 5A of the
      Immigration Act 2014.

            21.  The appellant's private life has been built up at a time
      when his status was precarious in the UK.  The statutory provisions
      are clear that little weight is to be given to a private life that has
      been established at a time when the person in the United Kingdom is
      here unlawfully.  What he has to do is show 'exceptional
      circumstances', and in the light of the fact that there are no medical
      issues, no marriage, no children, and no dependency of any kind other
      than the ordinary, it cannot be said that there are exceptional
      circumstances.

            22.  There is, however, the question of delay.  This is, I
      accept, an inordinate delay.  Lord Simon Brown in EB (Kosovo) had made
      it clear that delay can have an impact in at least three different
      ways, one of which is to enable someone to cast down roots and to
      develop a private and family life and the other of which is to lead to
      the impression that the Secretary of State is not interested in
      removing a party such as to give a person with unlawful leave a degree
      of permanency which otherwise would not exist.  This is not a matter
      of three or four years delay which has sometimes figured in the
      leading delay cases of past years.  This is a very significant delay
      of over 15 years for which no explanation has been given whatsoever.
      The cases on delay have, however, also made it clear that it is no
      part of the judicial function to reprimand the administrative
      authorities and to penalise them for such administrative failings.

            23.  Accordingly, whereas I view the delay in coming to a
      decision with some concern, I can only express the hope that the
      Secretary of State will revisit the position of the appellant and
      consider granting him leave to remain.  Whether or not the Secretary
      of State does so, however, is ultimately a matter for her."

6.    The appeal having been dismissed, the appellant applied for
permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The grounds contended, in
summary, that the judge had erred with respect to his treatment of the
relevance of the delay in the context of his Article 8 considerations; had
erred in failing to consider the adopted and unchallenged evidence of the
three witnesses as contained in their respective witness statements and, in
particular, had failed to consider indications therein that the ties the
appellant had with relatives in the UK amounted to family life within the
meaning of Article 8 as opposed to private life; had erred with respect to
the asylum arguments in seemingly taking a point against the appellant for
not giving oral evidence about it in circumstances where it is normal
practice for asylum claimants to simply adopt the content of a witness
statement and had erred in failing to consider argument and background
material regarding risk on return and sufficiency of protection.

7.    Permission was granted on all grounds although the judge granting
permission expressed the view that the first two were, perhaps, the
stronger.

8.    Permission having been granted there was a hearing before the
Upper Tribunal (before me) in order to consider whether the judge's
determination did contain material errors of law and, if so, what should
follow from that.  The respondent had, in fact, filed a brief "rule 24"
response defending the determination.  However, Mr Mills, before me,
indicated he would concede that there was legal error in the judge's
treatment of the Article 8 considerations.  Mr Mills expressed the view
that the determination failed to demonstrate that any proper balancing
exercise, with respect to proportionality, had been carried out.  He
suggested that the case should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

9.    I accept Mr Mills concession.  It does not appear that in considering
Article 8 the judge did take into account the inordinate delay despite his
clearly expressing the view that that delay was, indeed, inordinate.  What
was required, it seems to me, was a consideration as to proportionality
(since it seems to have been accepted that Article 8 was engaged) which
treated the very extensive delay and its consequences and implications as a
relevant factor.  Indeed, in looking closely at what the judge said towards
the end of paragraph 22 and in the opening to paragraph 23, it seems to me
that he took the view that he should not consider the delay as part of the
balancing exercise simply because it is not a judge's function to reprimand
or penalise administrative authorities for administrative failings.  At
least that is one reading of the words used and nothing was said to suggest
a different reading was appropriate.  It does not seem to me then that what
was said by the judge represented the correct approach.  Whilst it may well
be true, as he properly points out, that a judge should not seek to
penalise the Secretary of State for delay, that does not mean that such a
delay, at least of this magnitude, should not or cannot be considered as a
part, perhaps even a key part of an Article 8 assessment. Accordingly, I do
conclude, as indeed I am urged to do by both representatives, that the
judge erred in his treatment of the Article 8 claim and that, in
consequence, material legal error is established.

10.   As to asylum, Mr Mills did not make a similar concession.
Nevertheless, I do have some concerns about the way in which the matter was
considered though I accept that there may have been reason for the judge to
think that there were some weaknesses regarding aspects of that claim.
However, what the judge had to say at paragraph 17 of the determination
does appear to suggest that he weighed against the appellant his failure to
provide oral evidence in support of the claim.  In this context I would
accept Mr Bradshaw's argument in the grounds that that is not, of itself, a
factor which ought to weigh against an appellant bearing in mind, in
particular, the practice of witness statements standing as evidence in
chief.  The appellant had, whatever view might be taken as to the contents
of his witness statement, submitted one for the purposes of the appeal
hearing so he had provided, through that means, his evidence as to the
claim.  I also, insofar as it is now relevant, have some doubts about the
appropriateness of the approach (and it has not been contested that this
was the approach) of the judge in indicating, at the outset, that he viewed
the asylum claim as unlikely to succeed and it may be the case that the
strength of that initial view impacted unconsciously on the way he
subsequently dealt with the arguments.  I would accept, therefore, that the
judge did also err in his treatment of the asylum claim.

11.   It follows from the above that I must set the judge's decision aside.
 In the circumstances I do not preserve any of the findings or conclusions.
 I have decided to remit the appeal so that matters may be considered
entirely afresh by a differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.  I have,
therefore, issued some directions, which appear below, and which will
hopefully aid the preparation of the rehearing before the First-
tier Tribunal.

Directions

            A.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The
                 case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided
                 by a judge other than Judge Juss.

            B.   The time estimate for the rehearing shall be three hours.
                 The services of a Punjabi speaking interpreter shall be
                 required.

            C.   The parties shall prepare for the rehearing before the
                 First-tier Tribunal on the basis that nothing is preserved
                 from the previous determination.

            D.   The respondent (my having noticed that the original
                 respondent's bundle is for some reason not contained within
                 the Upper Tribunal's file) shall, at least 10 working days
                 prior to the date which will be fixed for the rehearing,
                 send to the First-tier Tribunal and the appellant's
                 solicitors, a copy of all documents which are to be relied
                 upon at the rehearing including a copy of the relevant
                 reasons for refusal letter.

            E.   The appellant's solicitor shall, at least 10 days prior to
                 the date which will be fixed for the rehearing, send to the
                 First-tier Tribunal and the respondent, a bundle containing
                 any documents to be relied upon not previously filed,
                 including any further witness statements, any further
                 skeleton argument and any further background country
                 material.

            F.   The parties should note that any bundles filed in
                 accordance with these directions should be indexed and
                 paginated and, where appropriate, should contain a schedule
                 of essential reading.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of errors of law.  The decision is set aside.

The case is remitted for rehearing before a differently constituted First-
tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
