
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49514/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 July 2015                                  |On 2 July 2015             |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Benjamin Carlos Jakpor
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the claimant: Mr A Ikie, instructed by Ikie Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The claimant, Benjamin Carlos  Jakpor,  date  of  birth  6.7.76,  is  a
    citizen of Nigeria.

 2. The Secretary of State has appealed against the determination of First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Russell  promulgated   9.10.14,   allowing   the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    2.11.13, to  refuse  his  application  made  on  13.5.13   for  an  EEA
    residence card as confirmation of a right to reside in the  UK  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty  rights,  pursuant  to  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, as amended.  The  Judge  heard  the
    appeal on 24.9.14.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge TRP Hollingworth granted permission to appeal
    on 24.11.14.

 4. Thus the matter came before myself on 21.1.15 as an appeal in the Upper
    Tribunal.  For the reasons set out in my error  of  law  decision,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside. In  summary  it  was
    found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had no regard to the  marriage
    interview and the issue of marriage of convenience, as relied on by the
    Secretary of State, which infected the findings as to whether there was
    a durable relationship.

 5. It was not possible to proceed immediately  to  the  rehearing  of  the
    appeal, as the claimant's wife was unwell and due to  undergo  surgery.
    In the circumstances, the continuation hearing was adjourned to 7.5.15.
    However, at that hearing, before Mrs Justice  McGowan  and  myself,  Mr
    Ikie raised a  preliminary  issue  arising  from  a  challenge  to  the
    accuracy of the interview record. As I have previously  stated,  it  is
    unfortunate that Mr Ikie did  not  ask  the  respondent,  or  sought  a
    direction from the Tribunal to the same effect, to produce the original
    interview  transcript,  whether  an  audio,  typed,   or   hand-written
    document. Mr  Clarke  was  able  to  produce  a  handwritten  completed
    proforma for the interview, but did not have any copy of the  interview
    record, other than as embedded within the refusal  decision.  He  could
    not confirm whether the interview  was  recorded  or  not.  He  further
    explained that it would likely not be possible to have  any  answer  to
    such a query within the day.

 6. In the circumstances, we agreed to adjourn the hearing  of  the  appeal
    and issued directions for the production of the record of the  marriage
    interview.

 7. The matter came back before me on 2.7.15,  whereupon  I  was  presented
    with a letter from the Home Office, date 24.6.15, stating that  it  has
    not been possible to provide a witness statement from the  interviewing
    officer as he has left the Home Office. The original marriage interview
    no longer exists and there are no copies. It was apparently typed on  a
    word-processor with no back up or recording of the  interview.  In  the
    light of Miah (interviewer's  comments:  disclosure:  fairness)  [2014]
    UKUT 00515 (IAC), it would not be fair to the claimant to rely  on  the
    interview extracts set out in the refusal decision when issue has  been
    taken as to the accuracy of the record and  the  record  is  no  longer
    available for disclosure. It follows, as accepted by  Mr  Clarke,  that
    the Secretary of State has failed to discharge the  initial  burden  of
    proof to show reasonable grounds of suspicion that the marriage is  one
    of convenience.

 8. The consequence is that the basis on which I considered that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's durability assessment was flawed  falls  away.  I
    remind myself that it was conceded at the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
    hearing that the claimant could not prove that his proxy  marriage  was
    valid and recognisable in law. Instead, Mr Ikie  relied  on  regulation
    8(5), on the basis of the claimant being an extended family  member  as
    the partner in a durable relationship with a qualifying  EEA  national.
    It was in respect of that issue that Judge Russell was  satisfied  that
    the claimant met the requirements of the EEA Regulations.

 9. The Secretary of  State's  grounds  of  appeal  are  quite  narrow.  No
    challenge is in fact made to the judge's durable relationship findings.
    Instead, it is pointed  out  that  pursuant  to  regulation  17(4)  the
    Secretary of State "may" issue a Residence Card to an  extended  family
    member on application if "in all the circumstances it  appears  to  the
    Secretary of State appropriate to issue the  residence  card."  It  is,
    therefore, a discretion which vests in the Secretary of State  and  not
    the Tribunal. The grounds submit that  the  correct  course  of  action
    should have been for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to allow the  appeal
    on the limited basis that as it has been  found  as  a  fact  that  the
    appellant is in a durable relationship with a qualifying  EEA  national
    partner, the decision of the Secretary of State is  not  in  accordance
    with the law and it remains for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  make  a
    decision which is in accordance with the law.

10. Mr Ikie said he could not ask for more than such  a  course  of  action
    and, as it is the course of action contended  for  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal, Mr Clarke could not resist it. I found that once  the  marriage
    of convenience issue fell away, there was in  any  event  no  basis  to
    interfere with the durable relationship findings of Judge Russell.  For
    those reasons this appeal should be allowed on the  limited  basis  set
    out above.

Decision

11. The appeal is allowed on  the  limited  basis  that  I  find  that  the
    decision of Secretary of State is not in accordance with the law.

12. It remains for the Secretary of State to make a decision  which  is  in
    accordance with the law and the findings of fact of Judge Russell.
Signed: [pic] Date: 2 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, we make no anonymity order.


Fee Award     Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been allowed, but only on the limited basis set  out
above.

Signed: [pic] Date: 2 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

