
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49428/2014
                                                               IA/49431/2014
                                                               IA/49433/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 22 March 2017                    |On 15 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                           A M M (first appellant)
                          O A O (second appellant)
                           N A A (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants


                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Abbas, Legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant was born in 1981 and is a citizen of Saudi  Arabia.
    The second and third appellants are  her  children,  both  citizens  of
    Saudi Arabia, born in 1997 and 1999 respectively.  The third  appellant
    is still a minor.  Given the sensitive nature of these appeals, I  make
    an anonymity order pursuant to rule 14 the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008

 2. The appellants appeal with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal  Judge  M  A  Khan,  promulgated  on  2  September  2015,
    dismissing their appeals against the decision made  by  the  respondent
    made on 21 November 2014 to refuse them leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom.  For the reasons set out in  my  decision  promulgated  on  27
    October 2016 I concluded that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    involved the making of an error of law and directed that the matter  be
    remade in its entirety in the Upper Tribunal.  A copy of my decision is
    annexed to this decision.

The Appellants' Case

 3. The first appellant, although born an Egyptian national, has  lived  in
    Saudi Arabia since the age of 13 and acquired  Saudi  citizenship  when
    she married her now ex-husband.  Her family considered that  it  was  a
    good match; his father was a judge and were well-connected, one of  her
    sisters being married into the Saudi family.  Her husband was  thirteen
    years older than her and had studied in the United States.

 4. After their marriage, the first appellant went to live in the USA  with
    her husband, having spent some time in Germany.  It  was  whilst  there
    that she began to realise that he was drinking  and  smoking  Marijuana
    and after their arrival in the USA  became  violent  towards  her  and,
    although in theory he was studying for a PhD he did  not  do  so.   The
    violence continued and after their first son was  born  in  the  United
    States they returned to Saudi Arabia in 1995.  They returned to the  US
    at the end of 1996 where their third son,  the  second  appellant,  was
    born in late 1997.  After this there began to be physical violence then
    for a short period in 1998 they moved to Egypt.  They returned  shortly
    in 1999 to Saudi Arabia  for  four  years  which  is  where  the  third
    appellant was born.  At this point the ex-husband's sister who had been
    supporting them got fed up with him and they went to  live  in  Morocco
    where the violence became worse.  The  situation  got  worse  when  the
    family returned for a brief period to Saudi before in 2006/7 moving  to
    Ireland and then to the United Kingdom.  The family have, since  August
    2008, apart from a brief period remained in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    first appellant is studying here.  The violence and abuse continued  as
    did the ex-husband's drug taking.  Eventually she sought  legal  advice
    about obtaining a divorce.  The first appellant was  able  to  persuade
    her husband to divorce her.

 5. The first appellant considers that there would be significant obstacles
    to her integrating again in Saudi Arabia as a divorced woman given  the
    lack of support she would receive and the difficulties she  would  have
    owing to  the  existence  of  "guardianship"  a  system  by  which  all
    important decisions would be taken by her guardian, most likely  to  be
    her older son.  She is also concerned  that  her  daughter,  the  third
    appellant, would be under the guardianship of the father and  that  her
    life would be severely restricted in consequence.  She fears  that  she
    would lose custody of the children although the son is now over 18.

 6. In respect of the second and third appellants, they have lived  in  the
    United Kingdom and prior to that in Ireland for a  substantial  period.
    They do not believe that they would be able  to  integrate  again  into
    life in Saudi Arabia particularly in the case of  the  third  appellant
    owing to the lack of freedom and the severe  restrictions  which  would
    apply to her as an unmarried minor, or for that  matter,  as  an  adult
    woman.

 7. It is also the appellants' case that they would not  be  able  to  live
    together as the mother has no home and it would be difficult  for  her,
    culturally, to live with her sister-in-law; the son could not  live  as
    part of that family as he is an adult male  who  is  not  part  of  the
    nuclear family and could not live in the same house as  the  sister-in-
    law as she has daughters.

 8. The third appellant particularly does not wish her life to be  dictated
    to and although she speaks Arabic she is not able to read or write  it.
    She considers she would never be able to adjust  to  a  life  in  Saudi
    Arabia having grown up in the United Kingdom, having education and  the
    freedom to dress and act as someone  who  grew  up  here.   The  second
    appellant also does not read or write  Arabic,  does  not  wish  to  be
    separated from his mother or to live in a culture which  is  completely
    different from that which he is used to, having lived outside of  Saudi
    Arabia in the west for the greater part of his life.

The Respondent's Case

 9. The respondent's case is  set  out  in  the  refusal  letter  dated  21
    November 2014.  The respondent concluded that  the  applicant  was  not
    entitled to Indefinite Leave to Remain as a victim of domestic violence
    as her husband  is  not  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.   She  also
    considered they were not entitled to remain  pursuant  to  Appendix  FM
    given that none of the parties were settled and  that  neither  of  the
    children had lived in the United Kingdom for  seven  years  immediately
    preceding the date of application.  Similarly, the respondent concluded
    the applicants were  not  entitled  to  leave  to  remain  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  given  they  had  not  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least twenty years;  had  not
    lived continuously in the United Kingdom for seven years in the case of
    the children nor had lived half of their life  here  continuously;  or,
    that there would be very significant  obstacles  to  their  integration
    into the country where they would have to go if required to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.  It was  considered  also  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances such that leave should  be  granted  outside  the  Rules.
    Leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student  was  in  the  case  of  the  first
    appellant curtailed.

The Law

10. The relevant provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  are  set  out  in
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) which provides: -

    276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  leave  to
    remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of
    application, the applicant:
    (i)  does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in  Section  S-
         LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix  FM;
         and
    (ii)     has made a valid  application  for  leave  to  remain  on  the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and
    (iii)    has lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  at  least  20  years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
    (iv)     is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the
         UK for at least 7 years (discounting any  period  of  imprisonment)
         and it would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the
         UK; or
    (v)   is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years  and  has  spent  at
         least half of his life living continuously in the  UK  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment); or
    (vi)  subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged  18  years  or  above,  has
         lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years  (discounting
         any period of imprisonment) but there  would  be  very  significant
         obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country to  which
         he would have to go if required to leave the UK.

11. In addition, sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act are applicable:
    117A Application of this Part
    (1)           This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is required
         to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
         (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for  private  and  family
             life under Article 8, and
         (b)      as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human
             Rights Act 1998.
    (2)           In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
         (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed  in  section  117B,
    and
         (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign  criminals,  to
             the considerations listed in section 117C.
    (3)      In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2).
    117B Article8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases:
    (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
interest.
    (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
         English, because persons who can speak English-

         (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

         (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

    (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
         of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons  who
         seek to enter or remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
         independent, because such persons-

         (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and  (b)  are  better  able  to
    integrate into society.

    (4)      Little weight should be given to-

          (a)     a private life, or

         (b)  a relationship formed  with  a  qualifying  partner,  that  is
             established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
             United Kingdom unlawfully.

    (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person  at  a  time  when  the  person's  immigration  status  is
         precarious.

    (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a qualifying child, and

         (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.


The Appellants' Evidence

12. I heard evidence from all the appellants.

13. The first appellant adopted  her  witness  statements  and  was  cross-
    examined.  She confirmed that  she  had  been  divorced  in  2014,  her
    husband having agreed to this and the divorce  taking  place  in  Saudi
    Arabia.  She said that  he  had  done  so  only  under  the  threat  of
    proceedings being commenced in the United Kingdom.  She  said  she  had
    consulted a solicitor and had shown the draft proceedings.

14. The first appellant confirmed that her two older  sons  were  studying.
    She said that the issue of who her "guardian" would  now  be  following
    her divorce had been discussed, being likely that it would be her older
    son appointed but she added she would have difficulty in  returning  to
    Saudi Arabia as the  "yellow  page"  in  her  passport  which  set  out
    permission from her guardian to travel had expired.  She said that  her
    younger son could not be her guardian as he was under 21.

15. The first appellant said that her ex-husband had not had any input into
    the children's education and that it was his sister (her sister-in-law)
    who was paying for them.  She said that she had some contact  with  her
    ex-husband but had much greater contact with her children and  appeared
    a relatively good relationship.  She said he was not doing anything  at
    present in Saudi Arabia whereas in the past he had said he  would  take
    her children from her.  She said that the sister-in-law was prepared to
    support them as long as the children were in education but  no  longer.
    She said it would not be possible to live with the sister except for  a
    very short period for cultural reasons.  She said she  could  not  live
    with her sister either  for  cultural  reasons  as  well  as  religious
    reasons and her son would not be able to live in the same house as  her
    sister as her sister had daughters.  She said it would be difficult for
    her to get work because of the expiry of the guardianship note  in  her
    passport and as she is over 40.  She said she had never worked  in  the
    United Kingdom but had only been her to study.

16. In response to my questions the first appellant said that she had  last
    lived in Saudi Arabia for an extended period in the two years prior  to
    leaving in 2007.She said that she had spent one and a  half  months  in
    Saudi in 2011/12 whilst awaiting a visa.

17. I heard evidence from the  third  appellant  who  adopted  her  witness
    statement saying that she is currently studying at Uxbridge College for
    a BTEC.  She says she  is  in  contact  with  her  father  despite  the
    personal problems and she  confirmed  that  she  is  supported  by  her
    father's  sister.   She  said  she  had  little   contact   with   her,
    communication being through her mother.

18. In response to my questions the third appellant said  that  her  father
    does make comments about how she dresses which meant that while he  had
    been with them he had told her how to dress.  That, however, might  not
    have been so bad as she was much younger at the time.

19. I heard evidence from the second  appellant  who  adopted  his  witness
    statement, agreeing with what his sister had said.

20. I then heard submissions.

21. Mr Kotas submitted that none of the appellants met the grounds  of  the
    Immigration Rules given they had failed to show that they came anywhere
    near the test to show that there would be very significant obstacles to
    their integration into Saudi Arabia, even though in  the  case  of  the
    second and third appellants they had not lived there  for  an  extended
    period.  He submitted that they would be able to integrate  into  Saudi
    Arabia despite any difficulties that may occur through the guardianship
    system.  Mr Kotas submitted that the second appellant did not meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1) (iv) as  she  had  not  lived  here
    seven years prior to the date of application.

22. Turning to Article  8  Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  the  fact  that  the
    applicants did not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  in
    and of itself a significant reason for attaching significant weight  to
    the public interest in maintaining immigration  control  and  requiring
    the appellants to return to Saudi Arabia.  He submitted that the  first
    appellant, having grown up in Saudi Arabia, could be expected  to  live
    under the guardianship system and that she  had  failed  to  show  that
    there were any specific difficulties which would arise.   He  submitted
    that in reality she would not be destitute or homeless as she  had  the
    support of family nor was there any  indication  that  she  would  face
    significant problems as a result of having to have a guardian,  as  her
    oldest son would have that role, nor was there  any  reason  why  there
    would be any difficulties in her obtaining employment as she  had  done
    in the past.

23. Mr Kotas submitted further that there was no reason why the  children's
    father would treat the second and third appellants  harshly,  given  he
    had shown no interest in the past that he  did  not  want  them  to  be
    educated and, had agreed to a divorce.  With regard to Section  117B(6)
    he submitted that although Noor may have developed a  private  life  in
    the United Kingdom it was nonetheless, reasonable for her to return  to
    Saudi Arabia as she would be going there with her mother  and  brother.
    Mr Kotas cautioned against making moral judgments about the  system  of
    guardianship which exists in Saudi Arabia.

24. Mr Kotas submitted further that note to be taken of the fact  that  the
    family's leave to be here had at all times been  precarious,  following
    Rajendran s117B - family life) [2016] UKUT 138  (IAC),  notwithstanding
    any indications to the contrary in MA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ
    705 or Rhuppiah [2016] EWCA Civ 803

25. Mr Abbas relied on  his  skeleton  argument.   He  submitted  that  the
    applicants did fulfil the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(vi)  given
    the significant difficulties that they would have in adjusting again to
    life  in  Saudi  Arabia,  drawing  attention  to  what  is   meant   by
    integration.  He submitted further that in  considering  Article  8  in
    this case it would be unreasonable to expect Noor  given  her  history,
    how she had spent in the United Kingdom prior to that  in  Ireland  and
    the extent to which she was acculturated to life in the west for her to
    return to Saudi Arabia where she would be under the guardianship of her
    father whose behaviour had in the past at the very least  been  erratic
    and had  subjected  her  mother  to  significant  an  serious  domestic
    violence and abuse.

26. Mr Abbas submitted that the nature of guardianship was so  restrictive,
    and peculiar, to Saudi Arabia.  He submitted that the situation should,
    following Treebhawon  and  Others  (NIAA  2002  Part  5A  -  compelling
    circumstances test) [2017] UKUT 13 (IAC) be viewed as a whole and  that
    it was evident that the family would in fact be outsiders if  returned.
    The second and third applicants were, he submitted, in reality  British
    having spent the most important  part  of  their  education  here.   He
    submitted that there were compelling reasons on the particular facts of
    this case why their removal to Saudi Arabia is not proportionate.

    Discussion

27. Although this is not a protection claim it  is  necessary  to  consider
    background evidence as to how the first and second appellant  would  be
    able to live on return to Saudi Arabia given  the  status  accorded  to
    women in that country.

28. I consider that  regard  must  first  be  had  to  the  nature  of  the
    guardianship system which exists in Saudi Arabia. No challenge has been
    made to the evidence about it set out in the report  "Boxed  In:  Women
    and Saudi Arabia's Male Guardianship System" (Human  Rights  Watch)  16
    July 2016.  I am satisfied from that report that under the guardianship
    system, every Saudi woman must have a male guardian, normally a  father
    or a husband but in some cases a brother or even  a  son  who  has  the
    power to make critical decisions on their behalf.  An adult woman  must
    obtain permission from her male guardian  to  travel,  marry,  and  may
    require consent in order to work or access health care.  They will also
    find difficulty conducting a  range  of  transactions  without  a  male
    relative from renting an apartment to filing  claims.   I  particularly
    notice the passage at page 7 :

         "The extreme difficulty of transferring male guardianship from  one
         male to another and severe inequality  in  divorce  rules  make  it
         difficult for women to escape abuse.  Men remain women's  guardians
         with all the associated levers of control during court  proceedings
         and until a divorce  is  finalised.   There  is  deeply  entrenched
         discrimination within the legal system, and courts recognize  legal
         claims brought by guardians against female dependents that restrict
         women's movement or enforce a guardian's authority over them.

         Women who have escaped abuse in shelters may, and  in  prisons  do,
         require a male relative to agree to their release before  they  may
         exit state facilities"..

29. It is of note that many aspects of the system are not codified  in  law
    but stem from  informal  practice  so  that  guardianship  restrictions
    placed  on  women  vary  widely  based  number  of  factors   such   as
    socioeconomic status, education level and place of residence.  Further,
    when a guardian dies or a woman divorces a new  guardian  is  appointed
    generally the next oldest mehram and although women may transfer  legal
    guardianship to another male it is extremely difficult  legal  process.
    It can only be done through a court order and it can  be  difficult  to
    establish the requisite level of proof.

30. With regard to the nature of restrictions placed  on  women  I  observe
    that in practice some women are  prevented  from  leaving  their  homes
    without their guardian's permission given that they  cannot  drive.   A
    guardian's permission is required to obtain a passport and  women  need
    permission to travel outside the country.   It  appears  also  that  in
    reality it is easy for male guardians to force women to remain  indoors
    to prevent them leaving the house without permission.  At page [33]  of
    the report, it is stated  that  the  courts  in  Saudi  Arabia  provide
    support for this practice:

         "the Ministry of Justice explicitly bolsters a guardian's authority
         to  deny  women  freedom  of  movement.   The  Ministry's   website
         contained a list of  complaints  that  can  be  filed  through  its
         electronic complaints system including two  which  request  that  a
         judge order the return the return of a woman to a mehram or a  wife
         to the marital home".

31. I note also that in Saudi Arabia khilwa (mixing  unrelated  members  of
    the opposite sex) is prohibited, this being justification for  the  ban
    on women driving.

32. I accept also that some forms of violence such  as  spousal  abuse  and
    violence against women and children are linked  to  these  guardianship
    systems. I find also that  the  legal  system  makes  it  exceptionally
    difficult for victims of violence to seek protection or obtain redress.

33. I am also satisfied that in addition to the difficulties in obtaining a
    divorce, limits are placed on the woman's ability to enter freely  into
    marriage,  and that forced marriages continue  to  occur  as  do  child
    marriages.

34. In addition to the guardianship system, there are  laws  which  require
    the physical separation from related men and women in all public  areas
    to limit the ability of women to independently  manage  any  assets  or
    access banks or other financial services (see Appellants' bundle A115).
     The Commission for the Promotion of  Virtue  and  Prevention  of  Vice
    police are also  responsible  for  maintaining  gender  segregation  in
    public places and purportedly are arbitrary  and  vindictive  in  their
    interpretation of laws relating to contact with other women  and  other
    aspects of "morality", often harassing and physically abusing women who
    they deem to be breaking the law (Gender Index, page 115). This  is  in
    addition to the very restrictive rules of dress.

35. None of these restrictions are necessarily Islamic; indeed there  is  a
    strong indication in the material particularly in  Human  Rights  Watch
    that these arise from culture and tradition.

36. The cumulative effect of this is, as the report indicates, to  restrict
    severely the right of a woman to be an autonomous  person  in  her  own
    right.

37. I found the appellants to be credible witnesses.  I find  the  accuracy
    of the testimony was not undermined by cross-examination conducted  and
    I accept the account given of how the first appellant  was  ill-treated
    throughout the whole of her marriage including a significant degree  of
    violence.

38. I accept, as Mr Kotas submitted, that it is somewhat unusual  that  the
    husband agreed to a divorce but I do not doubt that he acceded  to  the
    pressure from his wife that she would force him to divorce through  the
    courts of the England and Wales.  I do not, however, consider  that  it
    flows from that that he would be in any way well-disposed to her or the
    children.  Overall, the situation would be entirely different  if  they
    were all in Saudi Arabia where the women would, in effect be  powerless
    against him.

39. I am satisfied that if the appellants return to Saudi Arabia the second
    appellant would fall under the guardianship of the father. There is  no
    indication that the law applicable would have  any  other  effect,  nor
    that she could seek to have another guardian appointed.

40. It is difficult to predict how  the  second  appellant's  father  would
    compel her, as she has said, to dress and behave  in  a  different  way
    from that which she has become accustomed. She would also be forced  to
    live in the very restricted way in which a Saudi woman must live.

41. In assessing whether the requirement of 276ADE (6) is made out  I  note
    that as for what was said in Treebhawon at 37 to 38:-
    37.   The two limbs of the test to be addressed are  "integration"  and
    "very significant obstacles".  In  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813, the Court of Appeal held  that
    " integration" in this context is a broad concept. See [14]:
         " It is not confined to the mere  ability  to  find  a  job  or  to
         sustain  life  while  living  in  the  other  country.  It  is  not
         appropriate to treat the statutory  language  as  subject  to  some
         gloss and it will usually be sufficient for  a  Court  or  Tribunal
         simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen  to
         use. The  idea  of  'integration'  calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
         judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of
         an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
         that other country is carried on and a capacity to  participate  in
         it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to
         be able to operate on a day to day basis in  that  society  and  to
         build up within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private or family life".
    The other limb of the test, " very  significant  obstacles",  erects  a
    self-evidently  elevated  threshold,  such  that  mere  hardship,  mere
    difficulty, mere hurdles and mere upheaval or inconvenience, even where
    multiplied,  will  generally  be  insufficient  in  this  context.  The
    philosophy  and  reasoning,  with  appropriate  adjustments,  of   this
    Tribunal in its exposition of the sister  test  "unduly  harsh"  in  MK
    (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 at [46] apply.
    38.          The finding that Mr Treebhawon's case does not satisfy the
    test enshrined in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules is readily made.
    If required to leave the United Kingdom, his future  will  lie  in  the
    country of his birth where he has spent most of his life (33 of his  46
    years). He is an educated, evidently intelligent man with a command  of
    all of the languages commonly used in Mauritius. He is plainly familiar
    with the culture of the country. There is no  apparent  reason  why  he
    will be unable to  renew  certain  relationships  and  friendships  and
    develop others. He has overcome ill health and is  now  fit  for  work,
    albeit we accept that finding employment  will  not  be  easy.  He  has
    maintained some contact with his mother and sister and we refer to  our
    finding above that, as a matter of probability,  he  and  his  children
    will return to the mother's home where they lived previously.  In  sum,
    the "very significant obstacles" test is not satisfied by some measure.
    It follows that no error of law has been committed  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State  in  failing  to  find  that  Mr  Treebhawon's  case
    satisfies this (or any) provision of the Rules.

42. In assessing the difficulties faced by  the  appellants  on  return  to
    Saudi Arabia I have considered also the report of Mr Hugh Miles, who  I
    am satisfied has the sufficient expertise to be treated as an expert.

43. I accept that there is a family  life  between  the  first  and  second
    appellants. They are mother and daughter, and the daughter is 17.  They
    live together as a family unit. I accept also on  their  evidence  that
    the relationship is a close one, given the extent to  which  they  have
    lived together as a unit, with the  third  appellant.   I  accept  that
    living in what is to them a foreign country and apart  from  any  wider
    family or community, that their relationships are closer than might  be
    expected, this arising also out of the difficulty in the  parents'  now
    dissolved marriage, in which there was significant  violence.  This,  I
    find, has resulted in a tightly-bonded family unit in which there is an
    unusually close relationship between all three to the extent that I  am
    satisfied that all three share a family life. I  am  satisfied  that  a
    family life does exist between the  first  and  third  appellants.   He
    still lives at home and is part the unit. He is dependent,  effectively
    on his mother, and he  is  relatively  young,  being  under  21.  I  am
    satisfied that the particular nature of his upbringing has,  unusually,
    resulted in their still being a strong family life between him and  his
    mother.

44. The second appellant has lived by far the greater part of her  life  in
    the west.  Apart from a short period in 2011/2012 she has lived in  and
    been educated for the most part in Ireland and in the  United  Kingdom.
    Her entire experience of life  outside  the  family  is  in  a  western
    milieu.

45. Apart from her immediate family she has not lived in,  for  example,  a
    Saudi community or for that matter a Muslim community.  She  is  now  a
    young woman who has become accustomed to making decisions for  herself,
    dressing how she chooses and socialising with men and woman of her  own
    age and to attending  school  with  them.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    difference between what she has become accustomed and the circumstances
    in which she would have to live in Saudi Arabia under the  guardianship
    of her father are  so  wide  and  different  that  she  would  find  it
    difficult if not impossible to integrate into society there.  She would
    by no means be an "insider" and,  would  have  I  consider  significant
    difficulties in being able to participate in life in that society given
    how different and alien it is from that which she has  grown  up.   She
    would, I consider, find it difficult to know how she  was  expected  to
    behave towards men, how to dress and the very  nature  of  her  private
    life would be entirely different from that which  she  now  has.   More
    importantly, she would not have control over that  private  life  given
    that her father would have guardianship over her.  At best  this  would
    put significant obstacles into her living her life, if not  effectively
    extinguishing the private life she has.

46. I note Mr Kotas' submission there is no indication that she would be at
    risk from her father given his attitude  towards  her.   I  accept  the
    second appellant's evidence that her father has already  made  comments
    about how she dresses and behaves.  I bear in mind also how he  behaved
    towards her mother and how he treated her as  a  woman.   At  best  his
    behaviour has been erratic and he has shown himself capable  of  making
    threats and using violence towards her mother.  Further, she would have
    no realistic prospect of any redress against any abuse.

47. On the particular and unusual facts of this case the obstacles that the
    second appellant would face on return to  Saudi  Arabia  would  be  the
    entire restructuring of her private life against  her  will.   While  I
    accept that she has relatives in Saudi Arabia,  the  difficulties  with
    her father have already been identified.  She is not particularly close
    to her aunt and although she is likely to be able to receive  financial
    support from her, that is simply one  issue  which  has  to  be  placed
    against the other significant difficulties which would  occur  in  this
    case. Given the effect of the guardianship the second  appellant  would
    inevitably be separated from her mother.

48. Were it not for the fact that the second appellant is under 18, I would
    have no hesitation in finding that she would meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276 ADE (1) (vi) given the very real difficulties she,  as  a
    woman who has no real understanding of life in Saudi Arabia would  face
    in integrating to life there.

49. With regard to the first appellant, I consider that  her  situation  is
    somewhat  different.   I  accept  that  there   will   be   significant
    difficulties to her reintegration into Saudi Arabia but I  accept  also
    that she has in the past lived there both as a young woman  and  as  an
    adult.  I accept that she was not subject to  the  guardianship  system
    until she acquired Saudi citizenship after her marriage  but  she  will
    have had some experience of living under the system. It was under  that
    system that she was subjected to significant and serious abuse from her
    husband, and it was only recently that she was able to obtain a divorce
    from him.

50. That said, I do not diminish the fact that she  will  have  significant
    difficulties in finding somewhere to live and in  obtaining  employment
    but she does have a sister there and has  in  the  past  received  some
    assistance albeit just for the  education  of  her  children  in  Saudi
    Arabia from the sister-in-law unlike the children, she  does  read  and
    write Arabic and has additional qualifications she has obtained in  the
    United Kingdom.

51. I accept that she would have to have a guardian and this is  likely  to
    be her oldest son.  She will thus cease in effect to be an adult person
    with all the rights that go with that. She would at best be beholden on
    her oldest son albeit that there is no indication that he would put any
    obstacles in her way.  Whilst I note  Mr  Kotas'  submission  that  the
    younger son may be able to take over, I consider this in the  light  of
    the background material to be unrealistic not least as the son is 21.

52. It is however, inevitable that she would not be able to live  with  her
    daughter given the guardianship system. Contact between them  would  be
    difficult and subject to the control of  her  ex-husband.  Family  life
    could not continue in the same manner as exists in the United  Kingdom.
    Similarly, it would be difficult for the third appellant to  live  with
    his mother unless they formed a household on their own.  I  accept  the
    first appellant's evidence that as a male, the  third  appellant  would
    not be able to live in a household where women (or girls) who were  not
    his mother or sister (or wife) lived, this being unacceptable in  Saudi
    society.

53. The third appellant is in a different situation from  his  sister.   As
    the expert notes, he would not require a guardian and the  restrictions
    placed on him as a man in Saudi Arabia are considerably less than would
    be places on his mother or on his sister.  I accept that  it  would  be
    difficult for him to return but I do not consider the  difficulties  as
    such amount to very significant obstacles to integration albeit that  I
    accept that he would be having to integrate into  society  about  which
    for the same reasons as his sister, he knows little or nothing.

54. Taking these findings into account,  and  viewing  the  evidence  as  a
    whole, I am satisfied that the effect of removal would be  to  separate
    the first and second appellant and this, taking into account the  other
    difficulties that face the mother, have the effect that there would  on
    the particular facts of this case, be very significant obstacles to her
    integration into Saudi Arabia, and that this she meets the  requirement
    of the Immigration Rules

55. I now turn to the situation outside the rules.

56. I bear in mind that neither the second or  third  appellants  currently
    meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules;  that  situation  may
    change in a matter of months for the second appellant as she  may,  not
    long after reaching 18 years of age, have spent more than half her life
    here.

57. For the reasons set out above, I am satisfied that the appellants  have
    a family life in the United Kingdom, and that  on  the  facts  of  this
    case, that would be disrupted by removal to Saudi Arabia as they  could
    no  longer  live  together  as  a  unit.     That  interference  is  in
    accordance with law.

58. I am satisfied also that all three appellants have established  private
    lives in the United Kingdom. In  the  case  of  the  second  and  third
    appellants, this was developed while they were children, and having had
    regard to Rhuppiah and MA ( Pakistan), given that this was  established
    while under the control of their parents I am not satisfied that it was
    established while their situation was precarious. I do,  however,  note
    that the mother's status was precarious, but for the  reasons  given  I
    have found that she meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

59. There is I find significant weight  to  be  attached  to  the  need  to
    maintain Immigration control; that is particularly so where,  as  here,
    the second and third appellants do not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

60. I am satisfied that all three appellants  speak  English  and  are  not
    dependant on public funds. I am satisfied also  by  the  evidence  that
    they will continue to be supported for the foreseeable  future  by  the
    sister-in-law. Those are not factors in their favour but  are  neutral.
    The family are not, however, financially independent in  that  they  do
    not have their own resources, and that is a  factor  which  I  consider
    increases the public interest in  their  removal,  albeit  to  a  small
    degree.

61. The family life developed was established while all the appellants  had
    leave to remain, but again that is not a factor in their favour; it  is
    neutral.

62. I consider also on the facts of  this  case,  in  the  light  of  these
    findings, that the second appellant has  been  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom for more than seven years and that thus Section 117B (6) of the
    2002 Act applies to her circumstances.  I am satisfied

63.  I  am  satisfied  also  that  the   first   appellant   has   parental
    responsibility for her daughter, and that the family life between  them
    would effectively be severed if they were to return to Saudi Arabia due
    to the father being the daughter's guardian.   This is a matter which I
    consider bears significant weight in the appellants' favour and in  the
    first and second appellants being granted leave.

64. The effect of removing only the third appellant would be to breach  the
    family life that exists between him and his mother. That  is  a  family
    life which has been established  in  the  United  Kingdom  while  their
    presence here was lawful.

65. It would also appear that during the course of this  appeal  the  third
    appellant fell within the terms of  Section  117B  (6)  as  the  family
    entered the United Kingdom in August 2008 with a valid visa.  Thus, the
    latest by 1 September 2015  the  third  appellant  had  acquired  seven
    years' continuous residence allowing for a short gap in 2011/12 of  one
    and a half months however, he ceased to be a minor on 6 December  2015.



66. If the third appellant is removed, there will be an effective  severing
    of the ties he has with his sister, and  of the family life he has with
    his mother. The interference with that life can be avoided only if  the
    family life with her daughter is severed.  While  the  nature  of  that
    latter interference is significantly more serious than the interference
    with the family life with the son, viewing the unique situation of this
    family as a whole, I conclude that while there is significant weight to
    be attached to the public interest in removing the applicants, that  it
    is on the unique facts of this family's situation outweighed such  that
    their removal would be disproportionate.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS



 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. I remake the decision allowing the appeal of the first appellant  under
    the Immigration Rules.

 3. I remake the decision allowing the appeals  of  the  second  and  third
    appellants on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or anthem or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant sand to the respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 9 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


                        ANNEX - ERROR OF LAW DECISION



IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49428/2014,
                                               IA/49431/2014 & IA/49433/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 October 2016                            |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                    a a m
                                    o a o
                                    n a a
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Abbas, Imperium Group Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    M A Khan promulgated on 2 September 2015 in which  he  dismissed  their
    appeals against the decisions of the Secretary of State to refuse  them
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom  and  to  remove  them  from  the
    United Kingdom to Saudi Arabia, the  country  of  which  they  are  all
    citizens.

 2. In brief, the appellants' case is  that  they  would  have  significant
    difficulties on return to Saudi Arabia because the principal  appellant
    would not have custody of the children because under Saudi Arabian  law
    that would be given to the father.  Second, that she would not be  able
    to work on her return to Saudi Arabia and she  would  have  significant
    difficulties as a result of that and  in  living  her  life  generally,
    given the restrictions on women in Saudi Arabia.  It is also  submitted
    that the children would experience significant difficulties  given  the
    control over them that their father would have, and in  the  particular
    case of the second appellant as she is a female, under age,  and  would
    be in the custody of her father.

 3. The Secretary of State refused the applications for the reasons set out
    in the refusal letter which it is  not  necessary  to  recite  at  this
    point.

 4. When the matter came before Judge Khan he found: first, that he did not
    accept the appellant's evidence that she  would  lose  custody  of  her
    children.  Second, that she would not be able to work and  there  would
    be impermissible restrictions on her rights. Third, that there  was  no
    reason to think that she would  not  be  able  to  support  herself  by
    working on return to Saudi Arabia and that the children would  be  able
    to continue with their higher education in Saudi Arabia and  dismissing
    the appeal under the Human Rights Act.

 5. The appellants sought permission to appeal against that decision on the
    grounds that in substance the judge had in effect  failed  properly  to
    have any regard to the background material in reaching conclusions with
    regard to the loss of custody and the difficulties that  the  appellant
    would face on return to Saudi Arabia.

 6. Mr Walker did not seek to support Mr Khan's decision or suggest that it
    was in any way sustainable.  In my view  that  was  entirely  sensible.
    There is no indication in the decision that the judge had any regard to
    the background material which indicates the very real difficulties that
    any woman would have in retaining custody over her  children,  male  or
    female; the difficulties that the appellant or her daughter would face,
    given the guardianship system applicable in Saudi Arabia  whereby  they
    would not be able to live, move or indeed do  almost  anything  without
    the permission of a male guardian.

 7. I consider that in  failing  to  take  into  account  the  unchallenged
    background evidence or even to refer to it in  any  way  is  a  serious
    material error infecting the decision making  it  unsustainable  and  I
    therefore set it aside.

 8. I consider that in the circumstances of this case albeit that there has
    been some change in the circumstances given the age that  the  daughter
    is now an adult, that it would be appropriate to remain  this  case  in
    the Upper Tribunal subject to detailed directions which I now give.

    Directions

 1. The Upper Tribunal will consider all issues afresh,  including  whether
    paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules is met in the case  of  each
    of the appellants.

 2. The parties are to prepare for  the  hearing  on  the  basis  that  the
    following issues will be of interest to the Upper Tribunal

      a) Whether each of the appellants will be subject to a guardian,  and,
         if so, who that guardian will be;

      b) What difficulties and restrictions guardianship will have  on  each
         of the appellants, in particular in obtaining  somewhere  to  live,
         education, work, ability to travel or move around the local area;

      c) Given the length of time the appellants have  lived  outside  Saudi
         Arabia, the extent to which they may have acquired and have  become
         accustomed to living life in a way which would not be acceptable in
         Saudi Arabia; and, the consequences which would flow from that;

 3. The appellants are expected to compile a bundle  of  relevant  material
    relating to the situation the appellants face, including Human  Rights'
    Watch Report: "Boxed in - women and Saudi  Arabia's  male  guardianship
    system", published 2016

 4. The Upper Tribunal may be assisted in this  case  by  expert  evidence,
    particularly as to the  position  of  the  second  appellant,  and  the
    restrictions placed on him.

 5.  In  addition,  the  appellants  are  to  produced   detailed   witness
    statements, capable of standing as evidence in chief, setting  out  the
    difficulties each of them would have on return to Saudi Arabia.




Signed                                  Date 9 May 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

