
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49005/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23 March 2016                         |On 11 April 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD NAEEM
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N Hashmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan who entered the United  Kingdom
    on 26 December 2009 as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  He applied  for  a
    residence card as the spouse  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United  Kingdom.   His  application  was  refused  on  19
    November 2014 and he subsequently appealed.

 2. That appeal was  considered  on  papers  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal M D Dennis who in a decision promulgated on 4  September  2015
    dismissed it.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  This was granted  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler who  on  29  January  2016  gave  his
    reasons for so doing.  They state:-

         "1.  Judge Denis dismissed without a hearing the appellant's appeal
             against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to  issue  a
             residence card as confirmation of a right of residence as  the
             family member of an EEA national.

         2.    The  appellant  was  unrepresented  in  the  appeal  and  has
             submitted his grounds without legal  representation,  although
             they are couched in terms which suggests that their author was
             conversant  with   the   relevant   jurisprudence.    I   have
             nevertheless read the decision with particular care.

         3.   The grounds submit that the judge misdirected  himself  as  to
             the burden of proof where it is alleged that a marriage is one
             of convenience.

         4.   At [8] the judge referred to Papajorgi (EEA spouse -  marriage
             of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT  00038  (IAC).   He  stated
             that the respondent must have some basis for raising the issue
             of the marriage of convenience and that the burden on her  was
             to provide satisfactory grounds  for  entertaining  suspicion;
             thereafter it was for the appellant  to  provide  satisfactory
             evidence that the marriage was not one of convenience.

         5.   This issue was recently considered by the Court of  Appeal  in
             Rosa v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.  In light of  that  authority,
             in which  Papajorgji  was  considered  and  explained,  it  is
             arguable that the judge misdirected himself in law."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Miss Hashmi referred me to two authorities being Papajorgi (EEA  spouse
    - marriage of convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 00038 (IAC)  and  Rosa  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 14.  In particular she asked me to accept that  in
    light of the findings of Judge Dennis the respondent could not be  said
    to have built "a convincing case" in terms of the issue  of  burden  of
    proof.  In short therefore the judge's starting point for his  analysis
    contained a material error of law thereby infecting the totality of it.

 6. Mr Melvin relied on his own  skeleton  argument.   At  paragraph  7  he
    states that the burden of proof lies on the authorities of  the  Member
    states seeking to restrict rights under the Directive.  He acknowledged
    that it had to be a "convincing case" while respecting all the material
    safeguards described.  He asserted that there was ample material before
    the judge to find a "convincing case" and that following  the  relevant
    authorities the burden or proof had been properly applied.  As with the
    Rule 24 notice of 15 February 2016 Mr Melvin also relied on the  choice
    of the appellant "not to fully engage with  the  Appellate  provisions"
    having opted for a paper hearing and that this was despite the  serious
    allegation of a sham marriage and the need for the appellant and spouse
    to provide evidence to address the  very  significant  evidence  relied
    upon by the respondent.

 7. I have carefully considered  the  judge's  decision  and  for  all  the
    reasons put forward in the grounds and the submissions of Miss Hashmi I
    find that  the  judge  has  materially  erred  and  that  there  is  an
    irrationality in his decision to allow  the  appeal  in  light  of  his
    findings in relation to the respondent's  own  case.   Accordingly  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision contains an error of law and has to be set
    aside in its entirety.  The way forward is for this appeal to be  heard
    orally before a First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh,  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal's  Court  and  Enforcement  2007  and
Practice Statement 7.2(b), before any judge aside from Judge M D Dennis.

No anonymity order is made.





Signed                              Date 30 March 2016.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

DIRECTIONS

1.   This appeal is to be heard at  Taylor  House  on  the  first  available
    date.

2.   The time estimate is two hours.

3.   Any party wishing to file additional evidence must do so no later  than
    ten working days prior to the hearing.





Signed                              Date 30 March 2016.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

