








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49610/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 16 October 2014                           |On 13 November 2014          |
|Prepared:  9 November 2014                    |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                            Mrs Yasmih Sheikh Nur
                           no anonymity order made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr K Hersi, Solicitor (Hersi and Co)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Somalia, born on 1st January 1974.  Her
      appeal against the respondent's decision dated 12th November  2013  to
      refuse to issue her with a permanent residence card  pursuant  to  the
      Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  ("the  2006  Regulations")  was
      dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  in  a   determination
      promulgated on 11th June 2014.


   2. It was accepted at the hearing that the appellant was unable  to  meet
      the requirements under Regulation 10(5)(a) and 15(1)(b)  of  the  2006
      Regulations. Accordingly,  the  appellant's  representative  indicated
      that she was "trying to run an Article 8 argument." [4]


   3. The respondent's representative noted that this was not a  case  which
      involved an intention to remove the appellant and that pursuant to the
      2006 Regulations, there was no scope  for  considering  an  Article  8
      argument. Nor had there been a Section 120 notice issued.


   4. The refusal letter stated that it was open to the appellant to make  a
      separate application for family or private life.


   5. The Judge upheld that contention and concluded that there could be  no
      Article 8 argument at this stage and accordingly dismissed the appeal.




   6. On 4th September 2014, the Upper Tribunal Judge granted the  appellant
      permission to appeal. He noted that the  respondent  was  entitled  to
      refuse the application under the 2006 Regulations  and  to  refuse  to
      engage with the private life claim as a separate  process  was  to  be
      followed in making an Article 8 claim, which  the  appellant  had  not
      pursued.  Accordingly  there  was  no  such  application  before   the
      respondent to be decided.


   7. However, the Judge noted that "landscape had changed". Although  there
      was no section 120 notice and no removal decision, she had pleaded the
      Article 8 claim  in  her  grounds  and  s.86(2)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 required the Judge to  determine  "any
      matter raised as a ground of appeal."


   8. On that basis, the Judge arguably erred in refusing to  determine  the
      appeal on human rights grounds.


   9. However, in granting the appeal, the Upper Tribunal Judge  noted  that
      on the other hand, Regulation 25(1) of the 2006  Regulations  provides
      that a human rights claim has the meaning given  in  s.113(1)  of  the
      2002 Act. That section provides that a  human  rights  claim  means  a
      claim made by a person that to remove him from or require him to leave
      the UK would be unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1988. Here,
      there was no expressed intention to remove the appellant. In  granting
      permission to appeal, the  Judge  stated  that  the  apparent  tension
      between these provisions would benefit from considered argument.


  10. Mr Hersi, who had not represented the appellant at the hearing  before
      the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
      contended that the 2006 Regulations entitled the appellant to pursue a
      human rights appeal.


  11. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Kandola submitted that  there  was  no
      tension between the provisions. The  appellant  had  an  appeal  right
      under the 2006 Regulations and  she  failed  on  the  merits.  Section
      113(1) did not apply in this case as there had  been  no  decision  to
      remove the appellant from the UK.


     Assessment


  12. In the reasons for  refusal  letter  dated  12th  November  2013,  the
      respondent stated at page 3 that as the appellant appeared to have  no
      alternative basis of stay in the UK, she should now make  arrangements
      to leave. If she failed to do so voluntarily,  her  departure  may  be
      enforced. In that event, the respondent would first contact her  again
      and she would have a  separate  opportunity  to  make  representations
      against the proposed removal.


  13. It was  also  stated  at  page  4  that  Regulation  26  of  the  2006
      Regulations conferred a right of appeal against the decision. This did
      not however mean that if she chose to appeal, she would be entitled to
      remain in the UK whilst the appeal is being considered.


  14. This is repeated in the notice  of  immigration  decision  itself,  in
      which the respondent refused to issue a permanent residence  card.  It
      is again stated that if she did not  make  a  voluntary  departure,  a
      separate decision may be made at a later stage to enforce her removal.
      Any such decision and  associated  appeal  rights  would  be  notified
      separately.


  15. There is no further notice of decision that has  been  issued  to  the
      appellant  since  the  date  of  the  decision  appealed  against.  In
      particular, no further notice of  decision  has  been  issued  in  the
      attempt to enforce her removal from the UK.


  16. Regulation 25 (1) of the 2006 Regulations provides that 'Human  Rights
      Claim' has the meaning given in section 113(1) of the  2002  Act.   As
      noted section 113 provides that a human rights  claim  means  a  claim
      made by a person that to remove him from or require him to  leave  the
      UK would be unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1988.


  17. The appellant's grounds of appeal raised  "family  and  private  life"
      claims.


  18.  Although  neither  party  referred  to  or  relied  on  any  relevant
      authority, I have had regard to the Court of  Appeal  decision  in  JM
      (Liberia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1402. Once a person's appeal  against
      a refusal to vary his leave is dismissed he must leave the UK.  If  he
      does not he commits a criminal offence [17].  In that case the refusal
      has given rise to an imminent potential thereat of removal and thus as
      submitted in JM a potential violation of ECHR rights [24].


  19.  Further,  in  Ahmed  (Amos;  Zambrano;  reg  15A(3)  (c)  2006  Regs)
      [2013]UKUT 00089 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal had regard to the submission
      at paragraph 43 that the decision at issue - refusal  of  a  permanent
      residence card - was not a removal decision.  It held that  'it  would
      appear' on JM principles, that the Tribunal should consider  the  case
      on the basis that a putative consequence of the  refusal  decision  is
      that the respondent would proceed to direct the appellant's removal to
      Pakistan.


  20. I find from the reasons for refusal and from the notice of immigration
      decision dated 12th November 2013 that the respondent has stated  that
      the appellant  had  no  basis  of  stay  in  the  UK  under  the  2006
      regulations. She had no alternative basis of stay here and she  should
      make  arrangements  to  leave  if  she  failed  to  make  a  voluntary
      departure. A separate decision may be made at a later date to  enforce
      her removal.


  21. I find that although no decision has been made to enforce her  removal
      from the UK, the notice of decision in stating  that  she  should  now
      make arrangements to leave the UK with  the  threat  of  a  subsequent
      enforcement decision to remove  her  from  the  UK  falls  within  the
      definition of a human rights claim. It is evident that  the  appellant
      has  in  the  circumstances  "required  her"  to  leave  the  UK.  She
      consequently is entitled on the authorities referred to make  a  human
      rights claim within Regulation 25(1) read with section 113 (1) of  the
      2002 Act.


  22. I find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had jurisdiction to consider
      the Article 8 appeal, which had been raised in  her  grounds.  Section
      86(2) of the 2002 Act required the  Judge  to  determine  "any  matter
      raised as a ground of appeal."


  23. I accordingly find that the making of the decision by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge involved the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law.
      Accordingly, I set aside the determination.


  24. As there has not been any decision made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      relating to the Article 8 claim, it is agreed that this  would  be  an
      appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal.


  25. Having considered the Senior President's Practice  Direction  in  this
      respect, I find that this is an appropriate case for remittal  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for the human rights claim of the appellant to  be
      determined as she  not  had  the  opportunity  of  having  that  claim
      determined by the First-tier Tribunal.









      Decisions


      The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law and is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Hatton Cross) for a
      fresh decision to be made.


      No anonymity order made.



                               Signed                     Dated:  9/11/2014


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
