
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
           (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
                                                     IA490222014 IA490252014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House           |Decision& Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25th of April 2017           |On 2nd June 2017                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           Mrs AFSHEEN mAQSOOD (1)
                            MR TILA MOHAMMAD (2)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Al Arayn of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Stanton, a Home Office presenting officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and background

   1. The first appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 29 December 1980.
      The second appellant is also a citizen of Pakistan born on 9  February
      1988. The second appellant is the first appellant's dependent husband.


 2. The first appellant first entered the UK on 1 September 2010 with entry
    clearance until 1 July 2012 as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant. On 16 August
    2012 the first appellant was granted further leave to remain  until  16
    August 2014 as a Tier 1 (Post- study work) Migrant. On 14  August  2014
    first appellant made a combined application for leave to remain in  the
    UK as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant under  the  points-based  system.
    That application  was  refused  on  18  November  2014.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) on 4 December 2014.


 3. On 26 July 2009 the second appellant was granted leave to enter the  UK
    as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant  until  30  November  2012.  He  made  an
    application for leave to remain in the UK as a partner of Tier 1  Post-
    Study Dependent Migrant (the first appellant)  under  the  Points-based
    System (PBS) and was given a biometric residence permit until 16 August
    2014. However, following the first appellant's refusal of further leave
    to remain, the Secretary of State was not satisfied that the  appellant
    was the spouse or civil partner,  unmarried  or  same-sex  partner  the
    first appellant, as a Tier 1 migrant. The second appellant was  advised
    of his appeal rights. His immigration status remained dependent on that
    of the first appellant's.


 4. The respondent,  having  refused  the  first  appellant's  application,
    decided to make directions under section 47 of the  Immigration  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006 for the removal of the appellants from the UK.


The appeal to the FTT


 5. The first appellant appealed to the FTT and her appeal  was  determined
    on the papers,  following  a  request  to  that  effect  by  her  legal
    representative. The file was  allocated  to  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kainth (the immigration judge). Having considered the case  on
    the papers, the immigration judge concluded that the refusal letter had
    correctly addressed the points including any exercise of discretion  in
    the first appellant's favour. The decision is recorded as  having  been
    determined on the papers on 25 July 2016.


 6. It followed that the second appellant's appeal also failed.


 7. On 15 August 2016 the first appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal (U T). Permission to appeal was initially refused on
    5 January 2017 but of 7 February 2017 that application was reviewed the
    U T.  On 9th of March 2017 the  application  was  considered  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rimington. Judge Rimington decided  that  the  case  had
    arguable merit in that when all relevant material was considered it was
    properly arguable that the appellant could meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules.



The Hearing before the UT

   8. At the hearing before the UT Mr Al Arayn candidly  accepted  that  the
      relevant version of the archived Immigration Rules (which he produced)
      set out the requirements the first appellant's application  must  meet
      under the Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) scheme.  In  particular,  he  accepted
      that the  requirements included a requirement that the documents  must
      cover a continuous period commencing before 11  July  2014  up  to  no
      later than three months before the date of her  application  (in  this
      case the first appellant's application was on 15 August 2014 and  this
      would therefore have had to have covered a  period  which  expired  no
      later than 15 May 2014). Secondly, the  relevant  rule  specified  the
      type of documents including the following:


           "41 - SD (III)
   1.  advertising  or  marketing  material,  including   printouts   online
      advertising, that has been published locally  or  nationally,  showing
      the applicant's name (and the name  of  the  business  if  applicable)
      together with the business activity or where his business  is  trading
      online, confirmation of his  ownership  of  the  domain  name  of  the
      business website"


 9. It was submitted on the part of the appellants, based on page  6  of  a
    faxed supplementary bundle dated 23 June 2015, that an email written to
    Mrs Maqsood from yell.com, relating to a free listing confirmation, was
    sufficient  to  amount  to  a  piece  of  "advertising   or   marketing
    material... showing  the applicant's name". It was  also  submitted  on
    the appellants' behalf that  the  immigration  judge  had  not  engaged
    sufficiently with the documents  submitted  in  support  of  the  paper
    appeal and had not taken full account of those documents.


10. Mr Stanton submitted that the  appellant  had  failed  to  surmount  an
    essential hurdle placed in front of her, by the relevant version of the
    immigration rules; namely, rule 41 - SD as  quoted  above.  This  meant
    that even if there were any errors in terms of failing to consider  all
    the evidence, which he did not accept, there was no material  error  in
    the decision of the FTT as there was  no  material  error  of  law.  He
    therefore invited me to dismiss the appeal. Insofar as it was necessary
    to consider it, paragraph 41 - SD (III) (1) of  the  immigration  rules
    appeared to prohibit such evidence. Mr Stanton did not consider that Mr
    Al Arayn's charactersation of  the  yell.com  e  mail  as  "advertising
    material" could be correct.


Conclusions

11. Having carefully considered the  wording  of  rule  41  -  SD,  I  have
    concluded that the words "advertising or marketing  material"  did  not
    refer to an email merely making reference to a  "free  line  entry"  on
    yell.com. The inference may well be that the first appellant did indeed
    advertise with yell.com. However,  the  yell.com  email  could  not  be
    capable of constituting "marketing material" as defined by the rule.


12. Mr Al Arayn has conceded that he was no longer  wishes  to  pursue  the
    criticism of the immigration  judge  at  paragraph  5  of  his  amended
    grounds of appeal to the UT, in relation to  the   immigration  judge's
    interpretation of the requirement for the appellant's name to appear to
    comply with the rules. He  also  conceded  that  his  client  had  been
    looking at the new rules rather than rules which pertained at the  date
    of the application (see above).


13. It follows from the latter concession that the first appellant did  not
    satisfy a requirement of the Tier 1 scheme and therefore it  cannot  be
    said  that  a  different  judge  could  have  come   to   a   different
    interpretation  of  the  immigration  rules  or,  indeed,  a  different
    conclusion on the facts.


14. Further, Mr Al Arayn's other criticisms of the immigration judge,  with
    respect, appeared not to stand up to proper analysis. Having  carefully
    reviewed the decision of the immigration judge I am satisfied that  she
    took account material aspects of the case. The decision appears to be a
    detailed one which looked  at  all  the  evidence  placed  before  her,
    including the email to which reference has been made.


15. Overall, I am not  satisfied  that  the  immigration  judge's  decision
    contains any material  error  of  law  and  the  decision  of  the  FTT
    therefore stands.


Signed      W.E.Hanbury


Dated 31st of May 2017



Decision

The appeal is against the decision of the FTT is dismissed on all grounds.

The decision of the FTT therefore stands.

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT and I make no such direction.

Signed


Date





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury


Fee Award
I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signature   William Hanbury  Dated 31st of May 2017



