
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49374/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 February 2016                   |On 18 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                                     and

                               SHAHID MAHMOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Officer Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Symes promulgated on 7  August  2015  in  which  he
    allowed the claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State made on 27 November 2014 to refuse him further leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom and to remove him pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan who was granted leave to enter as
    a Tier 4 Student Migrant on 20 April 2008 until 7 September  2009.  His
    leave to remain in that capacity was extended on several occasions, the
    last grant being until 30 November 2014 to allow  him  to  undertake  a
    Diploma in Sales and Marketing Management  at  Middlesex  International
    College ("MIC"), but on 27 June 2014, his leave to remain was curtailed
    to 31 August 2014. That decision was taken as the college at  which  he
    was studying and was sponsoring him had had its  licence  revoked.  The
    claimant was, as is usual, given 60 days leave in order to obtain a new
    sponsor.  After contacting some 20 colleges he was  able  to  obtain  a
    conditional offer to study and London  College  of  Advance  Management
    ("LCAM") on a course running  from  September  2014  -  September  2015
    leading to a Level 7 Diploma in Healthcare Management and on 28  August
    2014 applied to the  respondent  for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student. LCAM having assured him that they would be able  to  assign  a
    Certificate of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS").

 3. On 27 November 2014, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  claimant's
    application for further leave on the basis that he had  no  CAS  number
    had been submitted with his application.

 4. The claimant's case is that LCAM had assured him that they would  issue
    a CAS once his application had gone through with the respondent, but in
    November 2014, he learned that LCAM no longer appeared on the  list  of
    Educational Sponsors on the Home Office website, and that LCAM's office
    was no longer at the address given.  He attempted to obtain a CAS  from
    another college, but was unable to do so as his original documents  and
    passport were held  by  the  respondent.  The  claimant  wrote  to  the
    Secretary of State to explain his  problem,  but  his  application  was
    nonetheless refused.

 5. The claimant's case is that he wished to finish his MABA, and  to  have
    the career in banking in Pakistan which he had  long  planned.  He  has
    spent a considerable  amount  on  his  studies  here,  and  would  face
    irreparable loss if he had to return to Pakistan.

 6. The respondent was not represented at the hearing before the First-tier
    Tribunal on 23 July when Judge Symes heard evidence from  the  claimant
    and submissions made on his behalf.

 7. In his decision, the judge held:
      i) The claimant was a genuine student on a course of  studies  planned
         to culminate in and MBA; that he had successfully found a place  to
         study (LCAM) after his previous college had lost its  licence;  had
         unsuccessfully sought another sponsor, and had sought to inform the
         Secretary of State of this [12];
     ii) The claimant could not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules [14]; and, [15] that the decision was in accordance with  the
         law, LCAM having failed to issue the applicant with a  CAS  and  he
         was thus  disqualified  under  the  respondent's  policy  of  given
         innocent victims of licence revocations a period of grace;
    iii) Having had regard to Nasim & Ors (Article 8) [2014] UKUT  25  (IAC)
         [18], that this was a case where the claimants studies were clearly
         central to his personal and professional identity, and  was  not  a
         case  where  the  private  life  asserted  merely  amounts  to  the
         "opportunity for a promising student to complete his course in this
         country" held in Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 73to be  an  insufficient
         basis to found a protected Article 8 interest [19];
     iv) The claimant has established a private life in the  United  Kingdom
         [20]; the frustration of his ambitions in light of his  significant
         investment and  long  period  of  lawful  residence  is  a  serious
         interference with his private life;
      v) While, having had  regard  to  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act")  is  to  be  given
         only limited weight [21], there was no significant public  interest
         requiring his departure until the purpose sought to be achieved  by
         the original provision of a sixty day window is completed [21];

 8.  The  judge  therefore  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the judge had materially misdirected himself:
      i)  in  finding  the  claimant's  circumstances   could   be   readily
         distinguished from those  in  Nasim,  this  claimant's  case  being
         weaker that those  considered  in  Patel  at  [57]-[59]  given  the
         provisions of section 117A to 117D of the 2002 Act;
     ii) in directing himself that "limited"  weight  rather  than  "little"
         weight as mandated by section 117B (5) of the 2002 Act  was  to  be
         applied to the claimant's private life; and, had the  correct  test
         been applied, the appeal would inevitably have been dismissed.

10. Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  17
    December 2015.

    Submissions

11. Mr Wilding submitted that, contrary to what the judge had  found,  this
    case fell clearly within the class of  cases  identified  in  Patel  at
    [57], and to which the Upper Tribunal had referred in Nasim at [19]. He
    submitted that there was, in reality, nothing in the claimant's case to
    take it outside those parameters. That was not to say there could never
    be an article 8 case, and all the factors referred  to  by  the  judge,
    including the claimant's self- identification were  all  considered  in
    Nasim, there being nothing in this case to distinguish it.

12. Mr Wilding submitted also that the distinction  between  "limited"  and
    "little" was not merely semantic, but in the context of concluding this
    was not a "Nasim" case, was a distinct, material error.

13. Ms  Shaw  submitted  that  the  judge  had  given  proper  reasons  for
    distinguishing Nasim, the claimant having here been issued  with  a  60
    day leave period, of which he had not, owing to an inability to  obtain
    documents, been able properly to avail himself. As he had not  had  his
    passport or other documents, he had been unable to obtain a CAS. It was
    also evident from the decision at [22] that it was  this  consideration
    which concerned the just.

14. Ms Shaw submitted further that a further difference in  this  case  was
    the claimant's long  term  career  path,  and  the  fact  that  he  was
    prevented from achieving it. There was no indication that the judge had
    not had proper regard to the relevant case law,  or  that  he  had  not
    properly applied it.

15. In addition, Ms Shaw submitted that there was in reality no distinction
    capable of being drawn between "little" and "limited".

16. In reply, Mr Wilding submitted that  there  was  in  any  event  little
    evidence that the claimant had sought to obtain his documents from  the
    Home office, the letter in the bundle being  dated  29  November  2014,
    after the date of decision. He submitted also that, as the claimant had
    confirmed, he was not in the middle of  a  course  of  study,  and  was
    seeking to do a new course.

Did the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of  an  error
of law?

17. I am satisfied that, for the reasons set out below, that it did.

18. In this case, the claimant's sponsor MIC had its  licence  revoked  and
    his leave was curtailed. There is no indication that at that point, his
    documents were held by the respondent; after all, he  had  valid  leave
    and there was no application pending, nor was  there  until  28  August
    2014. He had been able to obtain a conditional offer from LCAM (not, it
    would appear, a CAS). It is implicit in the acceptance of the 28 August
    application as valid (and from the documents  listed  within  it  which
    must be sent to the Home Office at pages 7 and 11) that  the  relevant,
    original  documents  and  passports  were  sent  in  support  of   that
    application, and it was because that application was pending,  that  he
    was not able to apply to another college for  a  CAS  after  28  August
    2014, and after he found out that LCAM was no longer a sponsor.  It  is
    also important to observe that LCAM did not in fact issue a CAS, as the
    judge noted [15].

19. It cannot therefore be properly argued that the purpose of the  60  day
    period granted to the claimant  to  find  an  alternative  sponsor  was
    frustrated by any action of the respondent in retaining documents; that
    difficulty arose after they had  been  submitted  on  28  August  2015,
    shortly before the 60 day period expired.

20. It must be borne in mind what the Supreme Court held in Patel at [57]:
         "It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for 'common sense' in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in  the  UK  for  some  years  ...
         However, such considerations do not by themselves  provide  grounds
         of appeal under article 8,  which  is  concerned  with  private  or
         family life, not education as such. The opportunity for a promising
         student to complete his course in this country,  however  desirable
         in general terms, is not in itself a right protected under  article
         8."

21. Considering also the decision in Nasim at section C in particular, I do
    not consider that the facts of this appeal, and  the  circumstances  of
    this claimant  are  distinguishable.   As  Mr  Wilding  submitted,  the
    factors identified at [5] and [10] are in  reality  no  different  from
    those  in  Patel.  Nothing  other  than  continuation  of  studies   is
    identified  and  it  would  appear  that  a  fresh  course   is   being
    contemplated rather than the continuation of a  previous  course.   The
    length of time spent in studies is not factor that alters this  in  any
    way.

22. Further, although the claimant had been unable to obtain  a  CAS,  that
    was not through the fault of the respondent, and what he is seeking is,
    in reality a further period of 60 days to find a proper sponsor  as  he
    had not been able to do so in the previous  60  day  grace  period;  it
    cannot be argued that that arose from any actions on the  part  of  the
    respondent. As the judge noted [15] and [16], this is  not  a  case  in
    which it could be said that the respondent acted unfairly.

23. While it is evident from [19] and [20] that the judge did give  reasons
    for concluding that there was, unusually, a private life in this  case,
    I am not satisfied that the reasons are sufficient to explain why  that
    is so, in the light of Patel and Nasim.

24. Further, even if that were the case, there is simply no indication that
    the necessary weight was attached to the public  interest  in  removal.
    While I accept  Ms  Shaw's  submission  that  the  distinction  between
    "limited" and "little" is of no import, the analysis of the  weight  to
    be attached to the  public  interest  in  removal  is  lacking.  It  is
    perverse, having found the Secretary of State has not  acted  unfairly,
    to  in  effect  lessen  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    Immigration Control where the requirements of the rules have  not  been
    met, on that basis. Similarly, bearing in mind what was said  in  Nasim
    at  [20  and  [21],  the  reasons  given  for  finding  removal  to  be
    disproportionate are neither adequate nor sustainable.

25. Accordingly, as I announced during the hearing,  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of law and I set it
    aside. I therefore turn to remaking the decision.

    Remaking the decision

26. Ms Shaw did not seek to adduce additional evidence, nor did she seek to
    call the claimant.

27. Mr Wilding submitted that, relying on Nasim at [20] and [21]  and  also
    [25]-[27] in particular, it could not be said  that  the  claimant  had
    established a private life here; or,  that  if  he  had  done  so,  his
    removal was not proportionate.

28. Ms Shaw relied on her previous submissions, adding  that  the  claimant
    had through no fault of his own been prejudiced  by  the  Secretary  of
    State's retention of documents, and that he had  attempted  to  resolve
    this matter by contacting the Home Office by telephone. All he was,  in
    reality, seeking was 60 days leave to obtain another sponsor which  was
    in line with policy.

29. In re-making  the  decision,  while  I  have  some  sympathy  with  the
    claimant, there is nothing before me which I consider takes him outside
    the class of students referred to in Patel at [57]. The  factors  found
    by Judge Symes at [20] and noted at [5] are clearly not  sufficient  to
    create a private life, even taking into  account  the  length  of  time
    spent here, there being little evidence of  the  content  of  his  life
    beyond studies. Further as I noted  above  there  is  a  break  in  his
    studies now.   For these reasons, I am not satisfied that article 8  is
    engaged.

30. Even were I satisfied that article 8 were engaged, I am  not  satisfied
    that the interference caused - a break in the claimant's studies  which
    are  not  mid-course  -  is  sufficiently  serious  to  amount  to   an
    interference. Further, I am not satisfied that  any  such  interference
    would  be  disproportionate.    The  claimant's  status  is  unarguably
    precarious and little weight can be attached thereto. There is, I find,
    a  significant  weight  to  be  attached  to  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control which includes the removal of those who
    do not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  For the reasons
    set out above at [18] and [19] of my decision, the reality is that  the
    claimant did obtain 60 days' leave to find another sponsor. He did  not
    find  a  satisfactory  one  in  LCAM,  but  it  cannot  be  said   that
    difficulties in obtaining yet another sponsor outside the 60 day period
    are any proper reason for lessening the public interest, nor can it  be
    said that there was any real frustration of the purpose of the  60  day
    period; the claimant did find another  college,  albeit  one  that,  it
    appears, took his money but did not issue a CAS.

31. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the claimant's removal would be in
    breach of his rights under the Human Rights Convention,  and  I  remake
    the decision by dismissing his appeal on all grounds.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

 2. I re-make the decision by dismissing it on all grounds.


Signed   Date: 12 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

