
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49836/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                         GOKULAKRISHMAN NARAYANASAMY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra (Counsel) instructed by the appellant
                    (direct access)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence,  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Thanki promulgated on  30  July  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 8 June 1985 and is a national of Sri  Lanka.
On 15th February 2013 the appellant applied for leave to remain  in  the  UK
as a tier 1 (entrepreneur) migrant. The respondent refused that  application
on 25 November 2014, in part because the respondent  believes  it  would  be
undesirable to allow the appellant to remain in the UK as he  was  convicted
of stalking at Woolwich Crown Court in August 2014.

4.    The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  a  decision
promulgated on 30 July 2015, First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki ("the  Judge")
dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's decision.

5.    Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  and,  on  3  December  2015,  Judge
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "The appellant has arguably been deprived of  a  fair  hearing  in  the
    light of the material available to the Judge"

The hearing

6.    (a)   Ms Malhotra,  counsel  for  the  appellant,  told  me  that  the
appellant took ill the night before the hearing of this  case  and  required
treatment in accident and emergency. She  told  me  that  the  appellant  is
provided with three different types of medication  by  his  GP  because  the
appellant suffers from anxiety and depression. She told me that  there  were
compelling medical reasons why  the  appellant  could  not  attend  his  own
hearing  and  that,  although  solicitors  attended  on  his  behalf,  those
solicitors had failed in  their  obligation  to  properly  prepare  for  the
hearing so that there was no appellant's bundle.

    (b)    Ms Malhotra argued  that  the  combination  of  the  appellant's
fragile health and the negligence of his  solicitors  meant  that,  although
the appeal proceeded, the appellant's arguments were not heard.  She  argued
that  the  appellant  had  been  unfairly  deprived  of  an  opportunity  to
participate in the appeal process. She told me that, given the  opportunity,
the appellant could produce  evidence  to  demonstrate  that  the  financial
documents he relies on are genuine, and can fully address  the  concerns  of
the entry clearance officer. She argued that, so far, the appellant had  not
had the opportunity to do that. She urged me to set the decision  aside  and
to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided of new

7.    Mr Avery, for the respondent, told me that the Judge's  decision  does
not contain any errors, material or  otherwise.  He  reminded  me  that  the
appellant's solicitors withdrew from acting on 27 January 2016 because  they
have not been placed in funds by the appellant. He told me that there is  no
evidence that the appellant has made a complaint about a solicitor,  nor  is
there evidence that the appellant had to go to accident  and  emergency  the
night before the appeal hearing. He reminded me that the Judge records  that
there was no documentary  evidence  placed  before  him  to  show  that  the
appellant would not be fit to  attend  the  hearing.  He  reminded  me  that
between [14] and [18] the Judge records the request for an adjournment,  his
consideration of that request  and  his  rejection  of  the  application  to
adjourn. He told me that there was nothing unfair in the decision to  refuse
the application to adjourn and that that was a decision that any  reasonable
Judge would make.

Analysis

8.     Rule  4(3)(h)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (First-tier   Tribunal)
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules  2014  empowers  the  Tribunal  to
adjourn a hearing. Rule 2 sets  out  the  overriding  objectives  under  the
Rules which the Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when  exercising  any
power under the Rules. The  overriding  objective  is  to  deal  with  cases
fairly and justly.  This is defined as including "(a) dealing with the  case
in ways  which  are  proportionate  to  the  importance  of  the  case,  the
complexity of the issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of  the
parties and of the Tribunal; (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and  seeking
flexibility in the proceedings; (c) ensuring,  so  far  as  is  practicable,
that the parties are able to  participate  fully  in  the  proceedings;  (d)
using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively; (e) avoiding  delay
so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues".

9.    In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it  was
held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, the  question  for
the Upper Tribunal is not whether the Firs -tier acted reasonably.   Rather,
the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there  any  deprivation  of
the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

10.   The history of this case is that the appellant's  previous  solicitors
started acting for the appellant on 28 May 2015. The notice of  hearing  was
sent to the appellant on 10 February 2015. A hearing took place on  15  July
2015. Although the appellant  was  not  present  at  that  hearing,  he  was
represented by a solicitor.

11.   Before the hearing, two  unsuccessful  applications  to  adjourn  were
made by  the  appellant's  solicitors.  On  18  June  2015  the  appellant's
solicitors sought an adjournment and said that  they  would  obtain  medical
evidence to demonstrate that the appellant's psychiatric  illness  prevented
him from attending court. That application was refused. The application  was
renewed (in writing) on 8 July 2015. That second application  was  supported
by  a  letter  from  the  appellant's  GP.  On  10  July  2015  that  second
application was refused by a duty judge who  took  the  view  that,  if  the
prospect of the  appeal  hearing  was  causing  the  appellant  anxiety,  an
adjourned hearing would not alleviate any stress suffered by the appellant.

12.   At [10] the Judge records that no  bundle  has  been  lodged  for  the
appellant. If the appellant had come to court on 15 July 2015,  there  would
have been no witness statement from him to adopt as his evidence  in  chief.
I mentioned that  to  Ms  Malhotra,  who  blamed  the  appellant's  (former)
solicitors for want of preparation.  Grounds  of  appeal  were  prepared  by
counsel other than Ms Malhotra. Those grounds of appeal  do  not  point  the
finger of blame at the  appellant's  former  solicitors.  (Ms  Malhotra  was
instructed directly by the appellant at the eleventh hour). The  appellant's
solicitors withdrew from acting the day before the hearing before me on  the
basis that they were without instructions and had not been placed in funds.

13.   No reliable evidence is placed before me  to  support  the  submission
that the appellant's former solicitors  are  responsible  for  the  want  of
preparation. On the contrary, I note that the appellant was happy enough  to
leave his solicitors with instructions until 27 January 2016, and that,  for
this hearing in January 2016, the appellant's former solicitors  produced  a
bundle which includes the appellant's  witness  statement  dated  4  January
2016. Because of the lack of evidence of  negligence  on  the  part  of  the
appellant solicitors, and because it is a matter which was  raised  for  the
first time during the appeal hearing on 28 January 2016,  I  find  that  the
appellant fails to establish that he was not in a position to lead  evidence
before the First-tier Tribunal on 15 July 2015 because of  the  inaction  of
his previous solicitors.

14.   This appeal turns on a narrow point. Was the refusal to adjourn on  15
July 2015 unfair? The appellant was ill and could not  attend,  but  between
10 February and 15 July, both 2015, the appellant did little,  if  anything,
to prosecute his own appeal. His instructions to his  solicitors  appear  to
have been limited to attempts  to  seek  adjournments.  Because  no  witness
statement had been prepared his participation in  the  hearing  on  15  July
2015 could only have been minimal. The respondent had not  been  given  fair
notice of the appellant's  detailed  position  because  no  bundle  for  the
appellant had been lodged.

15.   At [17] the Judge applies the correct  test.  He  says  "I  considered
whether it was fair to adjourn  the  appeal  hearing".  At  [18]  the  Judge
specifically considers the overriding objective set  out  in  the  procedure
rules before deciding that it was fair and just to proceed  in  the  absence
of the appellant, who was still represented by a solicitor.

16.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

17.   The respondent's decision dated  25  November  2014  is  made  on  two
bases.  The  first  is  that  the  respondent  believes  that,  because  the
appellant was convicted  at  Woolwich  Crown  Court  in  August  2014  of  a
criminal offence, it is undesirable to permit the  appellant  to  remain  in
the UK. The second is that the respondent produces a  document  verification
report which indicates that financial documents produced  by  the  appellant
are forgeries.

18.   In his witness  statement  (dated  4th  January  2016)  the  appellant
dwells on the financial documents between [5] and [10]. Even on 4th  January
2016 the appellant pays only superficial attention  to  the  impact  of  his
conviction at Woolwich Crown Court. Paragraph 4  of  his  witness  statement
deals with that  conviction,  and  (in  summary)  says  that  the  appellant
regrets his actions.

19.   At the hearing before me, the appellant produces  inadequate  evidence
to address the respondent's findings in terms of  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
immigration rules. The appellant concedes that the respondent's  account  of
his conviction and sentence in August 2014 is accurate.

20.   Because of the history of this appeal and because  the  appellant  was
legally represented by solicitors until 27 January  2016  I  find  that  the
refusal of the adjournment did not deprive the appellant of a fair  hearing.
I find that at [17] and [18] the Judge manifestly applied the correct  test.
It was for the First-tier Judge to decide whether or  not  it  was  fair  to
proceed in the appellant's absence. After considering the correct  procedure
rules and the correct the test, the  Judge  decided  that  it  was  fair  to
proceed in the appellant's absence. Because the Judge  applied  the  correct
test there is no error of law in his decision.

CONCLUSION

21.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

22.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 5 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
