
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49290/2014
                                                               IA/49294/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2015                  |On 16 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JABAD HUSSAIN
                              ROWSHANARA BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss R Akther, Counsel, instructed by Edward Alam &
Associates


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Kainth, promulgated on 22 June 2015,  in  which  he
    purported  to  "remit"  the  Respondents'  linked  cases  back  to  the
    Secretary of State for consideration under Section 55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

 2. The appeals to Judge Kainth were against decisions of the Secretary  of
    State dated 18 November 2014  to  remove  the  Respondents  by  way  of
    directions under Section 10 of the Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies by
    a decision dated 7 September 2015.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The basis upon which the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  its  decision  is
    essentially as follows.  At a hearing at which the Secretary  of  State
    was  unfortunately  not   represented   it   was   contended   by   the
    representative for Mr Hussain and  Mrs  Begum  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's refusal letter failed to have any or any adequate regard to the
    duty under section 55 of the 2009 Act, with reference to  paragraph  24
    of the letter in question.  That submission is set out at paragraph  11
    of Judge Kainth's decision.  The judge acceded to  the  submission  and
    concluded  that  the  cases  had   to   be   "remitted"   for   further
    consideration.

 4. However,  somewhat  unfortunately,  and  as  clearly  set  out  in  the
    Secretary of State's grounds of appeal,  both  the  representative  and
    more importantly Judge Kainth overlooked what is said at paragraphs  43
    to 47 of the refusal letter.  Within those paragraphs  there  is  clear
    and  detailed  reference  to  Section  55  of  the  2009  Act   and   a
    consideration of a number of relevant factors relating to the  relevant
    children in these appeals.  Therefore it is  clear  to  me  that  Judge
    Kainth made an error of law, namely a complete failure to  have  regard
    to relevant aspects of the Secretary of State's case as set out in  the
    refusal letter.

 5. In turn, the basis upon which  Judge  Kainth  purported  to  remit  (or
    perhaps more accurately to  allow  the  appeals  on  a  limited  basis,
    assuming that was his intention given that he had no power to remit  as
    such) is fundamentally flawed.

 6. The error of law is clearly material, and in terms of the  disposal  of
    these appeals, because there have been no findings of  fact  whatsoever
    in respect of Mr  Hussain,  Mrs  Begum  and  their  children  in  these
    appeals, the only appropriate  course  of  action  is  to  remit  these
    appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. This is not the usual course of action.   However  there  has  been  no
    opposition to this route from  either  representative  before  me,  and
    given the absence of any findings of fact whatsoever Mr Hussain and Mrs
    Begum have effectively been denied any  sort  of  a  hearing  at  first
    instance.

 8. Therefore having regard to paragraph 7 of the Practice  Statements  and
    section 12(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  I
    remit the appeals.

 9. In terms of the remitted hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    issues for consideration will  focus  on  Article  8  both  within  and
    without the Immigration Rules, and of  course  with  reference  to  the
    relevant children, one of whom it now appears has been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for over seven years.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Procedural Directions

      1. These appeals shall remain linked;

      2. The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard at
         the Hatton Cross Hearing Centre on a  date  to  be  fixed  by  that
         centre;

      3. The remitted appeals shall not be reheard by Judge Kainth.

Substantive Directions

      1. The issues for the First-tier Tribunal to consider at the rehearing
         of the appeals are: first, whether  Mr  Hussain  and/or  Mrs  Begum
         satisfy the Immigration Rules as they relate to Article 8;  second,
         if not, whether Mr Hussain and/or Mrs Begum can succeed on  Article
         8 grounds outside of the Immigration Rules in light  of  their  own
         circumstances, those of their children, current  case-law  and  the
         factors  contained  within  section  117B   of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


Signed   Date: 4 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

