
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49254/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |               Decision & Reasons    |
|                                         |Promulgated                          |
|On 29th January 2016                     |               On 16th February 2016 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEputy UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                      AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Shaw, Counsel instructed by Chhokar & Co
Solicitors
                                  ANONYMITY
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
an anonymity order is made in respect of each of the Appellants. Unless  the
Upper Tribunal or other competent Court orders otherwise, no report  of  any
of the  proceedings  herein  or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall,
directly or indirectly, identify any of  the  Appellants.  This  prohibition
applies to, amongst others, all parties.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr AA is a citizen of Pakistan whose date of birth is recorded  as  5th
    April 1989.  He has been in the United Kingdom at least from March 2011
    and has at all times been lawfully resident, having renewed and  varied
    his status on a number of occasions.

 2. On 11th August 2014 he married Mr K, a British citizen and on the basis
    of that marriage, on or about 22nd September 2014 made application  for
    variation of his leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.   On  19th
    November 2014 a decision was made to refuse the application and  Mr  AA
    appealed.  His appeal was heard by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Clarke on 26th June 2015 when sitting at Hatton Cross.  The appeal  was
    brought  on  human  rights  grounds,  having  regard  to  Appendix  FM,
    paragraph 276ADE and the wider application  of  Article  8  ECHR.   For
    reasons which are not entirely clear the  judge  allowed  the  decision
    under the Immigration Rules and on  human  rights  grounds  but  it  is
    common ground before me that  the  appeal  should  only  have  been  be
    considered under  the  wider  application  of  Article  8  because  the
    Appellant did not meet fundamental requirements of the  Rules.  I  need
    not say more about it because that is agreed. To that extent the appeal
    of the Secretary of State is conceded but the error is not  necessarily
    wholly material for reasons which I shall explain.

 3. The judge was  cognisant  of  the  fact  that  there  were  significant
    difficulties which would face Mr  AA  and  his  partner  were  they  to
    attempt to enjoy family life in Pakistan.  Mr  K  was  originally  from
    India and now a British citizen with 35 years in the United Kingdom. Mr
    K is HIV positive and was found to suffer from both Hepatitis B and the
    HIV infection was associated with  tuberculosis.   The  illnesses  with
    which Mr K suffers are being treated in the United Kingdom.

 4.  The  judge  properly  directed  himself  when  considering  the  wider
    application of Article 8 to the five stage test in Razgar [2004]UKHL 27
    and came to the view that it would be disproportionate to require Mr AA
    to leave the United Kingdom to make application from  outside.   It  is
    common ground so far as the Immigration Rules are concerned  that  what
    Mr AA lacked was the required evidence of his English language  skills,
    in all other respects he would otherwise have satisfied the Rules.

 5. Weighing heavily on the mind of the judge was the prospect that Mr  AA,
    were he to return to his home country, faced a real risk of  having  to
    disclose his sexual orientation and, more particularly, might be forced
    into an arranged marriage in circumstances  in  which  he  was  already
    lawfully married in the  United  Kingdom.   Having  regard  to  various
    factors including the fact  that  Mr  AA  was  healthy,  would  not  be
    dependent on the British taxpayer,  was  able  to  speak  English  even
    though unable to provide the prescribed certificate, and looking to the
    wider public interest in immigration control, the balance was found  by
    the judge to be tipped in favour of Mr AA.

 6. Not content with that decision by Notice dated  14th  August  2015  the
    Secretary of State made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal and on 3rd December 2015 permission was granted by Judge
    Hollingworth.  There were three grounds.

 7. The first ground took issue with the judge's finding that Mr  AA  would
    necessarily need to disclose his sexual orientation because were he  to
    make application from Pakistan it would only be necessary  for  him  to
    disclose his sexual orientation to  the  British  authorities  and  the
    information given to them would not  be  passed  on  to  the  Pakistani
    authorities.  There is logic to that ground but  it  does  not,  in  my
    view, recognise the reality nor the important  point  which  the  judge
    found, namely the risk of having to disclose his sexual orientation  to
    persons other than the British authorities.

 8. The second ground points to the fact that Mr  AA  has  married  in  the
    United Kingdom, and has not disclosed his  sexual  orientation  to  his
    family at home, and is therefore prepared to live a lie in  the  United
    Kingdom. In those circumstances the Secretary of State contends that he
    ought therefore to be found to be willing to live that same lie at home
    again. That ground misses the point  because  there  is  a  distinction
    between "living the lie" and the safety of Mr AA.  He has chosen not to
    tell his family at home; that is a matter for him but he has  not  told
    them in circumstances in which for so long  as  he  is  in  the  United
    Kingdom  he  feels  safe.   The  British  authorities   rightly   offer
    protection to people in same sex relationships, not so in Pakistan,  on
    the finding of the judge and it is that real risk to Mr AA that weighed
    heavily with the judge and in my view the judge came to a finding  that
    was open to him.

 9. The third ground in my judgment is simply not made out.  It joins issue
    with the  findings  of  the  judge  the  notion  that  contact  can  be
    maintained  through  visits  or  a  variety  of   modern   methods   of
    communication.  That  does  not  meet  the  true  facts  of  the  case.
    Sometimes it is suggested that an Appellant has the option  of  leaving
    the United Kingdom in order to make application from outside and during
    that time can be joined by his or her partner whilst making and waiting
    for a result but that is not an option on the findings  of  this  judge
    that is open to Mr AA.  There are a number of reasons for it.

10. Firstly, because the Sponsor as a British citizen would not receive the
    medical treatment  which  he  is  receiving  at  the  moment  with  the
    principles in Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 applying: there  is  just  one
    family, and for so long as they are together  outside  of  the  country
    waiting for application there is the risk that they would be discovered
    and more particularly the reality is that they could not  ever  on  the
    judge's findings enjoy the family life that they  would  wish  and  are
    entitled to outside or rather I should say in Pakistan.

11. Findings of fact can only be challenged in certain  circumstances.   In
    my judgment the findings were not against the weight of  the  evidence,
    the findings were adequately reasoned, there was  nothing  perverse  or
    irrational in the findings of the judge and  indeed  on  the  basis  of
    Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 the issue of near-miss was  discussed,  and
    following the case of Miah v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 261 and  Patel  there
    clearly is no basis to allow an appeal on a "near-miss"  basis  but  in
    circumstances where there is a near-miss that  goes  to  the  issue  of
    proportionality so that the closer an Appellant comes  to  meeting  the
    Rules, the less the additional factors he or she may need  to  show  in
    order to tip the proportionality scales in his or her favour.   I  note
    in fact on the findings of the judge in this case all the  requirements
    of the Rule were met in the spirit if not in  the  actual  requirement.
    The additional factors therefore were sufficient for it to be  open  to
    the judge to find the scales tipped in Mr AA's favour  and  the  appeal
    therefore allowed in part given that the appeal was allowed  under  the
    immigration rules when it ought not to have been but  the  decision  to
    allow the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  (Article  8)  is  to  be
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and set aside. The  decision  of
the First tier Tribunal is remade such that the appeal  is  dismissed  under
the immigration rules but allowed having regard to the wider application  of
Article 8 ECHR.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker



