
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49312/2014
                                                               IA/49333/2014
                                                               IA/49339/2014
                                                               IA/49344/2014
                                                               IA/49358/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2016                              |On 4 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                            Mr Nirmal Kumar Athi
                              Mrs Raj Rani Athi
                                    [AkA]
                                    [AdA]
                                    [PaA]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Martin of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, a Senior Presenting Officer


        DECISION AND REASONS FOR REMITTING TO THE FIRST-TIER TRIBUNAL


Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of India who appeals  against  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) to dismiss the appeal  brought  by  Mr
    Athi.  Mr Athi is married to Raj Rani Athi,  his  wife.   Akriti  Athi,
    Aditi Athi and Parvesh Athi are his children.  They are all appellants.

2.   Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Perkins  gave  them  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the FtT to dismiss
    their appeals against the respondent's decision to refuse them leave to
    remain under the Immigration Rules, or alternatively, on  human  rights
    grounds.  Judge Perkins gave them permission because  the  decision  of
    the FtT did not deal with the appellant's main ground of appeal, namely
    that the respondent had been wrong not to decide to allow him to remain
    as a student.  Arguably,  the  FtT  should  also  have  considered  the
    contention that the appellant should not be removed  because  a  timely
    application for leave to remain had not been decided.

3.   The respondent's preliminary view was that the decision  that  she  had
    made on 2 December 2014 did not adequately dispose of  the  appellant's
    Tier 4 application.  The Upper Tribunal is respectfully invited in that
    Rule 24 response to find that the decision of the respondent was not in
    accordance with the law.

The Hearing

4.   At  the  hearing  both  parties  were  represented.   The  respondent's
    representative, Mr Wilding, maintained the concession  that  there  had
    been a material error of law in the decision of the FtT.

5.   Both parties conceded that the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) for a new hearing before a different judge.

My Decision

6.   It was accepted that the fairest way to deal with this  matter  was  to
    remit the matter to the FtT.  Accordingly, I  find  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT in failing to consider
    the appellant's application for leave to remain  as  a  student  and/or
    that tribunal needs to consider whether the appellants'  removal  would
    be contrary to law in all circumstances.

Directions

7.   I direct as follows:

    (1)  The matter be remitted to the FtT for a  fresh  hearing  before  a
         judge other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pacey.


    (2)  None of the findings of fact of the FtT shall stand.


    (3)  All further directions are to be issued by the First-tier Tribunal
         in Birmingham.


    (4)  The FtT is to consider whether a fee award is appropriate.

Anonymity

There is no anonymity direction in this case.

Notice of Decision

I find a material error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
such that that decision requires to be set aside.  I  have  made  directions
for the remittal of the matter to the FtT above.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award  and  have
decided to make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

