
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49336/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 15th September 2014                        |On 7th November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                               DJEBAR MOKHTAR
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Doyle, Maliks and Khan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Algeria, born on 1st March 1980,  and  he
    made an application on 28th  February  2013  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain on the basis of his length of residence in the  United  Kingdom.
    His application was refused by the respondent on 5th November 2013.

 2. In a determination promulgated on 2nd April  2014  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Woodhouse   dismissed   the   appellant's   application   in   a
    determination running to 125  paragraphs  both  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and further to Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was filed  by  the  appellant's
    representatives on the basis that the judge had failed to  give  proper
    reasons as to why the Tribunal determined that the appellant  had  been
    evasive at paragraph 108.  With reference  to  paragraph  109,  it  was
    submitted, that the appellant could not go to the bank  for  copies  of
    his statements as he had no identification and therefore  it  stood  to
    reason  he  would  be  unable  to  get  such  documents,  and  it   was
    unreasonable for the Tribunal to expect the appellant to have  collated
    such evidence.  Insufficient reasoning was given at paragraph 110 where
    the appellant was described as evasive.

 4. The Tribunal rejected the evidence  of  the  relationship  between  the
    appellant  and  Miss  Abbani  but  there  were  consistencies  in   the
    appellant's evidence and yet the Tribunal overlooked such consistencies
    and coherency went on to determine at paragraph 117 that the  appellant
    knew very little of Miss Abbani.

 5. Additionally at paragraph 120 the Tribunal gave no reasons as to why it
    did not find Mr Boussag  a  witness  and  a  friend  of  the  appellant
    credible that he did not know of the appellant's alias.

 6. Initially the application for permission was rejected but on renewal of
    the application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  it  was
    submitted that no full and comprehensive assessment of the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights under the five stage proportionality test as  set  out
    in Razgar had been undertaken.  The Tribunal had failed to consider the
    appellant's case outside the Rules in the spirit of Gulshan and Nagre.

 7. It was also submitted that there had been a failure  of  reasoning  for
    findings on material matters. Thus the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  give
    reasons as per MK (Duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641.

 8. Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission on the basis  that  there
    had been no full assessment in relation to Article 8.

 9. In a Rule 24 response the respondent submitted  that  the  judge  found
    that the appellant had not established he had been residing in  the  UK
    for either twenty or fourteen years.  The  judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's account of events, particularly in  relation  to  documents
    produced from the employer and other evidence from witnesses.

10. In the absence of reliable evidence the judge dismissed the  appeal  in
    relation to the immigration rules.

11. At the hearing before me Mr Doyle submitted that the judge had made  no
    finding as to whether the appellant had been here for fourteen years or
    twenty years.

12. However, what is clear is  that  this  application  was  made  on  28th
    February 2013 and thus the application was made after 9th July 2012 and
    would be considered under paragraph 276ADE.

13. Recorded in the notice of appeal is that the  appellant  had  initially
    instructed McLee & Co Solicitors based in Cuthbert  Street,  London  in
    March 2012 to submit a  SET(O)  application  on  the  basis  of  having
    completed fourteen years' unlawful residence in the UK. It was  claimed
    that  the  solicitors  were  intervened  by  the  Solicitor  Regulatory
    Authority (SRA) and were  closed  down.   Following  such  closure  the
    appellant had had to chase up the progress of his case only to discover
    that his application was not submitted prior to the July  2012  changes
    to the Immigration Rules.  As this was a failure on  the  part  of  his
    previous solicitors it was stated that  the  appellant  should  not  be
    punished for their failure.

14. At paragraph 121 the judge turned to  the  letter  said  to  have  been
    forwarded from McLee &  Co  Solicitors.   She  recorded  that  she  had
    received a letter dated 25th March 2014 from Miss Sreeraman at the Home
    Office who declared that

         "As agreed at the substantive appeal hearing  I  have  checked  the
         Home Office file to establish whether the letter from  McLee  &  Co
         Solicitors has been  retained on the  file.   Unfortunately  I  was
         unable to locate any letters from McLee & Co Solicitors on the Home
         Office file. I have also notified M&K Solicitors that I  have  been
         unable to locate the letter."

15. It was upon this letter that the appellant rested his  claim  that  the
    judge should have considered his appeal outside the  Immigration  Rules
    and it was this letter showing that the appellant had attempted to make
    an application  on  fourteen  year  rule  prior  to  a  change  in  the
    Immigration Rules and that had it  not  been  for  the  fact  that  his
    solicitors had been intervened he would have  been  successful.   As  a
    result the appellant claims he was seriously prejudiced.

16. Further to BT (Nepal) there can be no findings made on the  solicitors'
    alleged misconduct until a complaint has been  made to  the  regulatory
    body. No evidence was produced to the judge that any  formal  complaint
    had been made to the regulatory body by the appellant and the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal  was  not  that  a  complaint  had  been
    registered.

17. Perhaps more surprising is the fact that not only did the  Home  Office
    not have the letter but even though it was stated a copy of the  letter
    from McLee & Co was recorded as having  been  sent  by  Maliks  &  Khan
    Solicitors with the application, there was no copy in their papers  and
    no copy on their file in support of an allegation that there  had  been
    negligence by the solicitors.

18. Mr Doyle stated that the appellant was not in  a  position  to  file  a
    complaint in the summer of 2011 but it was open  to  the  appellant  to
    make investigations at the time as to why the solicitors had not  filed
    any application and I note that no action was taken  by  the  appellant
    until the application was lodged by Maliks &  Khan  solicitors  in  the
    following year. Even if the solicitors  had  been  intervened,  in  the
    absence of such a  finding  that  there  has  been  negligence  by  the
    solicitors, and without any complaint made  by  the  appellant  to  the
    regulatory body before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, I see no evidence
    to support the contention that the appellant made  an  application  for
    leave to remain  prior to July 2012.

19. The judge made no error therefore in dismissing the appeal  further  to
    the Immigration  Rules  and  she  made  a  lengthy  assessment  of  the
    evidence.  Despite  the  fact  that  she  did  not  identify  that  the
    appellant needed to show either 14 or 20 years residence, I do not find
    that this would have made a material difference to the outcome  as  she
    found that he had not shown he had been in the UK for 14 years.

20. The judge went through the  evidence  at  paragraphs  106  to  122  and
    explained at paragraph 109 why she considered as  he  had  no  evidence
    that he had ever experienced any difficulties in using his bank account
    he could not in 2010, when putting  together  his  documentation,  have
    gone to his bank and obtained further statements prior to 2008.

21. The judge also explained in detail at paragraph 110 as to why she found
    him evasive about the means in which he had obtained his passport .

22. At [112] the judge also  gave  reasons  as  to  why  she  rejected  the
    evidence of Miss Abbani as the appellant was "unable  to  say  anything
    about Miss Abbani other than he had  visited  her  at  her  home".   At
    paragraph 113 the judge found again with Miss  Kahyleigh  Doherty  that
    there was no identity document accompanying the letter  and  like  Miss
    Abbani she did not attend the hearing.

23. Overall the judge gave reasons throughout her determination as  to  why
    she rejected the appellant's evidence.

24. On the appellant's own evidence he claims to have  entered  the  UK  on
    15th February 1998 and thus he had not lived continuously in the UK for
    at least twenty years irrespective of whether his  clamed  arrival  was
    accepted or not.  This the  judge  recorded  at  paragraph  11  of  the
    determination.

25. The appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules and  it  is
    under paragraph 276ADE that it falls to be  considered.

26. However, I  can accept that there is limited reasoning in  relation  to
    the Article 8 consideration and this is an error of law.  The appellant
    has some private life in respect of his private life and this  has  not
    been addressed. It is  not  clear  that  the  judge  engaged  with  the
    evidence in relation to any form of  Article  8  assessment  or  indeed
    addressed her mind as  to  whether  the  matter  should  be  considered
    outside the Immigration Rules.  Further to MM Lebanon and Others  R  on
    the Application of the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EW Civ I find that findings as to the appellant's  private  life
    and  an article 8 assessment  are  required.   I  therefore  remit  the
    matter to the First Tier Tribunal for consideration of  the  appeal  in
    relation to Article 8 only.

27. There is a material error in this determination in respect of Article 8
    only and the matter should be remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,
    because of the nature and extent of the consideration required, that is
    a full engagement with the evidence  in  respect  of  Article  8.   The
    judge's findings are preserved to the extent they are set  out  (106  -
    121).  It is open to the appellant to produce any further  evidence  on
    which he intends to rely.



Signed                                  Date 23rd October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


