

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49649/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 30 June 2014                               |On 25 July 2014              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE E B GRANT

                                   Between

                         MRS AYODELE BEATRICE YUSSUF
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Akindemi of Dillex Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. On 15 November 2013 the appellant arrived at Heathrow  TN4  and  was
       refused leave to enter but given temporary  admission  and  informed
       that she was required to attend Heathrow TN4 for a flight to Nigeria
       on 2 December 2013 and on 16 November 2013  the appellant's leave to
       enter was cancelled by the respondent in the following  terms:  "You
       were given entry clearance to enter the UK on 23/05/2012  but  I  am
       satisfied that false representations were employed or material facts
       were not disclosed for the purpose of granting  leave...I  therefore
       cancel your continuing leave....This is because  an  endorsement  in
       your passport purports to show that you arrived back in  Nigeria  on
       4th July 2011 after having arrived in the UK on the 13th June  2011.
       However Home Office records show that you didn't in fact arrive back
       in Nigeria until 11th November 2011. You were  unable  to  give  any
       explanation as to why the Nigerian Entry stamp dated 4th  July  2011
       is in your passport. I am therefore satisfied  that  you  have  used
       deception in order to facilitate your entry into the United Kingdom.
       This means any future applications for entry clearance or  leave  to
       enter the UK you make will be refused under paragraph  320  (7b)  of
       the Immigration Rules... for a period of one year from the  date  on
       which you leave the UK following this refusal"


    2. The appellant's appeal against cancellation of her leave  was  heard
       by FTTJ  NMK  Lawrence  on  the  papers  on  12  March  2014.  In  a
       determination promulgated on 27 March 2014 the judge found that  the
       appellant accepted that the  entry  on  her  passport  is  an  error
       committed by a Nigerian Immigration Officer. The appellant submitted
       a letter from the Nigerian Immigration Service to UKBA purporting to
       explain the mistake  in  the  entry.  The  letter  stated  that  the
       appellant had landed in Nigeria on 11 July 2013 and  an  Immigration
       Officer erroneously endorsed  the  passport  showing  the  appellant
       landed there on 11 November 2013. "I am not  satisfied,  however  an
       Immigration  Officer  may  be  incompetent,  it  cannot  extend   to
       endorsing a passport 4 months hence.  There  is  a  vast  difference
       between 4th of July 2011 (even expressed as 4.7.11 or 04.07.2011 and
       11th of November 2011 (even expressed as 11.11.11 or 11.11.2011). It
       simply does not make sense. The dates in numerals in whatever format
       do not match. Therefore I rule out any mistake on anyone's part. The
       differences in the dates is a deliberate attempt by the appellant or
       at her instigation to give a false impression she left the UK on  11
       July 2011 when in actual fact she left on 11th of November  2011.  I
       do not attach any weight to this letter. I  do  not  find  that  the
       appellant has discharged the evidential burden"


    3. The appellant applied for permission to appeal. On 8 May  2014  FTTJ
       PJM Hollingworth granted  permission  to  appeal  in  the  following
       terms: " An arguable error of law has arisen since a  concession  as
       to an error does not lead to a  conclusion  of  deliberate  falsity.
       There are inadequate findings of fact in relation to a  letter  from
       the Nigerian Immigration Services referred to in the application and
       in the determination"

    4.  Thus  the  matter  came  before  me  to   determine   whether   the
       determination contains an error of law.

    5. For the appellant Mr Akinyemi relied upon the grounds set out in the
       application for permission to appeal.  He relied upon  his  skeleton
       argument and expanded his argument to say that there was no way  the
       stamp would have been placed in  the  appellant's  passport  if  not
       placed there by the Nigerian authorities.   He  submitted  that  the
       later date did not show any breach of the Immigration Rules  because
       at all times his client left the United Kingdom within six months as
       required by the Immigration Rules.

    6. Mr Jarvis for the respondent submitted there was  no  error  in  the
       determination.  Once the respondent had highlighted the reasons  for
       the cancellation of leave which because a stamp in the passport  did
       not match the appellant's immigration history the burden  passed  to
       the appellant to rebut. She elected to have a hearing on the papers.
       The judge had to make his findings on what was before him.   It  can
       be seen the judge did not accept the letter was a reliable  document
       and he could not accept that an Immigration Officer would make  such
       a significant mistake by stamping a date  which  bore  no  numerical
       relation to the date the appellant said  she  returned  to  Nigeria.
       There had been no explanation as to how a  letter  address  to  UKBA
       fell into the hands of the appellant to enable her  to  produce  it.
       This is a case where the appellant disagrees with  the  findings  of
       the judge but could not provide any proper evidence of  rebuttal  to
       the judge. She provided no explanation as to how  she  obtained  the
       letter addressed to UKBA.

    7. As an aside Mr Jarvis said that if I were to find there was an error
       of law the respondent would like additional time for the listing  of
       the appeal because concerns have now been raised about another stamp
       in her passport.


    Decision

    8. Contrary to what is submitted in the grounds the judge has not erred
       in law in his determination. The judge has  given  adequate  reasons
       for attaching  little  weight  to  the  purported  letter  from  the
       Nigerian authorities. The weight to be attached to the document  was
       properly a matter for the judge and a  submission  that  too  little
       weight was attached to it cannot establish  any  arguable  error  of
       law.


    9. The FTTJ was not assisted by the choice of the appellant to  request
       a hearing on the papers. She did not instruct a  representative  and
       the FTTJ was faced with her explanation which was based on a  letter
       purportedly from the Nigerian authorities. There was no  explanation
       as to how this letter had come to be in the  appellant's  possession
       and, on the face of it, the letter raised the concerns mentioned  by
       the FTTJ.

   10. An explanation as to how she  came  by  that  letter  has  now  been
       provided with the application for leave to  appeal.  It  is  not  an
       error of law to fail to take account of matters  not  placed  before
       the  judge.  The  explanation  as  to  how  a  document  purportedly
       addressed to  UKBA  should  have  been  in  the  possession  of  the
       appellant should have been  put  before  the  judge  at  the  appeal
       hearing.

   11. Overall the  judge  in  a  well  reasoned  determination  has  given
       adequate findings for finding that the appellant  had  not  rebutted
       the evidence adduced by the respondent and I find that  he  did  not
       err in law.

          Conclusions:

      The determination contains no arguable error of law.
      I uphold the determination.


                               Signed
                                   7 July 2014




                                Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
