
                                    [pic]
IAC-fH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49226/2014
                                                               IA/49235/2014
                                                               IA/49234/2014
                                                               IA/49236/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2016                    |On 1 September 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                        Sumsuz [z] (FIRST Appellant)
                         DIL [U] (SECOND Appellant)
                          [M B Z] (THIRD Appellant)
                         [M M Z] (FOURTH Appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Khosla, instructed by D J Webb & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is my decision on the re-making of these linked appeals.

 2. By a decision promulgated on 23 June 2016  following  a  hearing  on  6
    June, I concluded that the First-tier Tribunal had materially erred  in
    law and I set aside its decision (see Annex 1).

 3. In essence I found that the First-tier Tribunal should  have  at  least
    considered the first Appellant's claim that despite failing to  satisfy
    paragraph 245FD of the Immigration Rules  (the  Rules)  he  nonetheless
    satisfied paragraph 245ED.  In addition, I found that the  judge  erred
    in his assessment of Article 8.  Following the error of law  hearing  I
    issued directions to the parties.  The  Appellants  were  to  file  any
    further evidence relied upon  and  the  Respondent  was  to  provide  a
    written position statement setting out her assessment of  the  evidence
    submitted by the first Appellant with his application of 27  June  2014
    in the context of paragraph 245ED of the Rules and her consideration of
    Article 8 in respect of all of the Appellants, with  particular  regard
    to the best interests and wellbeing of the third and fourth Appellants.



 4. Under a covering letter dated 6 July 2016  a  supplementary  bundle  of
    evidence was provided by the Appellants.  That  is  now  on  file.   In
    respect of the Respondent's written position statement, one was as  far
    as I can tell served  on  the  Appellants  and  filed  with  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 19 August 2016.  The statement is of that same date.

The hearing before me

 5. At the outset of the hearing I confirmed that both representatives were
    in possession of all the relevant evidence.  Mr Khosla informed me that
    he had only received the Respondent's written  position  statement  the
    day before, but notwithstanding this he did not  seek  an  adjournment.
    It was agreed by both representatives that the core issue in respect of
    paragraph 245ED of the Rules was whether or not  a  general  ground  of
    refusal applied to the first Appellant, namely paragraph 322(5) of  the
    Rules, this being the sole basis for the Respondent's  contention  that
    paragraph 245ED could not be satisfied (see page 2  of  that  statement
    under the subheading 'Assessment').

 6. Both representatives also confirmed that because of  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decisions under appeal (that being 13 November 2014) these
    appeals all fell within  the  old  appeal  regime  (i.e.  pre-2014  Act
    amendments).  Therefore it  was  agreed  that  I  had  jurisdiction  to
    substitute my own discretion for that of the Respondent in relation  to
    paragraph 322(5) of the Rules, that being a  discretionary  ground  for
    refusal (see section  86(3)(b)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, as it stood before the relevant changes).

 7. Mr Khosla provided me with the Respondent's  guidance  on  the  general
    grounds of refusal (v26.0, dated 19 April 2016).   He  referred  me  to
    page 31 of the guidance in which it is stated that  a  caseworker  must
    only take into account information which is new and was  not  known  to
    the Home Office at the  time  of  any  previous  decision.   Mr  Khosla
    submitted that in her original decision the Respondent had  not  relied
    on paragraph 322(5), but rather 322(1C).  He further submitted that the
    written position statement constituted a "new decision".  Therefore the
    Respondent should be precluded from seeking to rely on paragraph 322(5)
    now.  He submitted that in  seeking  to  rely  on  this  provision  the
    Respondent  was  acting  contrary   to   her   own   policy   guidance.
    Alternatively, Mr Khosla submitted that if the Respondent was  entitled
    to rely on this provision I should exercise my own  discretion  in  the
    first Appellant's favour.  He asked me to look at the circumstances  of
    the first Appellant's case in the round.  In particular  he  relied  on
    the fact that the misconduct relied upon by the Respondent related to a
    caution only, a caution that  is  due  to  lapse  the  day  after  this
    hearing.  There was no other adverse conduct  by  the  first  Appellant
    whilst in the United Kingdom.

 8. Mr Khosla asked me to look at the circumstances of  the  two  children,
    their length of time in the United Kingdom and  their  best  interests.
    There were no strong countervailing factors in this  case.   Mr  Khosla
    also referred me to pages 36 and 41 of the  Respondent's  guidance  and
    submitted that the factors set out there were far  removed  from  those
    pertaining to the first Appellant's case.

 9. Mr Whitwell submitted that the written position statement was not a new
    decision but a supplementary reasons letter only.   He  submitted  that
    paragraph 322(5) of the Rules had not been  considered  before  because
    there was no need to as paragraph 322(1C) had applied in respect of the
    application originally made to  the  Respondent.   In  respect  of  the
    guidance it was non-exhaustive and deliberately couched in wide  terms.
    The caution related to an assault on the first Appellant's daughter and
    in all the circumstances I  should  agree  with  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent not to exercise discretion in the first Appellant's favour.

10. In reply Mr Khosla accepted that the guidance was indeed guidance  only
    but he emphasised the fact that the  first  Appellant's  case  was  not
    similar in any way to the matters set out therein.

11. In respect  of  the  Article  8  claim  both  representatives  were  in
    agreement that if I decided in the first Appellant's favour in  respect
    of the paragraph 245ED issue I  need  not  go  on  and  consider  human
    rights.  However, if it was necessary to deal with Article 8  I  should
    consider the claims outside of the Rules and in light of  Section  117B
    of the 2002 Act.

12. In respect of the reasonableness  test,  I  was  urged  to  follow  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

Re-making the decision in respect of the Rules

13. In re-making my decision I have had regard to the Appellant's  original
    bundle which was before the First-tier Tribunal, indexed and  paginated
    1 to 73.  In addition I have had regard  to  the  supplementary  bundle
    referred to previously.  The first Appellant attended the  hearing  but
    there was no request by Mr Whitwell to ask any questions of him.  There
    has been no specific  challenge  to  the  credibility  of  any  of  the
    evidence contained in the two bundles before me.  I have also of course
    had regard to the Respondent's bundle and to the guidance  provided  to
    me today.

14. In light of  the  Respondent's  position  on  the  credibility  of  the
    evidence and having considered that evidence  for  myself,  I  have  no
    hesitation in finding it to be wholly reliable.

15. It is quite clear from the Respondent's written position paper that the
    sole basis for concluding that  the  first  Appellant  could  not  meet
    paragraph 245ED of the Rules is that subparagraph (a)  applies,  namely
    that the application fell to be refused because a  general  ground  for
    refusal applied, specifically paragraph 322(5).  It  is  accepted  that
    all other requirements of paragraph 245ED are met.  Paragraph 322(5) of
    the Rules is a discretionary ground for refusal. It reads as follows:

         "(5) the undesirability  of  permitting  the  person  concerned  to
         remain in the United Kingdom in the light of his conduct (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph  322(1C),  character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security"

16. The burden showing that it applies to the first  Appellant  rests  with
    the Respondent.

17. The sole basis provided  by  the  Respondent  for  the  application  of
    paragraph 322(5) is the caution he  received  on  27  August  2014  for
    common assault.  This assault related to a chastisement  of  his  older
    daughter, the third Appellant.  The fact of the caution is accepted  by
    the first Appellant.  Having had regard to all of the  evidence  before
    me and the particular circumstances of this case I find that  I  should
    substitute my own discretion for that of the Respondent's and  exercise
    it in favour of the first Appellant.  My reasons  for  this  conclusion
    are as follows.

18. First, I reject the argument put forward by Mr Khosla that the  written
    position statement constitutes  a  "new  decision".   The  document  is
    simply a position statement as is made clear in my directions from  the
    previous hearing. It amounts to no more than  a  supplementary  reasons
    letter, as submitted by Mr Whitwell. It was not a new  decision  on  an
    application that  had  been  formally  varied  prior  to  the  original
    decision. Therefore, the Respondent is entitled on the face  of  it  to
    rely on paragraph 322(5) without contravening that  particular  element
    of her own guidance.

19. Second, whilst not seeking to excuse the conduct of the first Appellant
    in respect of the relevant offence, it is right to say that it resulted
    in a caution only.  I fully accept the first Appellant's  own  evidence
    contained in his two witness statements that he bitterly  regrets  what
    he did, appreciates that it was entirely wrong and I accept  that  such
    behaviour is highly unlikely to occur in the  future.   It  is  not  in
    dispute that there has been no other misconduct by the first  Appellant
    whatsoever in respect of his time  in  the  United  Kingdom  or  indeed
    elsewhere.

20. Third, and importantly, I have regard to the  statement  of  the  third
    Appellant herself contained in the first Appellant's bundle at page 14.
     She states therein that she  accepted  that  she  had  been  rude  and
    disrespectful to her father and in that sense her perception  was  that
    she had provoked her father's action.  She expresses the  thought  that
    she felt responsible for all of the applications being refused  because
    of what her father did.  She speaks of her behaviour  being  difficult,
    as that of a teenager often is.  She also acknowledges  the  fact  that
    her father clearly accepts that what he did was  in  any  event  wholly
    wrong.  It  is  entirely  clear  from  this  evidence  that  the  first
    Appellant and his daughter are wholly reconciled.  For the avoidance of
    any doubt whatsoever, my consideration of this evidence  has  certainly
    not involved any sense of the third Appellant having 'asked for it'.

21. Fourth, I have of course considered  other  elements  of  the  guidance
    document.  It is obvious that guidance is what  it  says  it  is:  just
    guidance.  It represents a  non-exhaustive  set  of  circumstances  and
    factors to be taken into account by case workers; so to that extent the
    fact that it does not specifically cover the same sort of circumstances
    pertaining to the current appeal  of  the  first  Appellant  it  is  of
    somewhat limited value in respect of the  first  Appellant's  argument.
    However, it is, I find, of some relevance  that  the  matters  set  out
    generally in this guidance (relating  to  criminal  activity,  possible
    exclusion under Article 1F of the Refugee  Convention  and  such  like)
    are, as pointed out by Mr Khosla,  very  far  removed  from  the  first
    Appellant's own conduct.

22. Fifth, and finally, whilst the reasons set out above are sufficient  to
    underpin my conclusion on the exercise of discretion, I  have  for  the
    sake of completeness also taken into account the circumstances  of  the
    children.  They have been in this country for a significant  period  of
    time, both over seven years.  Both of them are  settled  in  education,
    both have spent significant periods of  their  lives  beyond  the  very
    youngest of ages, and neither have any meaningful links with Bangladesh
    (the third Appellant having left there aged just six  months,  and  the
    fourth being born in the United Kingdom).

23. Given my conclusions as to the exercise of discretion  under  paragraph
    322(5) and the fact that  the  Respondent  has  after  considering  the
    evidence submitted with the original application in  detail,  concluded
    that all other aspects of paragraph 245ED were satisfied, I  find  that
    the first Appellant succeeds under the Rules in relation  to  paragraph
    245ED.  In light of that conclusion the other  three  Appellants  would
    also succeed as dependants of the first Appellant.

24. The appeals are all allowed under the Rules.

25. I have reflected on whether to  go  on  and  consider  the  appeals  on
    Article 8 grounds as well. Although the representatives took  the  view
    that I need not, section 86 of the 2002 Act does mandate me to consider
    all issues. Therefore, in the alternative  to  my  primary  conclusions
    under the Rules, I assess the Article 8 claims as follows.

26. First, none of the Appellants can  succeed  under  the  Rules  as  they
    relate to Article 8. The adults clearly could not show very significant
    obstacles to reintegration into Bangladeshi society as at the  date  of
    their applications in 2014. Appendix FM cannot  assist  the  first  and
    second Appellants because of their status and the fact that  they  live
    together with their children as a single family  unit.  The  third  and
    fourth Appellants had not been in the United Kingdom for seven years as
    at the date of applications, and so paragraph  276ADE(1)(iv)  does  not
    apply.

27. Second, I look outside of the Rules. There is obviously family life  as
    between all of the Appellants. The first and second Appellants  have  a
    genuine and parental relationship with their children. They  all  enjoy
    separate private lives as well, given the length of time here  and  the
    ties they have clearly established.

28. Third, removal from the United Kingdom as a family unit would mean that
    there would not be any interference  with  the  family  life.  However,
    removal  would  clearly  interference  with  the  private  lives  to  a
    sufficiently serious extent.

29. Fourth, the Respondent's decisions were in accordance with the law  and
    pursued a legitimate aim.

30. Fifth, I assess proportionality in light of the  section  117B  factors
    and all other relevant matters.

31. As section 117B(6) has not been  confirmed  as  being  a  free-standing
    provision (see MA (Pakistan), at paragraphs  17-20),  I  turn  to  this
    first.

32. I find that the best interests of the third and fourth  Appellants  are
    to be assessed  with  reference  to  them  alone.  I  find  that  these
    interests lie in the children remaining with their parents and also  in
    remaining in the United Kingdom. They have  both  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for eight years now. On the evidence before me  they  are  very
    well settle, both socially and educationally. The  third  Appellant  is
    midway through her A-Levels; the fourth is about to  start  his  second
    year at secondary school. Neither have any experience of Bangladesh.  A
    move there now would be highly disruptive.

33. The next question is whether removal would be reasonable. This  is  not
    determined by the best interests conclusion, although that is a  highly
    significant matter.

34. The public interest lies in maintaining effective immigration  control:
    this is a weighty factor in the Respondent's favour. On the basis  that
    the Appellants cannot satisfy the Rules, this counts against them all.

35. All of the Appellants speak very good English.  There  are  and  always
    have been a financially self-sufficient family. I take into account the
    fact that the children are being educated at public expense.

36. The Appellants have always been in the United Kingdom lawfully,  albeit
    with limited  (and  therefore  precarious)  leave.  I  take  this  into
    account, as it reduces the weight attributable to private life. This in
    turn feeds into the assessment of reasonableness.

37. I have  considered  the  first  Appellant's  caution  earlier  in  this
    decision. I refer back to what I have said already. I take the fact  of
    the caution into account, but its relevance is significantly  mitigated
    by the facts.

38. The children have now been in the United Kingdom some  way  beyond  the
    seven year threshold. The third Appellant has spent almost half of  her
    life here, including the all-important  formative  teenage  years.  The
    fourth Appellant has spent his entire life here. As stated  previously,
    neither have any knowledge of Bangladesh.

39. Having weighed up the various factors and in light of the  guidance  in
    MA (Pakistan), I conclude that it would not be reasonable to expect the
    third and fourth Appellants to leave the United Kingdom. Although there
    are certainly matters counting against the Appellants,  there  are  not
    "powerful reasons".

40. Therefore, the appeals of the first and seconds Appellants are  allowed
    on the basis that section 117B(6) is  satisfied.  The  appeals  of  the
    third and fourth Appellants are allowed in line with this  result.  Put
    another way, it would be unreasonable and  disproportionate  to  remove
    the children and so they succeed under Article 8 in thier own right.




Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I re-make the decision by allowing the appeals under the  Immigration  Rules
and on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 31 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee  award  and  have  decided  to  make  no  fee
awards. This is because the original applications  made  to  the  Respondent
were based upon a different Rule to that under  which  the  Appellants  have
ultimately succeeded on appeal.



Signed                                  Date: 31 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



Annex 1: The error of law decision

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49226/2014
                                                               IA/49235/2014
                                                               IA/49234/2014
                                                               IA/49236/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2016                       |On 23 June 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between


                        SUMSUZ [Z] (FIRST APPELLANT)
                         DIL [U] (SECOND APPELLANT)
                          [M B Z] (THIRD APPELLANT)
                         [M M Z] (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr R Khosla, Solicitor from D J Webb and Co
For the Respondent:    Ms P Hastings, Senior Home Officer Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are all Bangladeshi  nationals.  The  first  and  second
    Appellants are the parents of the third and fourth.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge N M K Lawrence (the judge), promulgated on 30  September
    2015, in which he dismissed their appeals on all grounds. Those appeals
    were against the Respondent's decisions of 13 November  2014,  refusing
    to vary their leave to remain  and  to  remove  them  from  the  United
    Kingdom under section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
    2006.

 3. The Respondent's decision stemmed from applications  made  on  27  June
    2014 in which the first Appellant sought indefinite leave to remain  as
    a Tier 1 Investor under the Points-Based  System  (PBS).  The  relevant
    provisions of the Rules were paragraphs 245EF in respect of  the  first
    Appellant and paragraph 319E for the others (all being his dependents).



 4. On 27 August 2014 the first Appellant received  a  caution  for  common
    assault. When considering his application,  the  fact  of  the  caution
    triggered  paragraph  322(1C)(iv)  of  the  Rules,  because  the  first
    Appellant was seeking indefinite leave to remain and the caution  would
    not have become spent until August 2016. As a result  of  this  general
    ground of refusal, the first Appellant's application fell to be refused
    by virtue of paragraph 245EF(b). As a result of this, the  applications
    of the other Appellants were also refused.

 5. When appealing, both the grounds  and  response  to  the  statement  of
    additional grounds assert that he could rely on  an  alternative  route
    for succeeding in his case, namely paragraph 245ED of the  Rules.  This
    was because this particular provision did not engage paragraph 322(1C).
    Article 8 was also raised, as the third and fourth Appellant's had been
    in the United Kingdom for a considerable period of time.

The judge's decision

 6. The judge notes the acceptance by  the  first  Appellant  that  he  had
    indeed received a  caution  for  the  offence  in  question,  and  that
    paragraph 322(1C)(iv) therefore precluded success  of  the  application
    for indefinite leave to remain under paragraph 245EF.

 7. He considers the  first  Appellant's  arguments  as  to  the  potential
    application of paragraph 245ED (paragraphs 9-13 of his decision). It is
    said on several occasions that success under this argument  would  lead
    to the circumvention of the "will of Parliament". In  paragraph  13  he
    states that  the  approach  urged  by  the  first  Appellant  would  be
    "unobjectionable, but it invites the Tribunal to circumvent the will of
    Parliament as expressed in para 245EF."

 8. The judge felt unable to accede to the first Appellant's submission.

 9. In respect of the Article 8 claim, there is fairly  lengthy  recitation
    of case-law, particularly in relation to the children  (paragraphs  14-
    22). The headnote of the decision in Azimi-Moayed and Others (decisions
    affecting children - onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC) is used as
    a framework for his assessment of the children's claims. He notes  that
    both children have been here since 2008. It is  said  that  the  school
    systems in Bangladesh and the United Kingdom are "the  same",  but  the
    judge goes onto say that the systems are "not  too  similar."  Reliance
    was placed on the ability of children to adapt when they went to Russia
    some years ago, and then to the United Kingdom. It is said  that  there
    would not be a "detrimental wrench" of the children were to  return  to
    Bangladesh now. The children went home from school and then spent  time
    with their parents at home: they were not therefore "divorced from  the
    influence of their parents". They would have their parents if  returned
    to Bangladesh.

10. In respect of the first and second Appellant's, the  judge  found  that
    they could not satisfy paragraph 276ADE(vi). Outside of the  Rules,  it
    is  said  that  removal  would  not  constitute  an  interference  with
    protected rights, or that it would be disproportionate.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

11. The  grounds  contend  at  some  length  that  the  judge  should  have
    considered the paragraph 245ED issue in substance and that he erred  in
    his assessment of the Article 8 claims.

12. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce  on  14
    April 2016. She was of the view that paragraphs A34-34A  of  the  Rules
    may render the effect of SZ (applicable immigration  rules)  Bangladesh
    [2007] UKAIT 00037 redundant. However, it was arguable that  the  judge
    had got the Article 8 assessment wrong.

The hearing before me

13. Mr Khosla submitted that SZ and AS (Afghanistan) [2009] EWCA  Civ  1076
    remained good  law.  There  was  no  problem  here  with  post-decision
    evidence from the Appellant because he was relying on the same evidence
    as had been submitted with the application itself. An application  form
    itself was not new evidence (if such a form were requited).

14. In respect of Article 8, he accepted that paragraph 276ADE(iv) did  not
    apply to the children because they had not been in the  United  Kingdom
    for seven years continuously as at the date the applications were made.
    However, he relied on the grounds as regards errors in  the  assessment
    of Article 8 in general.

15. Ms Hastings relied on the rule 24 response and submitted that because a
    different form was required for an application  for  further  leave  to
    remain,  this  constituted  new  evidence  and  therefore  section  85A
    applied. She relied on the decision in Ali (s.120 -  PBS)  [2012]  UKUT
    00368 (IAC). In respect of the Article 8 point, Ms Hastings  noted  the
    fact that the family were prosperous, the  children  had  adapted  when
    they went to Russia, and that the caution was relevant  to  the  public
    interest.

Decision on error of law

Ground 1: the paragraph 245ED issue

16. I find that the judge  did  materially  err  in  law  by  declining  to
    consider  the  first  Appellant's  argument  on  paragraph   245ED   in
    substance.

17. In refusing the first Appellant's application for indefinite  leave  to
    remain it is clear from the Respondent's reasons letter that  the  sole
    basis for doing so was the fact  of  the  caution  and  the  consequent
    applicability of paragraph 322(1C)  to  paragraph  245EF(b).  No  other
    point was taken against the first Appellant.

18. In the notice of appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  it  was  asserted
    both in the 'primary'  grounds  and  in  the  statement  of  additional
    grounds that the first Appellant was relying on  an  alternative  route
    for success under paragraph 245ED.

19. Paragraph 245ED is in identical terms to paragraph 245EF in respect  of
    the number of  points  required.  Both  provisions  relate  to  Tier  1
    Investors. The only material differences are the nature of the leave to
    be granted if the requirements are met, the need to show that a Life in
    the UK test had been  completed  (it  had  been),  and  that  paragraph
    322(1C) bites on paragraph 245EF, but not on paragraph 245ED.

20. I conclude that in the circumstances of this particular case, the first
    Appellant was entitled to make this argument, and that the judge should
    have go on and considered it on the merits rather than  simply  stating
    that to do so would contravene the will of Parliament. My  reasons  for
    this conclusion are as follows.

21. First, I note the fact that SZ and AS (Afghanistan) were not  concerned
    with PBS scenarios. However, in my view both remain  sound  as  regards
    the principle that in appropriate case (in particular where a statement
    of additional grounds has been served and the relevant argument  raised
    therein), the First-tier Tribunal should  consider  the  issue  on  its
    merits. The First-tier Tribunal can, and often is, a primary  decision-
    maker in this respect.

22. Second, there is  nothing  necessarily  inconsistent  as  between  this
    principle and the decision in Ali. Ali highlights  the  application  of
    section 85A of  the  2002  Act  to  PBS  cases  and  the  inability  of
    appellants to seek to  introduce  new  evidence  on  appeal,  including
    through responses to section 120 notices. Section 120 notices cannot be
    used as a backdoor means of levering in fresh  evidence.  However,  the
    present case provides a good example, in my view, of how  the  case-law
    referred to above sits relatively comfortably together. Here, the first
    Appellant was not seeking to rely on any post-application evidence:  he
    was simply asserting that  the  evidence  he  had  submitted  with  his
    application met all the requirements of a different,  albeit  obviously
    connected, Rule, namely paragraph 245ED. This  assertion  had,  on  its
    face, real merit. The fact of  the  caution  was  only  relevant  to  a
    consideration of the application for indefinite leave to  remain  under
    paragraph  245EF.  Paragraph  322(1C)  would  not  have  applied  to  a
    consideration of paragraph 245ED.

23. Third, I do not see any merit in Ms  Hastings'  argument  that  an  FLR
    application form was either required, or that it would constitute  'new
    evidence'. The point is that if the First-tier Tribunal should consider
    a possible alternative route under the Rules, the presence  or  absence
    of the appropriate form is immaterial.

24. Fourth, in this case, there was no question of the judge being required
    to  hunt  around  for  himself  seeking  to  decipher  which,  if  any,
    alternative Rules may apply to  the  first  Appellant.  The  particular
    provision relied upon had been stated in the notice of appeal. In  that
    sense, it was clear.

25. Fifth, the fact that the Respondent had not actually awarded points  to
    the first Appellant because of the basis of refusal (paragraph 322(1C))
    did not of itself mean that the judge was precluded from making his own
    decision on the evidence  submitted  with  the  application.  He  would
    simply have been in the position of a primary decision-maker.

26. Sixth, the reason provided by the judge for  failing  to  consider  the
    first Appellant's argument on its merits was in my view inadequate.  It
    may have appeared as though the first Appellant was  seeking  to  avoid
    the fact of the  caution.  However,  this  burden  prevented  him  from
    obtaining indefinite leave, and this itself  represented  the  will  of
    Parliament, as reflected in the Rules.

27. Seventh, paragraphs A34-34A of the  Rules  did  not  defeat  the  first
    Appellant's case because the First-tier Tribunal can still be a primary
    decision-maker. In a case such as the present, this can still occur  in
    the context of the PBS.

28. For all of these reasons, the judge erred. It was a material  error  as
    the first Appellant's argument had a realistic prospect of succeeding.

Ground 2: the Article 8 issue

29. I conclude that the judge materially erred in his consideration of  the
    Article 8 claims relating to the two children in particular.

30. I would say first that the judge was in fact wrong to  have  considered
    the children's'  claims  under  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  because  of  the
    chronology of events. At the time the applications  were  made  (on  27
    June 2014) they had not been in the  United  Kingdom  continuously  for
    seven years, having arrived in 2008. This would not  necessarily  be  a
    material error, though.

31. In terms of the substance of his consideration of the  claims,  I  find
    that the following material errors have been committed.

32. First, it is, with respect, very difficult to see where the  judge  has
    in fact stated a conclusion, based on all relevant factors, as to  what
    the children's best interests actually were. In cases  such  as  these,
    the mere fact that the family would be removed together is not, without
    a clear and detailed explanation, sufficient to found a conclusion that
    the best interests have no scope beyond that.

33. Second, I cannot see how or why the judge reached the  conclusion  that
    the Bangladeshi educational system was "the same" as that in the United
    Kingdom.

34. Third, at the date of the hearing before the judge the third and fourth
    Appellants had been in this country for over  seven  years.  The  older
    child had been here since the age of nine, and the younger since he was
    almost four. In view of the guidance offered in  Azimi-Moayed  (and  of
    course cited by the judge at length)  and  other  cases,  there  is  an
    inadequacy here of consideration and reasoning  as  to  the  degree  of
    integration  into  life  in  the  United  Kingdom  (educationally   and
    socially), and the impact of being removed on the  children.  In  fact,
    there is very little by way  of  fact-finding  as  to  the  children's'
    circumstances in general. For example, there is nothing on the possible
    implications of the third Appellant being taken  out  of  her  A-Levels
    (which had just begun at the relevant time)  or  the  fourth  Appellant
    having to leave this country immediately  before  moving  into  Year  7
    (secondary school). Both children were on the face of it  at  important
    stages in their educational lives.

35. Fourth, is right that Russia is mentioned by the judge. However, I  can
    see no adequate assessment  of  the  undisputed  fact  that  the  third
    Appellant left Bangladesh for Russia aged just six months and had never
    lived in the country of her birth since. The fourth Appellant was  born
    in the United Kingdom during a period of residency  here  between  2003
    and 2005. He has never  lived  in  Bangladesh.  Neither  of  these  two
    seemingly important matters have been adequately considered.

36. Fifth, as Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce says in the grant  of  permission,
    even if the judge was correct not to have permitted the first Appellant
    to succeed under paragraph 245ED, the satisfaction  of  an  alternative
    route under the Rules was, in principle, relevant to the assessment  of
    the Article 8 claims.

37. Sixth, in respect of the assessment outside the Rules it was simply not
    open to he judge to properly  conclude  that  the  Appellants'  removal
    would not even constitute an interference with  any  of  their  private
    lives.

38.  Seventh,  the  assessment  of  proportionality  is  brief  and  wholly
    unreasoned. Relevant factors have been left out. It appears  as  though
    the judge has in effect  erroneously  treated  the  Rules  as  being  a
    complete code.

Summary

39. In light of the  above,  I  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  in  its
    entirety.

Disposal

40. Initially, I was of the view that if there was an error on ground  1  I
    could remake the decision and allow the appeals on  the  limited  basis
    that  the  Respondent's  original  decisions  were  not  otherwise   in
    accordance with the law. This would have had to be on  the  basis  that
    the Respondent should have considered the first Appellant's application
    under paragraph 245ED.

41. Having reflected on the matter, I now take the  view  that  whilst  the
    judge erred in refusing to consider the first Appellant's submission on
    the alternative route, the Respondent's decisions were not unlawful.

42. The first Appellant applied on the clear  basis  that  he  was  seeking
    indefinite leave to remain. He used the appropriate form and  paid  the
    relevant fee. The Respondent considered the application on the basis of
    the application as made to her. The alternative route  under  paragraph
    245ED was  not  raised  until  the  decision  was  made.  Further,  the
    Respondent has in  fact  applied  the  provisions  of  paragraph  245EF
    correctly, as is  accepted  by  the  first  Appellant.  Therefore,  the
    Respondent did not act otherwise than in accordance with the law.

43. In addition, the applications made by the Appellants were not  done  so
    on the basis of human rights.  The  Respondent's  failure  to  consider
    Article 8 was also not unlawful.

44. The Respondent has discretion to withdraw her decisions in light of  my
    error of law decision, but that is a matter for her.

45. As a result of the above, I have decided to retain these appeals in the
    Upper Tribunal and to hold a continuation  hearing  following  which  I
    will remake the decisions myself.

46. The appeals are therefore adjourned.

47. As Ms Hastings rightly pointed out at the hearing, it is important that
    the Respondent has an opportunity to consider the  evidence  originally
    submitted in the context of paragraph 245ED. Given the circumstances of
    the third and fourth Appellants, it is  also  very  important  for  the
    Respondent to now consider Article 8 in substance.

48. I shall give effect to these observations in directions, below.

Anonymity

49. I have not been asked for a direction in these appeals  and  I  see  no
    sound reason to make one.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeals are adjourned.

Directions to the parties

      1. These appeals are adjourned;

      2. Paragraph 245ED of the Rules and Article 8 are live issues in these
         appeals;

      3. The Appellants shall, no later than 1  July  2016,  file  with  the
         Upper Tribunal and serve on the  Respondent  any  further  evidence
         relied  upon  in  these  appeals,  including  any  updated  witness
         statements;

      4. The Respondent shall provide the Upper Tribunal and Appellants with
         a written position statement setting out;

          a)  her  assessment  of  the  evidence  submitted  by  the  first
             Appellant with his application of 27 June  2014,  and  in  the
             context of paragraph 245ED of the Rules;

          b) her  consideration  of  Article  8  in  relation  to  all  the
             Appellants, with particular regard to the best  interests  and
             wellbeing of the third and fourth Appellants;

         This statement shall be filed with the Upper Tribunal and served on
         the Appellants no later than 12 August 2016;

      5. The appeals shall be relisted before myself at Field  House  on  25
         August 2016;

      6. Limited oral evidence is permitted at the continuation hearing.

Directions to Listings

      1. These appeals are to be relisted before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
         Norton-Taylor at Field House on 25 August 2016;

      2. There is a time estimate of 2 hours;

      3. No interpreter is required.


Signed                              Date:  20 June 2016

H B Norton-Taylor
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

