
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49280/2013
       IA/49281/2013

                                             IA/49283/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th September 2014                         |On 10th September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR SATWINDER VIR SINGH (1)
                             MRS BALJIT KAUR (2)
                           MR KULWINDER SINGH (3)
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms R Baruah, Counsel, instructed by G Singh Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I will refer to
       the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellants are all citizens of Indian. The first  appellant  was
       born on 31st January 1971, the second appellant on 15th  April  1969
       and the third appellant on  8th  May  1996.  The  first  and  second
       appellants are husband and wife, and the third  appellant  is  their
       son. The first and second appellants arrived in the UK in March 2004
       as visitors. The third appellant arrived as an accompanying child in
       2006. They all overstayed their visas.

    3. The appellants applied to regularise their stay on 5th  March  2013.
       This application was refused on 12th July 2013 without  a  right  of
       appeal. The appellants issued judicial review proceedings, and as  a
       result of a consent order another refusal with a right of appeal was
       issued on 6th November 2013. The appeal against  this  decision  was
       heard on 10th March 2014. It was allowed under  Article  8  ECHR  by
       First-tier Tribunal Judge JC Hamilton in a determination promulgated
       on the 3rd July 2014, although only to the extent it was  said  that
       it would be unlawful to remove the family until the third  appellant
       had finished his A level studies at the end of the academic year  at
       which point removal of the whole family could lawfully take place.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Kelly on 22nd July 2014 on the basis that it was arguable  that  the
       First-tier judge had erred in allowing the appeal on  the  basis  of
       Article 8 ECHR outside of the Immigration  Rules  as  in  accordance
       with Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 the third appellant did not  have
       a right to be educated in the UK and because it  was  reasonable  to
       expect  the  third  appellant  to  follow  his   parents,   see   EV
       (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

    5. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    6. Mr Nath relied upon  the  grounds  of  appeal.  These  contended  as
       follows: that as Judge JC Hamilton had  found  that  the  appellants
       could not succeed under the Immigration Rules relating to Article  8
       ECHR he should not have allowed the  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR
       outside of these Rules  as  he  did  not  identify  any  exceptional
       circumstances for so doing. Further the appeal should not have  been
       allowed in this way as by the time it was promulgated the  appellant
       was no longer a child and had finished his examinations.

    7. I asked Mr Nath to point to the paragraphs in the  determination  of
       Judge JC Hamilton in which there were legal errors, but he could not
       do so. I also asked Mr  Nath  to  explain  the  public  interest  in
       bringing an appeal when the effect of the determination was that the
       appellants were all removable at the date the appeal was lodged, but
       again he could not explain this. This particularly concerned  me  as
       it seemed to be a waste of public money to  bring  an  appeal  where
       even if there were errors they could no longer be  material  at  the
       time of lodging the appeal.

    8. I told Ms Baruah that I did not need to trouble her for  submissions
       as I was  satisfied  that  there  were  no  errors  of  law  in  the
       determination of Judge JC Hamilton. I set out my  reasons  for  this
       decision below.

    9. Ms Baruah then said that she wanted to  appeal  on  the  appellants'
       behalf. I refused to accept this oral application,  which  was  also
       opposed by Mr Nath.

   10. Ms Baruah handed in a document which was entitled "response pursuant
       to Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008".
       However she accepted that she had not complied with the Asylum,  and
       Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 at  paragraph  24  which
       required such an application to be made in writing to the First-tier
       Tribunal, and given that this was more than five days after the date
       the determination of Judge JC Hamilton was deemed  to  be  received,
       also needed grounds justifying  the  special  circumstances  why  it
       would be unjust not to extend time.  The  Upper  Tribunal  only  has
       power to entertain an application for permission to  appeal  if  the
       First-tier Tribunal has received this application and either refused
       it or it has not been admitted, see paragraph 21(2) of the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Conclusions

   11. Judge Hamilton determined  the  human  rights  appeal  correctly  in
       making findings as of the date of hearing. At the  date  of  hearing
       the third appellant was a minor and in full time education finishing
       his A levels. It is not legally correct to say that he  should  have
       changed his determination to  reflect  the  situation  when  it  was
       written or promulgated.

   12.  Judge  Hamilton  was  fully  and  correctly  aware  of  the   third
       appellant's stage of education and when  it  would  end  as  he  had
       before him  a  letter  from  the  Head  of  Year  13  at  the  third
       appellant's school (paragraph 9 of the determination). At paragraphs
       31, 33 and 41 of his determination Judge Hamilton made findings that
       the third appellant had special needs and particular assistance  had
       been put in place for him at his school and that  it  would  not  be
       right for him to be removed prior to the very imminent end  of  this
       stage of his education, particularly as  this  would  deny  him  the
       opportunity  to  complete  his  current  studies  and   obtain   his
       qualifications as this could  not  be  replicated  abroad.  He  thus
       concluded that it would not be proportionate  to  remove  the  third
       appellant prior to the imminent conclusion of his sixth form studies
       as he was a child who was not responsible  for  his  situation,  and
       indeed was the victim of his parents' abuse of the immigration laws.



   13. Judge Hamilton directed himself properly with reference  to  Gulshan
       (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640  and
       other cases, and was aware that he should only consider  the  appeal
       outside the Immigration Rules if there were  arguably  good  grounds
       for doing so, see paragraph 21 of his determination. He acknowledges
       that the starting point is that it  is  in  the  best  interests  of
       children to be removed with their parents if  this  is  the  correct
       decision in relation to those parents, see paragraph 26 in which  he
       refers to Azimi-Moayed and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;
       onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197. He is  clearly  aware  throughout
       his determination that none of the appellants is entitled to  be  in
       the UK or receive services here.

   14. I find that Judge Hamilton makes a very limited and  legally  proper
       decision in the appellants favour that they should  not  be  removed
       prior to the end of the third appellant's schooling  in  June  2014,
       making the best interests of the child (who in this case  had  lived
       in the UK for 8 years and whom he finds has a  strong  private  life
       with friends and social attachments in this country - see  paragraph
       40 of the  determination)  a  primary  consideration  whilst  giving
       proper  weight  to  the  importance  of  a  consistent   system   of
       immigration control, see paragraphs 38 and the decision at paragraph
       48.

   15. I find no legal errors in the determination of Judge JC Hamilton.

Decision

   16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law.

   17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  under
       Article 8 of the ECHR is upheld.

   18. It is to be noted that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was
       only that removal prior to completion of the third appellant's sixth
       form studies would be a breach of Article 8 ECHR. These studies have
       now been completed, and thus the effect of the determination is that
       the appellants are now lawfully removable.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
8th September 2014

