

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)            Appeal Number: IA/49774/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 27 June 2014             On 1 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                                Hammad Anwar
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                   Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:            Mr. I. Khan of IKON Law.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Flynn promulgated on 10 March 2014, allowing Mr Anwar's appeal against
      the Secretary of State's decision dated 8 November 2013 to  refuse  to
      vary leave to remain and to remove him from the UK.


   2. Although before me the Secretary of State  is  the  appellant  and  Mr
      Anwar is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr  Anwar  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
      Respondent.

Background

   3. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  born  on  5  July  1979.  The
      relevant chronology of his immigration history is as follows:


      28 Feb 2011:           The Appellant arrived  in  the  UK  with  entry
                       clearance  as  a  Tier  4  student,  valid  until  13
                       November 2012.

      2 Apr 2012:      The Appellant applied for variation  of  leave  as  a
                       Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) migrant.

      25  Jan  2013:            The  Respondent  refused   the   Appellant's
                       application. The Appellant subsequently  appealed  to
                       the IAC .

      7 Jun 2013:      Determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Callender
                       Smith promulgated, allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal
                       (ref  IA/04428/2013).  The  appeal  was   essentially
                       allowed on the  basis  that  the  Appellant's  degree
                       awarded by the University of Wales after the date  of
                       application, but before the date of the  Respondent's
                       decision, should have been considered  as  qualifying
                       for points under the PBS. The appeal was allowed with
                       reference to the case of  Khatel  [2013]  UKUT  00044
                       (IAC)  on  the  basis  that  "the  Appellant  had   a
                       continuing  application  being  considered   by   the
                       Respondent and the Appellant had also been awarded  a
                       Master's degree before the date of  the  Respondent's
                       decision" (determination at paragraph 12). The appeal
                       was "allowed in so far  as  it  is  remitted  to  the
                       Secretary of State to make a valid  decision  against
                       this factual background" (paragraph 13).

      2 Jul 2013:      An application by the Respondent  for  permission  to
                       appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision  of
                       Judge  Callender  Smith  was  refused  by  First-tier
                       Tribunal Judge Fisher. Judge Fisher observed that the
                       application was made one day out-of-time, but was not
                       satisfied that any  special  circumstances  had  been
                       shown to  justify  extending  time.  As  regards  the
                       substance of the challenge, it was noted  to  involve
                       "lengthy grounds tak[ing] issue with the decision  in
                       Khatel": in this context Judge Fisher observed  that,
                       notwithstanding that the Respondent had succeeded  in
                       applying for  permission  to  appeal  in  Khatel,  it
                       remained good law which bound Judge Callender  Smith.
                       As such Judge Fisher indicated that he would not have
                       granted permission to appeal, even if there had  been
                       justification for extending time.

      8 Aug 2013:      The Respondent was refused permission  to  appeal  by
                       Upper Tribunal Judge McKee. Judge McKee observed that
                       Judge Fisher had been mistaken in stating that Khatel
                       had not yet been overturned  in  circumstances  where
                       the Court of Appeal had handed down judgement  on  25
                       June 2013 in Raju and others  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  754.
                       However, he observed that Judge Fisher had refused to
                       admit the application because it was out of time, and
                       that "[t]he renewed application... does  not  address
                       the timeliness point" such  that  "[t]he  application
                       must therefore be refused".

      8  Nov  2013:       The  Respondent   reconsidered   the   Appellant's
                       application of 2 April 2012, and refused it.


   4. The decision of 8 November 2013 refusing the  Appellant's  application
      was made for reasons set out  in  a  combined  Notice  of  Immigration
      Decision and 'reasons for refusal' letter of that date. The Respondent
      applied the reasoning in Raju, and in consequence, concluded that  the
      Appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 245FD(c)  of  the
      Rules. No points were awarded in respect of  'Date  of  obtaining  the
      eligible award'. (In consequence no points were awarded in respect  of
      Appendix B (English language) either.)


   5. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for  reasons   set   out   in   his
      determination.


   6. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Foudy on 23 April 2014.



Consideration: Error of Law

   7. The effect of the decision of Judge Callender Smith promulgated  on  7
      June 2013 was to find that the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  25
      January 2013 was not in accordance with the law, and as such  remained
      outstanding before the Respondent and required to be re-determined  in
      accordance with the law. In  due  course,  on  8  November  2013,  the
      Respondent  did  indeed  re-determine  the  Appellant's   application,
      applying the law as it then stood with reference to the case of  Raju.
      In so far as the law set out  in  Raju  might  have  been  applicable,
      ('might', because its applicability is the issue herein),  it  is  not
      suggested that the Respondent erred:  what  has  been  argued  on  the
      Appellant's behalf is that the Respondent should not have applied  the
      law as it stood on 8 November 2013, but  should  have  in  effect  re-
      determined the Appellant's case by reference to an  earlier  erroneous
      understanding of the law as set out in Khatel.


   8. The Appellant's complaint was essentially this: the Respondent  having
      failed to resolve the matter in her favour before the Tribunal made  a
      new decision in the Appellant's case that achieved the same result  as
      she had failed to achieve in the appellate process.


   9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge directed himself to the case of Chomanga
      (binding effect of unappealed decisions) Zimbabwe  [2011]  UKUT  00312
      (IAC) (determination at paragraph 18).  He  then  identified  that  in
      light of the decision in  Raju  the  key  question  was  "whether  the
      Respondent was justified in making her decision in line with the legal
      position at the date of her second decision", and in doing so observed
      that "It was clearly recognised in Chomanga that a change in the legal
      position might justify a different outcome, contrary to a decision  of
      the Tribunal" (paragraph 19).


  10. However, the Judge accepted the  submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant that the change in the legal  position  did  not  justify  a
      different outcome because the  Respondent  had  sought  permission  to
      appeal which had been refused by both the First-tier Tribunal and  the
      Upper Tribunal: see determination at paragraphs 20-24. In my judgement
      this was a material error of law:  the  factual  difference  does  not
      justify  making  a  legal  distinction  I  do  not  agree   that   the
      Respondent's failed attempt to launch a challenge to the  decision  of
      Judge Callender Smith has any material impact upon  the  fact  of  the
      subsequent  clarification  of  the  law,  or  justifies  ignoring  the
      principle identified by the Upper Tribunal in Chomanga with  reference
      to TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 997 that a decision  of  the  Tribunal
      would not inevitably be binding where there had been a material change
      in circumstances - including a change in the law.


  11. Of course this case is not strictly speaking premised on a  change  of
      law but a clarification  of  the  law  involving  the  overturning  of
      previous case law. Whilst clarification of the law  is  not  a  factor
      expressly identified in Chomanga I have no hesitation  in  considering
      it analogous to the circumstances identified at  paragraph  35  of  TB
      (Jamaica) quoted in Chomanga (and helpfully reproduced at paragraph 18
      of Judge Flynn's determination).


  12. Indeed in my judgement this latter  aspect  undermines  Judge  Flynn's
      reliance at paragraph 23 upon the finding  of  Judge  Callender  Smith
      that the qualification should have been  taken  into  account  by  the
      Respondent because it had been obtained before the date  of  decision.
      That finding was by  the  date  of  the  Respondent's  decision  of  8
      November 2013 understood to have been  legally  flawed.  Whilst  Judge
      Callender Smith's finding was consistent with the  then  current  case
      law, the then current case law misstated the legal position. I do  not
      accept that a legally flawed factual premise can provide justification
      for distinguishing the approach  in  Chomanga  and  TB  (Jamaica),  or
      otherwise for effectively compelling the Respondent to make a  further
      legally flawed decision.


  13. I note that as part of his submissions in  support  of  Judge  Flynn's
      determination Mr Khan argued that there had been an abuse of process -
      a submission also made before the First-tier  Tribunal  (determination
      at paragraph 14).


  14. I profoundly  disagree  with  the  submission  that  the  Respondent's
      conduct amounted to an abuse of process. In the first instance I  note
      the observations of Lord Justice Stanley Burnton at paragraph 36 of TB
      (Jamaica): "That is an expression normally reserved for abuses of  the
      process of the courts". See further in this  regard  paragraph  23  of
      Chomanga.


  15. In so far as the concept of abuse of process within the  court  system
      may provide analogy for considering any possible abuse of power on the
      part of the Executive, I note the analysis set out at paragraph 57  of
      Modi [2010] EWHC 1996 (Admin) (cited in Chowmanga during submissions -
      e.g. see paragraphs 12 and 15):
           "i) The bringing of a claim in later  proceedings  may,  without
           more, amount to abuse if the court is satisfied (the onus  being
           on the party alleging abuse) that the  claim  should  have  been
           raised in the earlier proceedings if it was to be raised at all.
           ii) It is not necessary, before abuse may be found, to  identify
           any additional element such as a collateral attack on a previous
           decision although a collateral attack  may  well  render  second
           proceedings abusive.
           iii) There will rarely be a finding of abuse  unless  the  later
           proceedings involve what the court regards as unjust  harassment
           of a party.
           iv) It is wrong to hold simply that because a matter could  have
           been raised in earlier proceedings it should have been, so as to
           render the  raising  of  it  in  later  proceedings  necessarily
           abusive.
           v) A broad, merits-based judgment  is  called  for  which  takes
           account of the public and private interests  involved  and  also
           takes account of all the facts of the case.
           vi) The crucial question is whether, in all the circumstances, a
           party is misusing or abusing the process of the court by seeking
           to raise before it  the  issue  which  could  have  been  raised
           before.
           vii) The question to ask is whether in all the  circumstances  a
           party's conduct is an abuse  rather  than  to  ask  whether  the
           conduct is an abuse and then, if it is, to ask whether the abuse
           is excused or justified by special circumstances."

  16. In my judgement there is nothing in the Respondent's conduct  that  is
      remotely analogous to the behaviour identified in Modi. The Respondent
      argument - which was  eventually  upheld  in  Raju  -  was  maintained
      throughout the earlier proceedings herein from the point  of  decision
      until the exhaustion of appeal rights by  the  refusal  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal of permission to appeal.  There  is  no  new  claim,  or  new
      approach brought to bear by the Respondent in the instant decision and
      proceedings. Her position has been consistent and has been  vindicated
      by the decision in Raju. Any inconsistency, regrettably, has  been  in
      the decision-making of the Tribunal and Courts. It is inappropriate to
      characterise the Respondent's behaviour as being tantamount  to  abuse
      of process, or amounting to an abuse of power in such circumstances.


  17. Further, whilst it is unfortunate that in the earlier proceedings  the
      Respondent failed to offer any reasons to justify extension of time in
      her applications to each of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
      Tribunal, I do not consider that it may be said that it was  an  abuse
      of process to seek to challenge the decision of Judge Callender  Smith
      and fail.


  18. Mr Khan  acknowledged  before  me  that  if  the  Respondent  had  not
      attempted to challenge the decision of Judge Callender Smith, and  had
      simply proceeded to reconsider the Appellant's  application,  and  had
      done so in reliance upon Raju, he would not have a  case  to  present.
      His argument is premised on the Respondent's unsuccessful  attempt  to
      overturn the  decision  of  Judge  Callender  Smith  as  in  some  way
      estopping  the  Respondent  from  thereafter  making  a  new  decision
      pursuant to the remittal of the  case  by  Judge  Callender  Smith  in
      accordance with the law as it stood at the date of the making  of  the
      new decision. This is tantamount to arguing that  to  have  tried  and
      failed to overturn the decision of Judge  Callender  Smith  makes  the
      Appellant's new decision in some way an abuse,  whereas  not  to  have
      tried at all and then  to  have  applied  Raju  would  not  have  been
      abusive. I reject the logic of such a submission.


  19. In any event I note that Judge Flynn did not  make  any  finding  that
      there had been an  abuse  of  process.  Although  he  did  accept  the
      submission that the  Respondent  "was  not  entitled  to  make  a  new
      decision again refusing the application  and  that  doing  so  was  an
      attempt to circumvent the decision of the FtTJ" (paragraph 22),  I  am
      satisfied for the reasons set  out  above  that  his  reasons  for  so
      concluding were flawed.


  20. For completeness I also note that during the course of submissions  Mr
      Khan  argued  that  paragraph  9  of  the  Respondent's  grounds  were
      "misleading". It seems to me that the worst that could be  said  about
      paragraph 9, is that paragraphs 20-22 of Judge  Flynn's  determination
      do not themselves expressly encompass the whole thrust of the  Ground.
      However, the proposition contained in paragraph 9 - that  the  premise
      of Judge Flynn's  decision  (and  indeed  the  premise  of  Mr  Khan's
      submissions before me) was that the Respondent should ignore  the  law
      set out in Raju because her application for permission to  appeal  the
      decision of Judge Callender Smith was refused as being out of  time  -
      is accurate. Mr Khan gracefully withdrew his characterisation of  this
      paragraph as 'misleading' after some discussion.


  21. In all the circumstances I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge was flawed for material error  of  law  and  I  set  it
      aside.


  22. The decision in the appeal accordingly needs to be remade.


Re-Making the decision

  23. It was common ground between the representatives  that  in  the  event
      that I rejected the basis of the Appellant's  case  then  it  followed
      that the Respondent was correct in applying the law as set out in Raju
      to the Appellant's application. In such  circumstances  the  Appellant
      could not succeed under the Rules.  There  being  no  other  arguments
      advanced on behalf of the Appellant - and in particular Article 8  not
      being pursued - the only decision open to the Tribunal in remaking the
      appeal is to dismiss it.


  24.  For  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  I  find  that  the   Respondent
      appropriately determined the Appellant's application by  reference  to
      the law as it stood at the date of the decision, and that  accordingly
      the Respondent's decision  was  in  accordance  with  the  Immigration
      Rules. I am unable to identify that the decision was otherwise not  in
      accordance with the law, or  was  in  breach  of  the  Appellant's  or
      anybody else's human rights. Accordingly, I  remake  the  decision  by
      dismissing the appeal.


Decision

  25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  contained  a  material
      error of law and is set aside.


  26. I remake the decision in the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     30 August 2014
