
[pic]
IAC-AH-DH-V1
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49080/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7th April 2016                             |4th May 2016                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    A R B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Jacqueline Victor-Mazeli, Counsel for Berkleys
                    Solicitors London


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary  of  State  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on  [  ]  1988.   He  appealed
    against the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  25th  November  2014
    refusing his application for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  as
    the spouse of a settled person.  His appeal was heard by Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Sweet on  23rd  September  2015.   The  appeal  was
    allowed to  the  extent  that  the  Respondent  should  reconsider  the
    application, in a decision promulgated on 7th October 2015.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler on 2nd  March  2016.
    The grounds on which permission was granted took issue with the judge's
    findings that the Respondent had failed to  prove  that  the  Appellant
    used deception in relation to his English  language  test  certificate.
    Paragraph 23 of the decision is referred to, in which the  judge  found
    that the generic evidence provided by the Respondent was not sufficient
    to prove that in effect, the Appellant had obtained  a  certificate  by
    deception.  The permission states that it  is  arguable  that  in  that
    paragraph the judge failed to give adequate reasons for this finding.

 4. There is no Rule 24 response.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge made a  material  error
    of law on a material matter  being  the  Appellant's  English  language
    certificate.  I was referred to paragraph  23  of  the  decision  which
    states that the judge  is  not  persuaded  that  the  generic  evidence
    provided by the Respondent is sufficient to meet the  burden  of  proof
    that the English language certificate was false.  The judge  refers  to
    challenges  to  the  generic  nature  of  the  findings  in  JP  French
    Associates' report of 5th February 2015.   The  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant is fluent in English and finds that the  Respondent  has  not
    met the burden of proof in respect of a false document.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that the evidence in this case was the
    normal evidence in an ETS case, being standard witness statements  from
    two civil servants.  He submitted that the judge appears to have  given
    them no weight but these go to the issue of proving that the  Appellant
    in this case obtained his visa with an invalid  test  certificate.   He
    submitted that not only was  there  generic  evidence  there  was  also
    evidence specific to the Appellant referred to at paragraph  7  of  the
    decision.  He submitted that the ETS evidence normally  consists  of  a
    spreadsheet with details of where and when the  test  was  taken.   The
    Presenting Officer submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has not
    given adequate reasons for rejecting the Respondent's evidence and that
    had he applied his mind properly he  would  have  reached  a  different
    conclusion.

 7. I asked  about  the  JP  French  Associates'  report.   It  is  in  the
    Appellant's bundle and is a generic report.

 8. The Appellant's representative submitted that the  Respondent  provided
    no direct evidence that the Appellant had cheated in the English  test.
    She submitted that the burden  of  proof  is  on  the  Respondent  when
    deception is alleged and she submitted that the two statements from the
    civil servants contain no specific evidence relating to the  Appellant.
    She  submitted  that  generic  evidence  from  a  third  party  is  not
    sufficient.  This is hearsay  evidence  not  direct  evidence.   I  was
    referred to paragraph 20 of Rebecca  Collings'  statement  and  Counsel
    submitted that this  makes  it  clear  that  the  evidence  is  hearsay
    evidence and submitted that the Respondent's policy is  not  sufficient
    for the Tribunal to be able to accept these statements.  She  submitted
    that the Tribunal requires the Respondent to produce cogent evidence of
    deception by the Appellant and the Respondent has to put forward strong
    evidence which stands up to anxious scrutiny.

 9. She submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge heard the evidence  of
    the Appellant and his wife and concluded at paragraphs 20 to 21 of  his
    decision that this Appellant's  appeal  should  succeed  to  a  limited
    extent, in  that  the  student  leave  should  be  reinstated  and  not
    curtailed.

10. I was referred to paragraph 22 of  the  decision  in  which  the  judge
    states that the Appellant does not accept that there was any  deception
    and I was referred to the witness statement which gives  very  detailed
    evidence about the test and in which he explains the procedure  of  the
    test.  He also gave his evidence in English.

11. The judge has  noted  that  the  Appellant  took  two  further  English
    qualifications in 2014 and at paragraph 23 of the  decision  the  judge
    states, "There are challenges to the generic nature of the findings  in
    the JP French Associates' report of  5th  February  2015."   The  judge
    finds that the generic evidence is not enough to satisfy the burden  of
    proof.  I was asked to consider paragraphs 21 to 23 of the decision and
    Counsel submitted that it is clear how the judge came to his decision.

12. I was asked to consider the Upper Tribunal decision on file relating to
    appeals  IA/31380/16920  and  IA/36319/2014  before  a  panel  of   the
    President the Honorary Mr Justice McCloskey and Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Saini.  I was handed the summary of this judgment which states at
    paragraph 1, "The evidence of the Secretary of  State's  two  principal
    witnesses, Mr Millington and Ms Collings, (the  same  witnesses  as  in
    this claim), is intrinsically limited.  Neither witness  possesses  any
    relevant  qualifications,  credentials  nor  expertise   in   what   is
    ultimately a scientific field".

13. She submitted that in these  cases  there  was  no  evidence  from  the
    protagonist of the ETS organisation and at  paragraph  3  the  Tribunal
    found the evidence of Dr Harrison of JP French to be  persuasive.   His
    report contains a litany of criticisms of  the  ETS  voice  recognition
    testing systems both automated and human.  Counsel submitted  that  his
    opinion is not challenged.

14. The First-tier  Judge  in  our  case  found  the  Appellant  to  be  an
    impressive witness and accepted his evidence in all material respects.

15. Counsel submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  gave  adequate
    reasons for his findings. There is no material  error  of  law  in  his
    decision and the decision should stand.

16. There were no further submissions from the Presenting Officer.



Decision and Reasons

17. This is an application by the Appellant for  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a spouse but he was found to be unsuitable under  the
    Immigration Rules because he  had  been  found  to  have  cheated  when
    applying for a visa, when sitting  his  English  test.   His  leave  to
    remain as a student was curtailed on 8th  September  2014  although  he
    originally was granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom until 30th
    May 2017.

18. In the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision he has set  out  the  facts
    and evidence properly and under  the  heading  "Findings  of  Fact"  at
    paragraphs 21 to 23 he properly explains the burden of proof and why he
    does not find that there was any  deception  relating  to  the  English
    language test for which the appellant received a certificate  from  ETS
    dated 20th June 2012.  The judge refers to  the  Appellant's  statement
    and the details he gave of the actual test  which  he  sat  at  Premier
    Language Training Centre in Barking, Essex  on  20th  June  2012.   The
    judge refers to the further two English language qualifications he  has
    obtained and the fact that he spoke in fluent English at  the  hearing.
    At paragraph 23 he refers to the challenges to the  generic  nature  of
    the findings in the  JP  French  Associates'  report  and  the  generic
    evidence provided in the statements of the two civil servants.  He  has
    given adequate reasons for his findings.  There is no material error of
    law in the judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

19. I find there to be no material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision  promulgated  on  7th  October  2015.   I  uphold  his
    decision  that  the  Respondent  should  reconsider   the   Appellant's
    application for leave to remain as the spouse of a settled  person  and
    that the appeal should be allowed to the extent  that  the  Appellant's
    student leave should be reinstated and not curtailed.

20. I explained  to  the  Appellant  that  this  does  not  mean  that  his
    application for leave to remain as a spouse in the United Kingdom  will
    be successful.

21. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

