
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49075/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th December 2015                 |On 19th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Mrs Dudh Kumari Gurungseni
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Counsel instructed by N.C Brothers & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Nepal born on the 8th  July  1947.   On
    the 1st June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge M. Symes allowed her appeal
    against a decision to refuse to vary her leave to remain and to  remove
    her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the  Immigration  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006. The Secretary of State now has permission  to
    appeal against that decision[1].

    Background

 2. The Respondent came to the United Kingdom  in  February  2014  and  was
    given leave to enter as a visitor. She had come to visit her  daughter,
    British citizen Chanda  Kumari  Gurung,  who  is  now  treated  as  the
    'sponsor' for the purpose of this appeal.  On the  31st  July  2014  an
    application was made for the Respondent to be granted further leave  to
    remain 'outside of the Rules'. The basis of the application was set out
    in a covering letter dated 28th July  2014.  The  Respondent  had  been
    living in Nepal for a long time without any problems. Although she  had
    separated from her husband when the Sponsor was about two years old she
    had brought her up alone; when the Sponsor had moved to the UK she  had
    moved in with her niece.  In 2005 the  Respondent's  husband  contacted
    her to ask for a divorce. He claimed that this was  to  enable  him  to
    remarry but the Sponsor suspects it was to prevent her from making  any
    claim on his Gurkha's pension.  She did not oppose the divorce  and  as
    far as she is aware it went through without any difficulty. In 2012 the
    niece died and the Respondent was left alone.  Since she arrived in the
    UK neighbours in Nepal contacted her to say  that  her  ex-husband  was
    looking for her. The Sponsor understands from what she  has  been  told
    that he has discovered  that  the  pension  is  still  payable  to  the
    Respondent and he  wants  her  to  transfer  any  entitlement  to  him.
    "Serious and credible" threats have been  made.  It  was  against  that
    background that the Sponsor, on the Respondent's behalf, asked  for  an
    unspecified period of leave outside of the Rules: "we need my mother to
    stay here with us at least until we know what is happening. Please  can
    you allow my mother to remain in this country where we can  look  after
    and protect her".

 3. The Secretary of  State  refused  the  application  to  vary  leave  in
    succinct terms. She was not satisfied that there  were  any  particular
    compelling  circumstances  that  justified  a  grant  of   leave.   The
    Respondent had lived on her own in Nepal for a year before she  arrived
    in the UK and she could always return there and make an application for
    entry clearance as an elderly dependent relative.   If  she  wanted  to
    make a claim for asylum, she should do so.

 4. The appeal against this decision came before  Judge  Symes.   He  heard
    evidence from the Respondent and the Sponsor,  which  he  found  to  be
    credible and generally plausible.  Having swiftly established that  the
    Respondent did not meet the requirements of the Rules he  proceeded  to
    consider Article 8. Judge Symes directed himself to the authorities  on
    when leave should be granted 'outside  of  the  Rules',  in  particular
    Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), Aliyu and Anr [2014] EWHC 3919  (Admin),
    MM and Ors [2014] EWCA Civ 985, and SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    wherein the Court of Appeal agreed that "compelling circumstances would
    need to be identified to support a claim for grant of LTR  outside  the
    new Rules".  The determination then presents an analysis of the caselaw
    relating to the existence of family life  between  adult  children  and
    their parents, concluding it to be established that such  relationships
    are capable of engaging Article 8, albeit not as a  matter  of  course.
    Applying the facts as  found  to  that  legal  framework  the  Tribunal
    concludes that there is here a family life for the purpose  of  Article
    8:

         "I accept that on the facts of this case, the lengthy  relationship
         between  mother  and  daughter  is  an   especially   strong   one,
         unsurprisingly given the circumstances in which they lived together
         following their abandonment  by  the  Appellant's  former  husband,
         their ties having endured throughout the many years they have lived
         separately.

         Clearly  that  family  life  will  the  be   subject   of   serious
         interruption if the Appellant is returned to Nepal: she  has  lived
         in this country for some time and there is a  serious  obstacle  to
         her returning to her normal life, given the threats issued  against
         her by her former husband. The family unit will be disrupted by the
         separation resulting from the Appellant leaving  the  country.  The
         Respondent's decision is in accordance with the law and  pursues  a
         legitimate aim, i.e. the economic well  being  of  the  country  in
         terms of immigration control, and so  the  relevant  issue  in  the
         appeal is thus proportionality".

 5. In addressing proportionality the  determination  first  sets  out  the
    relevant section of Part V of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act  2002,  section  117B.  Each   sub-section   is   considered.   The
    determination then concludes:

         "Considering the evidence as a whole, it seems to me that it  would
         be disproportionate to expect the  Appellant  to  return  to  Nepal
         before her family are able to  assure  her  return  in  safety  and
         dignity. As the European Court said  in  Pretty  v  United  Kingdom
         (2002) 35 EHRR 1, para 65, "the very essence of the  Convention  is
         respect for human dignity and human freedom".  In  coming  to  this
         conclusion I take account of the fact that the visitor route  (even
         allowing for Home Office policy on carers) should not be seen as  a
         gateway to extended residence in this country and to the very  high
         threshold  set  in  settlement  applications  for  adult  dependent
         relatives, who cannot make an application from  within  the  United
         Kingdom.  I consider the circumstances  identified  above  outweigh
         the public interest in maintaining those policy  positions  in  the
         particular facts of this case. There  are  unusual  and  compelling
         circumstances.

         I find that as things stand the Appellant's return to Nigeria (sic)
         would represent a disproportionate interference with  the  family's
         Article 8 rights. The consequences of my decision are a matter  for
         the Respondent when she considers what grant  of  leave  to  remain
         might be appropriate. The family should  not,  given  my  findings,
         necessarily expect that there would be a further grant of leave  to
         remain: they must now put their affairs in order  with  appropriate
         speed".

 6. The appeal was thereby allowed.

    The Appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal  are  somewhat  repetitive  but  in  essence  the
    Secretary of State submits the decision of Judge Symes  to  be  legally
    flawed in the following respects:

      i)    Although dressed in the  language  of  Article  8  this  was  in
         essence a "veiled  Article  3  claim"  and  the  evidence  did  not
         establish a real risk, or flagrant  denial  of  rights,  such  that
         Article 3 was engaged;

     ii) It is difficult to see how Article 8 was engaged, given the limited
         scope of the case: the application sought only a limited period  of
         leave and the Tribunal failed to  grapple  with  how  the  decision
         might be disproportionate in those circumstances

 8. In response Mr Howells emphasised that in putting the case (he had been
    counsel before the First-tier Tribunal) he had not  relied  at  all  on
    Article 3. The case was squarely put on Article 8 grounds and  this  is
    reflected throughout the determination. The Article was engaged because
    of the strong bonds the Respondent shares with her  daughter,  and  the
    First-tier Tribunal understood and accepted that to be the case. As  to
    the temporary nature of the leave sought there was no legal  basis  for
    suggesting that this could bar recourse to  the  ECHR:  the  point  was
    simply that at this time the separation  of  mother  and  daughter  was
    disproportionate, given the Respondent's age, vulnerabilities  and  the
    understandable concern about expecting her  to  deal  with  her  former
    husband alone.

    My Findings

 9. It is difficult to understand why the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department takes the view that Judge Symes has applied  Article  3  "by
    the backdoor".  At paragraph 15  the  case  for  the  Respondent  (then
    appellant) is recorded as being on "grounds of her private  and  family
    life". The legal framework set out  at  paragraphs  18-22  is  entirely
    directed at Article 8. The s117B analysis and the concluding paragraphs
    I have set out above further reflect  that.   The  conclusion  that  it
    would be disproportionate not to grant a period of limited leave turned
    not on whether there was a real risk of serious harm in Nepal,  but  on
    the particular circumstances of the case, those being that here  is  an
    elderly lady who enjoys a close dependency on her daughter and would be
    returning to Nepal alone.  The  passage  cited  from  Pretty  could  be
    relevant to an Article 3 analysis but  not  exclusively  so:  that  the
    "essence of the Convention is respect for human  dignity  and  freedom"
    was equally pertinent to Article 8.  The potential  risk  of  violence,
    threatening behaviour and/or legal proceedings in Nepal was in that way
    relevant, but it remained one facet of the Article 8 case.

10. As to the temporary nature of the leave sought that was clearly in  the
    forefront of the Tribunal's reasoning: see paragraphs 7, 13, 23 and 26.
     The basis of the case was that the Sponsor requested some time to make
    appropriate arrangements for her mother in Nepal: that this was not  an
    application  for   settlement   is   central   to   the   analysis   on
    proportionality.  No legal authority is cited to support the suggestion
    in the grounds that the temporary nature of the  leave  sought  brought
    this claim outwith the scope of the Convention.

11. This was an unusual case. The First-tier Tribunal  found  that  on  the
    facts there was a family life between these two adults and  that  there
    would be an interference with  it  should  the  Respondent  be  refused
    further leave and removed.  Given the temporary  nature  of  the  leave
    sought, the family history and the close  relationship  between  mother
    and daughter the Tribunal found that the decision was disproportionate.
    It gave reasons for doing so, having regard to all the material factors
    including s117B(1)-(5) and  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the  public
    interest.   In reaching its conclusions the First-tier Tribunal did not
    err in law.

    Decisions

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

13. I was not asked to make any direction for anonymity, and on the facts I
    see no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          26th December 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 20th August 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Simpson

