
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49698/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31 July 2014                                 |On 10 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                          Nenih Nurhaeni BT Setiadi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Nenih Nurhaeni Bt Setiadi, born on 23 November 1974  and
    is a citizen of Indonesia.  By a decision dated 8  November  2013,  the
    appellant was refused further leave to remain as a domestic worker in a
    private household.  The decision was also taken to removal her from the
    United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed against that  decision  to  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Robson)   which,   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 20 May 2014, dismissed the appeal.   The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The relevant Immigration Rules are 159D; 159E, 159EA:

         159D. The requirements for an extension of stay as a domestic
    worker in a private household are that the applicant:
    (i) entered the United Kingdom with a valid entry clearance as a
    domestic worker in a private household; and

    (ii) was granted less than 6 months leave to enter in this capacity;
and

    (iii) has continued to be employed for the duration of leave granted as
    a domestic worker in the private household of the employer with whom
    the applicant entered or joined in the UK; and

    (iv) continues to be required for employment for the period of the
    extension sought as a domestic worker in a private household that the
    employer lives in, where there is
    evidence of this in the form of written terms and conditions of
    employment in the UK as set out in Appendix 7 and evidence that the
    employer is living in the UK; and

    (v) does not intend to take employment except as a domestic worker in
    the private household of the employer; and

    (vi) meets the requirements of paragraph 159A (iv) and (vii); and

    (vii) must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws except that
    any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less will be
    disregarded.

    Extension of stay as a domestic worker in a private household
    159E. An extension of stay as a domestic worker in a private household
    may be granted for a period of six months less the period already spent
    in the UK in this capacity.

    Requirements for extension of stay as a domestic worker in a private
    household for applicants who entered the United Kingdom under the Rules
    in place before 6 April 2012
    159EA. The requirements for an extension of stay as a domestic worker
    in a private household for applicants who entered the United Kingdom
    under Rules in place before 6 April 2012 are that the applicant:
    (i) last entered the UK with a valid entry clearance as a domestic
    worker in a private household under Rules in place before 6 April 2012;
    and

    (ii) has continued to be employed for the duration of leave granted as
    a domestic worker in a private household; and

    (iii) continues to be required for employment for the period of the
    extension sought as a full time domestic worker in a private household
    under the same roof as the employer or in the same household that the
    employer has lived in and where evidence of this in the form of written
    terms and conditions of employment in the UK as set out in Appendix 7
    and evidence that the employer resides in the UK; and

    (iv) does not intend to take employment except as a full time domestic
    worker in the private household referred to in sub-paragraph 159EA
    (iii); and

    (v) meets the requirements of paragraph 159A (i) and (vii); and
    (vi) must not be in the UK in breach of immigration laws except that
    any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less will be
    disregarded.

    remaining before the expiry of the current leave (so if the application
    is decided on March 31st and the current leave does not expire until
    April 30th, an additional period of one month's leave may be granted).

    I have read the detailed written submission made by the appellant.  In
    that document [6] she sets out, in admirably concise terms, the single
    issue which arises in this appeal:

         I agree that under the under new Rules I will not  be  entitled  to
         apply for a new domestic worker visa.

         Under the old Rules I would be entitled to apply for a new domestic
         worker visa.  Another point is that it is stated in the Rules  that
         those who continue to hold domestic worker visas from since  before
         April 2012 are entitled to have all their  other  further  domestic
         worker applications considered under the old Rules.  That is it.

 3. The appellant told me that she and the family for which she  works  had
    all entered the United  Kingdom  in  September  2013;  the  appellant's
    passport bears an entry stamp of 22 September 2013.  The appellant  had
    been granted leave to enter as an overseas domestic worker on  3  April
    2013.  The visa was valid until 3 October 2013.  The Secretary of State
    was not satisfied the appellant was granted less than six months' leave
    to enter in that capacity.  The appellant therefore did not qualify for
    a visa  by  virtue  of  the  provisions  of  paragraph  159D(ii).   The
    Secretary of State was also not satisfied  the  appellant  intended  to
    leave the United Kingdom at the end of the six months of her visa or at
    the same time as her employer whichever was the earliest.  Accordingly,
    the appellant did not qualify for leave by virtue of paragraph 159D(vi)
    and 159A(iv).  The Rules at 159EA(i) make it clear that that  paragraph
    should only apply to domestic  workers  who  last  entered  the  United
    Kingdom under Rules in place before 6 April 2012.  This appellant  last
    entered the United Kingdom under the Rules which applied  in  September
    2013.  Those are the very Rules which  she  acknowledges  excluded  her
    from extending her visa beyond its  expiry  on  3  October  2013.   The
    interpretation which the appellant places on the Rules is the  opposite
    of the plain and ordinary meaning of  the  words  used;  she  would  be
    entitled  to  remain  under  paragraph  159EA  but  that  Rule  covered
    applicants who had first arrived under  the  pre-6  April  2012  Rules.
    However, that is not what the Rule  states.   In  consequence,  I  have
    concluded that Judge Robson was correct to dismiss the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules.

DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.
                                Date 20 September 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
