
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49512/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd February 2016                        |On 4th May 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S L R

                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Abrahams

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and the Respondent was the Appellant before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and for the sake of clarity I shall refer to  the  parties  as
    the Secretary of State and Claimant respectively.

2.    The  Claimant  applied  on  21  August  2014  for  the  extension   of
    discretionary leave based on her relationship with  her  son.  She  had
    previously been granted discretionary leave to  remain  from  6  August
    2011 to  6  August  2014  on  the  basis  of  this  relationship.   The
    Respondent refused to vary her leave to remain in a decision  dated  21
    November 2014 and made a decision to remove her under section 47 of the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The Respondent found that
    the Claimant had failed to fulfil the requirements of E-LTRP2.4 as  she
    had not submitted evidence of contact with her son.

3.   The appeal against that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M Symes and in a decision promulgated  on  19th  August  2015  he
    allowed the appeal on the basis that the Claimant met the  requirements
    for limited leave to remain as a  parent.  He  found  that  she  had  a
    genuine ongoing relationship with her son and that the relationship was
    a long one. He accepted the oral evidence he had heard as  set  out  in
    the decision and  that  the  documents  provided  confirmation  of  her
    ongoing involvement with his education confirmed  by  the  school.   He
    found that she satisfied the relevant aspects of the exception route as
    to the eligibility criteria and was clearly playing an active  role  in
    the child's upbringing in circumstances where she had direct access  in
    person to the child as ordered by a court in the United Kingdom.

4.   Neither the Claimant nor the Secretary  of  State  was  represented  at
    that appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal
    against the First-tier Tribunal's decision. In the grounds for  seeking
    permission it is submitted that there was insufficient evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal to come to the conclusion  that  there  was  an
    access order in  favour  of  the  Claimant.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    identified documentary evidence put before it amongst other things that
    there were ongoing family  proceedings  and  a  court  hearing  of  2nd
    February 2015.  The grounds assert that it was  not  explained  in  the
    decision what document it was that produced that  information.   It  is
    asserted that if the Claimant did not produce the order  then  she  had
    not complied with the requirements of  the  Rules  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in accepting the same.

5.   Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers  on  15th
    December 2015. The reasons for the grant of permission were that it was
    considered arguable that it was insufficient for the Claimant  to  tell
    the judge that the family court had granted her  an  order  for  direct
    access to her son and that corroboration was required.

6.   The appeal now comes before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether  or
    not there was an error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

7.   I heard representations from Mr Melvin for the Secretary of  State  and
    from Mr Abrahams for the Claimant in his appeal.  As neither party  was
    represented at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the Secretary
    of State was not aware precisely  what  documentation  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal  when  the  decision  was  made.    The  First-tier
    Tribunal recorded at paragraph 7 of the decision that he  was  provided
    with documents  at  the  hearing  including  confirmation  that  family
    proceedings were ongoing and that a hearing was due on 2 February 2015.
    I am satisfied, having perused the file  and  having  established  that
    there was indeed a contact order dated 20 May 2015  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal confirming that there was a hearing on  2  February  2015
    and that contact was ordered to take place between the Claimant and her
    son every other Sunday from 10:00am to 7:00pm. The First-tier  Tribunal
    had sufficient evidence before it to conclude  that  the  Claimant  was
    taking an active role in her child's upbringing.  That  order  predated
    the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing by about two months and was  not
    the only basis on which the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  the  decision,
    credibility also having been  accepted.   In  the  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied there was sufficient evidence for the First-tier Tribunal  in
    terms of court documentation confirming access rights to the child  and
    an ongoing active  role  in  the  child's  upbringing  to  justify  the
    conclusion that the  requirements  of  section  E-LTRPT.2.4  were  met.
    Therefore there was no error of law.

8.   I dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal in those circumstances.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.  I do not set the decision aside.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

