
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49518/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25 July 2014                                 |On 05 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          miss Virtue Anuri Nwokoro
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M K Hasan


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The parties are hereafter referred to as they were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal so that Miss Nwokoro is the appellant and  the  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department is the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a Nigerian national who was born on 25 November  1982.
    She appealed the decision of the respondent made on  19  November  2013
    refusing to vary her leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant. Removal directions  were  also  issued  against
    her.

 3. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal and the
    appeal was heard by Tribunal Judge Fox.  In a determination promulgated
    on 16 May 2014 the judge allowed the appeal "insofar as the  matter  is
    returned to the respondent to reconsider  her  decision  in  accordance
    with the evidential flexibility policy".

 4. The  respondent  took  objection  to  that  decision  and  applied  for
    permission to appeal and the application was granted.

The Rule 24 Response and Cross - Appeal

 5. In response the appellant filed a Rule 24 reply and cross-appeal to the
    effect that there was an e-mail from the respondent  to  the  appellant
    seeking further information.  This showed that the  process  under  the
    evidential flexibility policy had already been engaged in and  on  that
    premise the First-tier Tribunal was of the view that enquiries ought to
    be fully completed.  It was argued that the judge was correct therefore
    to remit to the Secretary of State as the policy is not the only  power
    or source through which evidence or  information  could  be  requested.
    There are also the provisions of paragraph 245AA of the Rules.  In  any
    event the respondent would  not  be  prejudiced  by  the  appeal  being
    remitted as she is not obliged to grant the appellant  leave  following
    the determination.  Any error of law by the judge is not  material  and
    the respondent "if they are adamant that their decision was correct  in
    the first place simply needs to remake the same decision  causing  very
    little, if any administrative burden."

 6. The appellant also challenges the findings of the judge  at  paragraphs
    27 to 33 of the determination.  In essence the  argument  is  that  the
    appellant sought the services of lawyers and therefore clearly had  not
    considered the SOC codes  herself.   Therefore,  for  the  Tribunal  to
    penalise her or find against her in that respect is arguably  erroneous
    and against the evidence.  The  judge  also  failed  to  make  adequate
    credibility findings with proper reasoning, failed to  appreciate  that
    the respondent ought to have noticed and raised enquiries following the
    fact that the SOC code and the description given in the contracts  were
    different. There is the further assertion that the  appellant's  actual
    role is much higher than the role given through the  SOC  code  in  the
    application.

 7. Another matter of complaint is that no findings were made in respect of
    Article 8, but if the respondent's grounds were found to be sustainable
    and the determination set aside there  needed  to  be  a  comprehensive
    reconsideration of the appeal and the matter should be remitted to  the
    First-tier for a de novo hearing on all  issues  with  no  findings  or
    evidence preserved.



My Deliberations

 8. The grounds seeking permission submit that the respondent  refused  the
    original application, inter alia, because the appellant had  failed  to
    provide evidence of working in an occupation which appears on the  list
    of occupations skilled to National Qualifications Framework Level 4  as
    stated in the Codes of  Practice  detailed  under  Appendix  J  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   The  judge's  findings,  which  are  set  out  at
    paragraphs 27 to 34 of the determination, include in paragraph 31  that
    "upon the available evidence I am not satisfied that the  appellant  is
    engaged in business activities as claimed".

 9. It is  readily  apparent  therefore  that  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules to enable her to
    succeed in her application under  the  points-based  system.   At  that
    point one would have expected the appeal to have been  dismissed  under
    the Immigration Rules and an assessment made of the appellant's Article
    8 claim.  As to that the judge said merely that as the  matter  remains
    outstanding before the  Secretary  of  State  he  made  no  finding  in
    relation to Article 8 ECHR.

10. It appears that the reason for saying this  is  that  in  the  previous
    paragraph he found  it  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  respondent
    intended to conduct  further  investigations  in  accordance  with  her
    evidential flexibility policy when she  issued  an  e-mail  and,  as  a
    result, he directed that the matter be returned to  the  respondent  to
    reinstate her request for further information "and  the  respondent  is
    free to make enquiries in accordance with my findings should she  chose
    to do so". The e-mail is referred to at page 3 of the  decision  letter
    of 19 November 2013.

11. As part of the reason for the refusal of  the  appellant's  application
    the respondent was not satisfied that on a date  falling  within  three
    months prior to the date of the application the appellant registered  a
    new business in which she is a director.  The reason for coming to that
    conclusion is because the document provided is only the application  to
    register with Companies House and not the  current  report  naming  the
    appellant as the director with a business address and as such does  not
    meet the requirements specified under Appendix A.

12. The appellant denied ever receiving that e-mail.  It is not clear  from
    the judge's findings what he made of that aspect, but  whether  it  was
    received or not he found that  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  the
    appellant registered as a director with Companies  House  within  three
    months of her application as an entrepreneur.  To that extent therefore
    it appears he was saying that she met that part of the Rule.   However,
    she still needed to show that she was working in  an  occupation  which
    appears on the list of occupations skilled to  National  Qualifications
    Framework Level 4 and he found that she did not do so.

13. The importance of the e-mail referred to appears to be because of  what
    was  recorded  as  the  submission  made  in  paragraph   24   of   the
    determination.  Mr Hasan submitted  that  the  respondent  should  have
    sought clarification from the appellant about whether the SOC code 1135
    was the appropriate code.  He submitted that the evidential flexibility
    policy applied and that the e-mail  demonstrates  that  the  respondent
    intended to actively apply the evidential flexibility policy.

14. At paragraph 34 of the  determination  the  judge  states  that  it  is
    reasonable to conclude that the respondent intended to conduct  further
    investigations in accordance with  her  evidential  flexibility  policy
    when she issued "the e-mail".  It was for that reason that  the  matter
    was returned to the respondent to reinstate  her  request  for  further
    information.

15. What is entirely unclear is how or why the respondent was  required  to
    make such investigations, particularly in light of paragraph  245AA  of
    the Rules.  The request for the supply of the current  Companies  House
    report naming the appellant as a director of the  business  to  support
    her application was a request made for a specific document as envisaged
    by Rule 245AA.  The Secretary of State is  only  required  to  consider
    documents that have been submitted with an application  and  will  only
    consider documents submitted  after  the  application  where  they  are
    submitted in accordance with sub-paragraph (b) of 245AA which states as
    follows:-

         "(b) If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which:

              (i) Some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted (for
                  example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);

              (ii)     A document is in the wrong format (for example, if  a
                  letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or

              (iii)    A document is a copy and not an original document; or



              (iv)     A document does not  contain  all  of  the  specified
                  information;

         ..."

16. The relevant Rule goes on to state that documents will not be requested
    where a specified document has  not  been  submitted  (for  example  an
    English language certificate is missing), or where the ... Secretary of
    State did not anticipate that addressing the omission or error referred
    to in sub-paragraph (b) will lead to a grant  because  the  application
    will be refused for other reasons.  The Rule also sets out that if  the
    applicant has submitted a specified document in the wrong format or  is
    a copy or does not maintain all of the specified information etc.,  the
    application may be granted exceptionally as long as  the  Secretary  of
    State is satisfied that the specified documents  are  genuine  and  the
    applicant meets all of the other requirements.

17. In the light of paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules absent further
    reasoning by the judge it  is  not  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the
    respondent intended or was required to conduct further  investigations,
    the e-mail demonstrating only that the information sought by it  should
    be provided.  It never was provided  and  there  is  a  dispute  as  to
    whether the e-mail was ever received, but in the event the refusal,  as
    the judge found, was because the  appellant  was  engaged  in  business
    activity below the required skill level.

18. It is entirely unclear  to  me  therefore  what  was  expected  of  the
    respondent under the "evidential flexibility policy",  or  indeed  Rule
    245AA, if that was what was meant, because it is readily apparent  that
    the application itself was bound to fail given the basis upon which  it
    was made and the code given which was  provided  by  the  appellant  or
    those acting on her behalf.  Although the appellant asserted  that  the
    reason the application was made using the wrong code was the  fault  of
    her  former  representatives  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's
    evidence taken at its highest demonstrates that she  did  not  need  to
    defer to another professional on this matter because she holds  herself
    out as an expert in the field of employment  issues  (para  33  of  the
    determination).

My Conclusions

19. My conclusions therefore are  that  the  judge  made  findings  on  the
    evidence before him that he was entitled to make.  The  judge  had  the
    benefit of hearing from the appellant who was cross-examined about  the
    evidence that she gave.  There has been an attempt  to  show  that  the
    judge was not entitled to come to those conclusions but for the reasons
    given I found that he was.

20. Where the judge fell into error was in deciding  that  "the  evidential
    flexibility policy" required that the respondent  embark  upon  further
    inquiry, which on the facts found would still be bound to have led to a
    refusal of the application as it was originally made.  The judge should
    therefore have dismissed the appeal.

Decision

21. The Upper Tribunal sets aside the decision of the First-tier judge  and
    in substitution for allowing the appeal to a limited extent substitutes
    a decision that the appeal is dismissed under  the  Immigration  Rules,
    and this is for the reasons set out above.

22. This leaves outstanding the  Article  8  aspect  of  the  appeal.   The
    appellant relied on Article 8 in her grounds of appeal  and  the  judge
    declined to deal with that part of the appeal for the  reasons  stated.
    I find that he should have done so and announced  my  decision  at  the
    hearing.  I sought the views of the representatives. As a result I have
    decided that the matter is to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a hearing before the same judge, who is judge  VMD  Fox,  and  that
    hearing will be limited to the Article 8 human rights issue only.

23. I was not addressed on the matter of anonymity.  However, the facts  do
    not  appear  to  warrant  that  an  anonymity  direction  be  made  and
    accordingly I do not make one.


Signed                              Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton
