

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal Number IA/49387/2013
                                                        IA/49388/2013

                                                           IA/49389/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon
                            Determination Promulgated
On 13th August 2014
                         On 14th August 2014
Prepared 14th August 2014

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                KAMRAN YOUSAF
                                                             First Appellant
                                     And

                                VERD E SAMEEN
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     And

                                ZAYAN KAMRAN
                                                             Third Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Anonymity directions not made
For the Appellant: Mr R Martin (Counsel, instructed by Ahmad and Williams,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The First Appellant applied for leave to remain as a member of an
   entrepreneurial team under Tier 1 of the PBS, the application was made on
   the 11th of October 2013, the second and third appellants applied as his
   dependents. The applications were refused for the reasons given in the
   Refusal Letters of the 6th of November 2013.

2. The Appellants appealed under Notice and Grounds of Appeal of the 20th
   of November 2013. Their appeals were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Ghaffar at Sheldon on the 20th of March 2014 and allowed in a
   determination promulgated on the 4th of April 2014.

3. In the determination the Judge found that on the basis of the evidence
   before him the First Appellant had shown that he met the requirements
   under Tier 1. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal
   asserting that the decision was flawed as the Judge had considered post-
   decision evidence contravening section 85a of the Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. As the applications were refused because
   specified documents had not been submitted and in allowing the appeal the
   Judge had not found that relevant documents had been submitted with the
   application as required.

4. The submissions are set out in the Record of Proceedings. Mr Smart
   relied on the grounds and amplified them. For the Appellant it was
   submitted that all of the relevant documentation had been submitted with
   the application and had been mislaid by the Home Office before the
   application had been considered.

5. Following submissions it became clear that the issue of what had been
   submitted with the application, what had been supplied later and the
   application of section 85A of the 2002 Act were issues that had not been
   identified or addressed in any way in the determination. It is clear that
   these are fundamental issues that go the heart of the case. On the face
   of it the Judge appears to have considered evidence not submitted with
   the application which is clearly an error.

6. In the circumstances I am satisfied that the Judge erred in the approach
   to the evidence both with regard to its date of submission and
   admissibility. Accordingly given the fundamental nature of the error it
   is appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-
   hearing on all issues with no findings being preserved. The Appellants
   are permitted to serve further evidence relating to the documentation
   submitted and the Secretary of State is to have the right to reply.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The appeals of the Appellants are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
re-hearing on all matters.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

I make no fee award, this will be a matter for the First-tier Tribunal.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 13th August 2014


