

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/49707/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 December 2015                           |On 18 January 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MOHAMMeD RASEL
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr  Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Karim, counsel, instructed by MA Consultants


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Dean who,  on  23  June  2015,  allowed  the
    appeal of Mr Mohammed Rasel to the limited extent that it was  remitted
    back to the Secretary of State to make a lawful decision.




Background

2.   Mr Rasel is a citizen of Bangladesh whose date of birth is given  as  5
    April 1975. He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision
    of  the  Secretary  of  State  dated  20  November  2014  refusing  his
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
    his human rights. In that decision the Secretary of State noted that Mr
    Rasel had three dependants:- his wife, AA and his two children  RR  and
    WJA.

3.   Mr Rasel arrived in the United Kingdom on 2 June 2005 and his wife  and
    oldest child were last granted permission to enter  in  November  2009.
    On 10 November 2011 Mr Rasel made an application for leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom. The application was made on a form FLR(O).  Section
    2 of the application form is headed "Dependants who are also  applying"
    and  Mr  Rasel's  dependants  were  identified  in  that  section.  The
    application form was accompanied by a covering letter dated 10 November
    2011.

4.   The final paragraph of the covering letter states:

         "Our client's oldest child is currently attending school  and  will
         have become settled  in  his  way  of  life.  Documents  are  being
         presented to demonstrate that the oldest child is well  settled  in
         the UK. The youngest child was born in the UK. The children  regard
         the UK as their home. They have established a private and a  family
         life in the UK and there will be no justification to interfere with
         this life. Our client has been working since his arrival in the  UK
         and has not been a burden on the state."

5.   According to the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  this  application  was
    rejected with no right of appeal on 25 November 2011. On 21 August 2014
    Mr Rasel was served with a one-stop notice under  Section  120  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In  a  letter  dated  10
    September 2014, which was a response to  the  Section  120  notice,  Mr
    Rasel, through his solicitors, indicated that he  was  relying  on  his
    established  family  and  private  life  in  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    maintained that he was in a genuine  relationship  with  his  wife  and
    children, and that the children had established private lives in the UK
    as they were attending school where they made friends.

6.   In her decision the  Secretary  of  State  considered  the  family  and
    private life of Mr Rasel. The Secretary of State took  account  of  the
    best interests of the children, making specific reference to Section 55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. The Secretary  of
    State also considered whether there were exceptional factors consistent
    with the right to respect  for  private  life  and  family  life  under
    Article 8 that would entitle the family to a grant of leave to  remain.
    In so doing  the  Secretary  of  State  took  account  of  the  various
    relationships Mr Rasel had with his partner and with his  children  and
    took into account the circumstances of the children.

7.   The Secretary of State made  a  decision  to  remove  Mr  Rasel  on  20
    November 2014 under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  1999,
    as it applied at the date of the hearing. This was on an  IS151B  form.
    On the same date decisions were made to  remove  his  dependants,  also
    under Section 10. They were not however served with an IS151B form  but
    with an IS151 Part 2 form which indicated that they only had a right of
    appeal that could be  exercised  once  they  were  outside  the  United
    Kingdom.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

8.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the  Secretary  of  State
    was not represented. Mr Rasel's  representative,  Mr  Karim,  who  also
    appears before us, accepted that the removal directions had  been  made
    in cases of all of the parties and that the Reasons for Refusal  Letter
    addressed Mr Rasel and his children. However, whereas Mr Rasel had been
    given an in-country right of appeal his wife and two children had  not.
    It was submitted by Mr Karim before the First-tier Tribunal that a full
    consideration  of  Mr  Rasel's  family  and  private  life  necessarily
    involved consideration of his wife's circumstances  and  those  of  his
    children because the rights of one encompassed those of the others.  Mr
    Karim argued that it was not  possible  to  make  a  proper  Article  8
    assessment in the absence of in-country rights of  appeal  relating  to
    the dependants.

9.   The Judge noted that the Reasons for Refusal Letter  was  addressed  to
    Mr Rasel, his wife and their two children and that it addressed Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 in relation  to
    the needs and welfare of the children. At paragraph 13 the  Judge  made
    reference to Mr Rasel's immigration history and found that  there  were
    material concerns about his relationship with his wife and  that  these
    matters needed to be considered in a rounded assessment of  his  family
    life and that of his wife and children.

10.  At paragraph 14 the Judge stated:

         "Accordingly, looking at the totality of the evidence before me,  I
         find that this is a case where the respondent's decision is not  in
         accordance with the law and therefore should be remitted for a full
         consideration of the removal decisions in order  that  these  cases
         can be  linked  and  a  rounded  assessment  of  all  the  evidence
         undertaken."

    The Judge thereafter allowed the appeals to  the  limited  extent  that
    they were remitted back to the Secretary of State.


The Grounds of Appeal

11.  The Secretary of State's grounds of appeal indicated that,  despite  Mr
    Rasel's wife and children being dependent upon  his  application,  they
    had not made applications of their own. The grounds state that the only
    person within the family who had made a claim on human  rights  grounds
    was Mr Rasel. The Secretary of State  asserted  that  the  decision  to
    serve the IS151 Part 2 decision notice on the dependants was correct in
    law as they had not made separate claims. The grounds  maintained  that
    the decision of the Secretary of State under appeal  was  not  unlawful
    and that the Judge was wrong to have remitted  the  matter  because  he
    could have considered the various relationships that Mr Rasel had  with
    his children and the  impact  on  the  children  and  that  this  would
    constitute sufficient consideration under Article 8.

Submissions at the Hearing

12.  In his submissions Mr Duffy maintained that Mr Rasel's  dependants  had
    not made human rights claims and referred to the definition of a  human
    rights  claim  contained  within  Section  113  of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He maintained that, as no human rights
    claim had been made by the dependents, they were only granted an out of
    country right of appeal. Mr Duffy submitted, in the  alternative,  that
    even if this was not correct, it was nevertheless open  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to hear the case and to make appropriate findings.

13.   Mr  Karim  submitted  that  the  dependants  had  made  human   rights
    applications.  When  pressed  by  us  he  accepted  that   the   actual
    immigration decision in respect of Mr Rasel was not defective. Mr Karim
    submitted that whilst it was open to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  hear
    the appeal, it was also open to the Tribunal to  remit  the  matter  as
    well.

Discussion

14.  This is an appeal  against  the  decision  to  remove  Mr  Rasel  under
    Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999. As the Secretary  of
    State accepted, Mr Rasel had made a human rights  claim  prior  to  the
    section 10 decision and therefore had  a  suspensive  right  of  appeal
    pursuant to sections 82 and 92(4) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  On the same date, 20 November  2014,  decisions  were
    made under Section 10 in respect of his dependants. These were  on  the
    IS151A Part  2  forms  which  indicated  that  the  dependents  had  no
    suspensive right of appeal.

15.  Mr Karim submits that the  FLR(O)  application  form  received  by  the
    Secretary of State on 11 November 2011 made clear, at section  2,  that
    the dependants were applying on the same basis as Mr Karim.   In  other
    words, these dependants were also making human rights  claims.  Further
    support was identified by reference to the  covering  letter  dated  10
    November 2011. This application was however  rejected  on  25  November
    2011.

16.  The Reasons for Refusal Letter  takes  the  solicitor's  letter  of  10
    September 2014, which was the response to the Section 120 notice issued
    in August of that year, as the relevant claim for  family  and  private
    life and one that was made by Mr Rasel only.  This is the basis of  the
    dispute between Mr Rasel and the Secretary of State as to  whether  his
    dependants made human rights claims for the purpose of the  Section  10
    decisions.

17.  What however is not in doubt is that the immigration decision  made  in
    respect of Mr Rasel was not itself defective. The decision  against  Mr
    Rasel was one that the Secretary of State was lawfully entitled to make
    and one that Mr Rasel properly appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    There was therefore a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    Judge was obliged to deal with that appeal. Specifically, the Judge was
    obliged to engage with the grounds  of  appeal  and  to  make  material
    findings in respect of the Article 8 private lives of the children  and
    the impact that the removal decisions would have on their lives (Beoku-
    Betts (FC) (Appellant) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    (Respondent) [2008] UKHL 39 indicates that the First-tier Tribunal  was
    entitled to consider all the family life relationships in  the  context
    of the single appeal). The fact that there were  no  appeals  from  the
    children themselves before him did not absolve the Judge of his duty to
    determine the appeal that was lawfully before him.

18.  It was, and continues to be, open to the dependants to file notices  of
    appeal with the First-tier Tribunal  requesting  that  it  resolve  the
    dispute as to whether they enjoyed in-country rights of appeal  (Basnet
    (Validity of application - respondent) [2012] UKUT 00113).  If  notices
    of appeal were lodged with the First-tier Tribunal and it decided  that
    the dependants did have suspensive rights of appeal  because  they  did
    make human rights claims, then the appeal notices to the dependants are
    likely to have been defective for failing to properly identify their in-
    country rights of appeal. In OI (Notice of decision: time calculations)
    Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00042 the Tribunal gave consideration to the issue
    of whether an appellant required an extension of time  for  lodging  an
    appeal with the Tribunal in circumstances where, inter alia, the notice
    of decision bore a misleading statement as to the time limit  to  bring
    such an appeal. The Tribunal observed as follows at paragraph 15:

         The Notices Regulations are clearly made for the benefit  of  those
         who receive the notices, and as a result the Tribunal has regularly
         held that an applicant or appellant may waive a requirement of  the
         Regulations  by  submitting  a  notice  of  appeal  even   if   the
         Regulations have not been fully complied with. But an applicant  is
         entitled to require compliance  with  the  Regulations,  and  if  a
         notice has not been served by  one  of  the  methods  specified  in
         Regulation 7(1), it has not been lawfully served  at  all,  and  in
         that case time has not yet  begun  to  run  against  any  intending
         appellant.

19.  A recipient of a decision notice that failed to comply with the  notice
    Regulations can therefore  bring  an  appeal  before  the  Tribunal  by
    waiving the need for the Secretary of State for the Home Department  to
    comply with the requirements of such Regulations.

20.  The Secretary  of  State's  decision  in  the  present  appeal  clearly
    engaged with the rights of the  children.  Specific  consideration  was
    given by the Secretary of State  to  the  nature  and  quality  of  the
    private lives they had established.




Decision

21.  We are satisfied that the  decision  under  appeal  fulfilled  all  the
    requirements necessary to be properly  brought  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. Faced with such a decision it was incumbent on the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to have engaged substantively  with  the  appeal  before
    him. There was  nothing  preventing  the  Judge  from  considering  the
    Article 8 rights of  Mr  Rasel's  children  in  the  context  of  their
    father's appeal. We are satisfied that  the  First-tier  Judge  made  a
    material error of law and that it is appropriate to  remit  the  appeal
    back to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  lawful  consideration  of  the
    substantive Article 8 rights at play.

22.  No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]                               15 January 2016
Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

