
[pic]
IAC-hw-am-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/49136/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2016                       |On 21 March 2016                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                           MS ANA ROSA LOPEZ SILVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Soloman, Counsel, instructed by Shanthi & Co,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Samimi, promulgated on 21 July 2015 in  which
    she allowed the appeal of Ms Ana Rosa Lopez Silva (to whom I  refer  as
    the claimant) against the decision of the Secretary of State to  refuse
    her leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  The appeal had been brought
    under Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Appeal
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") and the judge allowed the appeal on  European
    law and on human rights grounds.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nicaragua who entered the  United  Kingdom
    as a visitor on 11 December 2007.  She has  remained  here  ever  since
    having met her partner, Jose Amadeo Gonzalez-Payan, also  a  Nicaraguan
    national, in this country.  They met in 2009 and they have  a  daughter
    born on 5 August  2011.   Mr  Gonzalez-Payan  has  permanent  right  of
    residence under the  EEA  Regulations  as  the  result  of  a  previous
    marriage.  On 25 March 2015 the couple's daughter was registered  as  a
    British citizen pursuant to Section 1(3) of the British Nationality Act
    1981.

 3. The Secretary of State's case is set out in the refusal letter dated 18
    November 2014.  In summary, the respondent considered that the claimant
    did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM under the  partner  route,
    concluding that EX.1 did not apply as the child was  only  3  years  of
    age, was not a British citizen and  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect her to leave the United Kingdom.  It was  also  considered  that
    there would be no insurmountable obstacles  to  the  claimant  and  her
    husband continuing their relationship in Nicaragua.  Similarly  it  was
    concluded that the claimant did not meet the requirements of  leave  to
    remain under Appendix FM, parent route, again as she has overstayed and
    did not meet the requirements of Appendix EX.1 nor did  she  have  sole
    parental responsibility for the child.  It  was  considered  also  that
    having had regard to  Section  55  of  the  UK  Borders  Act  2009  and
    paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules, that there were no exceptional
    circumstances such that the claimant should be granted leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.

 4. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal had been adjourned on 15 June
    2015 to permit the respondent to reconsider  the  appellant's  case  in
    light of the EEA Regulations, point to be raised.  That,  however,  did
    not occur and on 25 June 2015 the  judge  proceeded  to  determine  the
    appeal.

 5. The judge found that:-

      i) the claimant's daughter is  wholly  dependent  on  her  mother  for
         almost every aspect of her life and that the direct consequence  of
         the decision to remove the claimant would be to deprive the ability
         of the daughter (a British citizen) to live in the  United  Kingdom
         [12];

     ii) the possibility of the claimant's daughter living with  her  father
         was neither practical nor realistic [12];

    iii) the claimant's child would be compelled to leave the United Kingdom
         in order to accompany her mother to Nicaragua;

     iv) it was not proportionate in the interest of immigration control  to
         require the claimant to leave in order to make an  application  for
         entry clearance from abroad [16] given that the appellant was fully
         maintained and accommodated by her husband;

      v) in the circumstances of the  case  there  are  factors  that  would
         justify the respondent's exercise of discretion outside  the  Rules
         and that there are compelling factors which justify the exercise of
         discretion outside the Rules [18];

     vi) having had regard to Section 117B of the 2002  Act  [19]  that  the
         claimant's removal would be disproportionate  to  the  respondent's
         interest of immigration control [20].

 6. The judge then allowed the appeal under Article 8 "to the  extent  that
    the matter should be referred back to the respondent for  the  exercise
    of her discretion in the appellant's favour".  The  judge  did  however
    expressly allow the appeal under the EEA Regulations and Article 8.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds that:-



      i) the judge had misdirected herself with respect to Regulation 15A of
         the EEA Regulations in that she had failed properly  to  apply  the
         requirement that the relevant British citizen would  be  unable  to
         reside in the United Kingdom [4], [5] and that as the  claimant  is
         clearly not the primary carer with sole responsibility as  this  is
         shared with the husband [7] it had not been demonstrated  that  the
         child would be compelled to remain in the  United  Kingdom  if  the
         claimant was required to leave [8],  there  being  no  evidence  to
         suggest the father was unable to  assume  caring  responsibilities,
         the reliance on the father's work  commitments  being  insufficient
         [10];

     ii)  having  accepted  that  the  claimant  could   not   satisfy   the
         requirements of the Immigration Rules the  judge's  findings  under
         Article  8  are  flawed  as  the  refusal  would  not   result   in
         unjustifiably harsh circumstances, the judge having failed to  give
         adequate reasons why that is so and, in remitting the matter to the
         Secretary of State, the judge erred materially in law [12], [13].

 8. On 11 December 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic  granted  permission  on
    all grounds.

Submissions

 9. Mr Walker submitted that the judge had  misapplied  the  relevant  case
    law, in particular the guidance  given  in  MA  and  SM  (Zambrano:  EU
    children outside the EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC) and Ahmed  (Amos;
    Zambrano; reg 15A(3)(c) 2006 EEA Regs) [2013] UKUT 00089.  He submitted
    that there had been no proper evidence to show that the applicant was a
    sole carer.  He submitted further that the  high  threshold  identified
    had not been met.

10. Mr Solomon submitted that  the  judge  had  given  proper  reasons  for
    concluding that the  claimant  was  the  primary  carer  and  also  for
    concluding that the child would in effect be  compelled  to  leave  the
    European Union.  He submitted that, having had regard to the principles
    set out in Dasgupta (error of law - proportionality - correct approach)
    [2016] UKUT 00028 (IAC), applying the principles in Edwards v  Bairstow
    [1956] AC 14 as well as Greenwood (No. 2) (para 398 considered)  [2015]
    UKUT 00629 (IAC) it could not be said that the judge's decision was  in
    this case perverse or irrational.  There was he submitted no indication
    that the judge left out of the account any material evidence,  or  took
    into account extraneous matter or that there was  any  other  basis  on
    which the decision could be set aside.

11. Mr Solomon did accept that the judge's decision  to  remit  the  matter
    back to the Secretary of State was inapt given the clear  finding  that
    there would be a breach of Article 8 flowing from removal.

12. I indicated that, for reasons which I set out below,  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law
    insofar as it relates to allowing the appeal under the EEA  Regulations
    but that I was not satisfied that  the  decision  allowing  the  appeal
    pursuant to Article 8 did involve the making of an  error  of  law.   I
    asked for submissions as to how in  these  circumstances  the  decision
    should be remade.  Mr Sullivan was content for me in the  circumstances
    to formally dismiss the appeal under the EEA Regulations.

The Law

    The law

14. Regulations 15A of the EEA Regulations provides, so far as is  relevant
    to the facts of this case:

    15A. Derivative Right of Residence

    A person ("P") who is not  an  exempt  person  and  who  satisfies  the
    criteria in (2), (3), (4) (4A) or (5) of this regulation is entitled to
    a derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom for  as  long  as  P
    satisfied the relevant criteria.

    -(4) ...

    (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

    P is the primary carer of a  British  citizen  ("the  relevant  British
    citizen");

    The relevant British Citizen is residing in the United Kingdom; and,

    The relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in the UK or  in
    another EEA state of P were required to leave.

    (5)  ...

    (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if

    (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person; and

    (b) P-

    (i) is the person who has  primary  responsibility  for  that  person's
    care; or

    (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's care with  one
    other person

    who is not an exempt person.

    (7A) Where P is to be regarded as a primary carer of another person  by
    virtue of paragraph (7)(b)(ii) the criteria in paragraphs  (2)(b)(iii),
    (4)(b) and (4A)(c) shall be considered on the basis that both P and the
    person with whom care responsibility is shared  would  be  required  to
    leave the United Kingdom.

    (7B) Paragraph (7A) does  not  apply  if  the  person  with  whom  care
    responsibility is shared acquired a derivative right to reside  in  the
    United Kingdom as a result of this regulation prior to P assuming equal
    care responsibility.

    (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a person's care
    for the purpose of paragraph (7) on  the  sole  basis  of  a  financial
    contribution towards that person's care.

    (9) A person who otherwise satisfies the  criteria  in  paragraph  (2),
    (3), (4), (4A) or (5) will not be entitled to  a  derivative  right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom where the Secretary of State  has  made  a
    decision under

         (a) regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1) or 20A(1); or
         (b) regulation 21B(2), where that decision was taken in the
    preceding twelve months.

15. Regulation 15A(4A) was inserted to comply with  the  CJEU's  ruling  in
    Ruiz Zambrano v ONEM [2012] EUECJ C-34-09  where CJEU held:

      i) Article 20 of the TFEU "precludes national measures which have  the
      effect of depriving citizens of the  European  Union  of  the  genuine
      enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred by virtue of  their
      status as citizens of the European Union" (paragraph 42); and

      ii) A refusal to grant  a  right  of  residence  to  a  third  country
      national with dependent minor children in the member state where those
      children are nationals and reside has such an effect  (paragraph  43),
      because "[i]t must be assumed that such a  refusal  would  lead  to  a
      situation where those children, citizens of the European Union,  would
      have to leave  the  territory  of  the  European  Union  in  order  to
      accompany their parents".

16. The CJEU considered the matter again in Murat  Dereci  [2011]  CJEU  C-
    256/11 the Court clarifying that denial of the genuine enjoyment of the
    substance of EU citizenship rights corresponded to  the  situation  'in
    which the Union citizen has, in fact, to leave not only  the  territory
    of the Member State of which he is a national but also the territory of
    the Union as a whole', a situation described as exceptional.  The Court
    did not expand on what circumstances might  oblige  an  EU  citizen  to
    leave the territory of the European Union, though it held [68] that:

         the mere fact that it might appear desirable to  a  national  of  a
         Member State, for economic reasons or in order to keep  his  family
         together in the territory of the Union' for residence rights to  be
         granted was insufficient in  itself  to  conclude  that  denial  of
         residence would cause such departure

17. The scope of the principle in Zambrano was considered in detail by  the
    Court of Appeal in Harrison v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 where Elias  LJ
    (with whom Ward and Pitchford LJJ agreed) held [63] that  the  Zambrano
    principle would not apply except where the EU  citizen  is  effectively
    forced to leave the territory of the EU.

18. I am assisted by Hickinbottom J's distillation in R (ota Sanneh) v  DWP
    and HMRC [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin) of the relevant  principles  extracted
    from the cases referred to  above.  He  summarised  the  principles  as
    follows [19]:-

       i) All nationals of all member states are EU citizens. It is for each
       member state to determine  how  nationality  of  that  state  may  be
       acquired, but, once it is acquired by an individual, that  individual
       has the right to enjoy the substance of the rights that attach to the
       status of EU citizen, including the right to reside in the  territory
       of the EU. That  applies  equally  to  minors,  irrespective  of  the
       nationality of their parents, and irrespective of whether one or both
       parents have EU citizenship.

       ii) An EU citizen must have the freedom to enjoy the right to  reside
       in the EU, genuinely and in practice. For a minor, that  freedom  may
       be jeopardised if, although legally entitled to reside in the EU,  he
       is compelled to leave EU territory because an ascendant relative upon
       whom he is dependent is compelled to  leave.  That  relative  may  be
       compelled to leave by dint of direct state action  (e.g.  he  is  the
       subject of an order for removal) or by  virtue  of  being  driven  to
       leave and reside in a non-EU country by force of  economic  necessity
       (e.g.  by  having  insufficient  resources  to  provide  for  his  EU
       child(ren) because the state refuses him a work permit).  The  rights
       of an EU child will not be infringed if he is not compelled to leave.
       Therefore, even where a non-EU ascendant  relative  is  compelled  to
       leave EU territory, the article 20 rights of an EU child will not  be
       infringed if there is another ascendant relative who has the right of
       residence in the EU, and who can and will in practice  care  for  the
       child.

       iii) It is for the national courts to determine,  as  a  question  of
       fact on the evidence before  it,  whether  an  EU  citizen  would  be
       compelled to leave the EU to follow a non-EU national upon whom he is
       dependent.

       iv) Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles 20 and  21
       of the TFEU. In particular, EU law will not be engaged where  the  EU
       citizen is not compelled to leave the EU,  even  if  the  quality  or
       standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result  of  the
       non-EU national upon whom he is dependent is (for example) removed or
       prevented from working; although (a) diminution  in  the  quality  of
       life might engage EU law  if  (and  only  if)  it  is  sufficient  in
       practice to compel the a relevant ascendant relative, and  hence  the
       EU dependent citizen, to leave, and (b) such actions  as  removal  or
       prevention of work may result in  an  interference  with  some  other
       right, such as the right to respect for family life under  article  8
       of the European Convention on Human Rights.

       v) Although such article 8 rights are similar  in  scope  to  the  EU
       rights conferred by article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of
       the European Union, the provisions of the Charter  are  addressed  to
       member states only when they are implementing EU law. If  EU  law  is
       not  engaged,  then  the  domestic  courts  have  to  undertake   the
       examination of the right to family life under article 8; but that  is
       an entirely distinct area of protection.

       vi) The overriding of the general national right to refuse  a  non-EU
       national  a  right  of  residence,  by  reference  to  the  effective
       enjoyment of the right to  reside  of  a  dependent  EU  citizen,  is
       described in both Dereci (paragraph 67) and Harrison  (paragraph  66)
       as  "exceptional",  meaning  (as  explained  in  the  latter),  as  a
       principle, it will not be regularly engaged.

19. The applicable principles where, as here, there is another relative who
    may be able to care for the child, are further elaborated  in  Hines  v
    Lambeth  [2014] EWCA Civ 660 where Vos LJ held [21], [23]-[24]:

    20. Accordingly, in my judgment, the judge was right, applying Harrison,
        to conclude as he did in paragraph  21  of  his  judgment  that  the
        claimant was only entitled to  accommodation  if  Brandon  would  be
        effectively compelled to leave the United Kingdom if  she  left.  He
        was also right to point out that what amounts  to  circumstances  of
        compulsion may differ from case to case. As Elias LJ said:  "to  the
        extent that the quality or standard of life [of the EU citizen] will
        be seriously impaired by excluding the  non  EU  national,  that  is
        likely in practice to infringe the right of residence itself because
        it will effectively compel the EU citizen to give up  residence  and
        travel with the non-EU national". It is for  this  reason  that  the
        welfare of the child in this case comes  into  play,  again  as  the
        judge held.


21. ...


   23. I have no doubt  that  the  test  applicable  under  regulation  15A
       (4A)(c) is clear and can be given  effect  without  contravening  EU
       law. The reviewer has to consider the welfare of the British citizen
       child and the extent to which the quality or standard  of  his  life
       will be impaired if the non-EU citizen is required to leave. This is
       all for the purpose of answering  the  question  whether  the  child
       would, as a matter of practicality, be unable to remain in  the  UK.
       This requires a consideration, amongst other things, of  the  impact
       which the removal of the primary carer would have on the child,  and
       the alternative care available for the child.

   24. There was much discussion in argument as to the kind  of  alternative
       care that might be required in order to  avoid  the  conclusion  that
       the child would be forced  to  leave.  It  would  be  undesirable,  I
       think, for the court to lay down any guidelines in this  regard,  but
       it was, as I have said, common ground that an available  adoption  or
       foster care placement would not be adequate for  this  purpose.  That
       is because the  quality  of  the  life  of  the  child  would  be  so
       seriously impaired by his removal from his mother  to  be  placed  in
       foster care that he would be effectively compelled  to  leave.  I  do
       not, however, think that all things being  equal  the  removal  of  a
       child from the care of one responsible parent to the care of  another
       responsible parent would normally be expected so seriously to  impair
       his quality and standard of life that he would be effectively  forced
       to leave the UK. Apart from anything else, he would, even if  he  did
       leave, still only have the care of one of his  previously  two  joint
       carers.

21. It is not disputed that a British child cannot be compelled by  law  to
    leave the United  Kingdom.  The  question  is  thus  whether  he  would
    effectively have to leave the EU if his mother is refused  a  right  of
    residence.

22. The EEA Regulations require two questions of fact to be answered:

               1) Is the applicant the primary carer of a  British  citizen;
                  and,

      2) If so, would the relevant British citizen be unable  to  reside  in
         the UK or in another EEA state if the applicant  were  required  to
         leave?

23. If the answer to the first question is yes,  it  does  not  necessarily
    follow that the answer to the second question  must  be  yes.  That  is
    because there may be another person able to provide care,  and  as  the
    case law establishes, the threshold of establishing compulsion is  high
    - see Harrison at [66]-[70]. It is not  the  same  test  as  showing  a
    breach of article 8.

13. I accept that it was open to the judge to conclude  that  the  claimant
    was a primary carer, given the child's age and the undisputed fact that
    her father works full-time.  I do not consider that the  definition  of
    primary carer requires that person to be the sole care giver.

14. I accept that there is a high threshold to overcome in showing that the
    child would be compelled to leave the United Kingdom - that is  evident
    from the case law.  I bear in mind in particular what was said in Hines
    at [23] and [24].

15. There is no indication that in this case the judge had  regard  to  the
    binding authorities of the Court of Appeal and the  European  Court  of
    Justice referred to above or that she  applied  them,  not  least  when
    considering the fact that there is in this case a father  who  has  the
    right of residence in the United Kingdom. It  is  remarkable  from  the
    judge's decision that there is no indication that  the  judge  properly
    considered the question of whether the  father  could  look  after  the
    child, what difficulties there would be if he did  so  and  the  impact
    that there would be on the child.  The finding that the  husband  would
    "clearly find it impossible to look after his daughter on his  own"  is
    unreasoned and the basis on which that conclusion was  reached  is  not
    discernible from the summary  of  the  evidence.   The  fact  that  the
    possibility of the daughter living with the father is not practical  or
    not  realistic  is  also  not  reasoned  sufficiently.   There  is   no
    indication that what was said in MA and SM in particular at [13.  (iv)]
    and certainly the reference to  ZH  (Tanzania)  and  the  balancing  is
    directly contrary to the approach commended by the Court of  Appeal  in
    Harrison and Hines.

16. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge did involve the making of an error of law in respect  of
    the decision to allow the appeal pursuant to the EEA Regulations.

17. In remaking the appeal on this ground, I consider that while it may  be
    difficult for the father to look after his child, it has not been shown
    he is incapable of doing so. While it may impinge  on  his  ability  to
    work, that is a financial matter, and insufficient  evidence  has  been
    provided to show that he or the child  would  be  destitute.  There  is
    insufficient evidence that the child would not be cared  for,  or  that
    the child's welfare would be so impaired by being looked after  by  her
    father, that she would be compelled to leave the United Kingdom  to  be
    with her father.

18. Turning to Article 8, Mr  Walker's  submissions  on  this  matter  were
    limited and he accepted that the  main  thrust  of  the  case  was  the
    challenge to the EEA Regulations.  He accepted that there is in reality
    no  challenge  to  the  judge's  findings   that   removal   would   be
    disproportionate or that this was a situation to which section 117B (6)
    of the 2002 Act applied.  I observe in passing that it is not  entirely
    clear why it was conceded that EX.1 did not apply in this  case,  given
    that finding.  Certainly, the refusal letter in which it  is  concluded
    that it does not is framed in terms that the child  is  not  a  British
    citizen which of course she now is.

19. Having had regard to the decision in  Treebhawon  and  others  (section
    117B (6) [2015] UKUT 674, I consider that in this case  the  judge  had
    fairly concluded, having directed herself properly as to the law,  that
    the claimant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with
    her child, which is not in dispute, and concluded that it would not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the United Kingdom.   The  test
    of whether it is reasonable or not for a  child  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom is not the same as the test in respect  of  meeting  Regulation
    15A (4A) of the EEA Regulations.  It is evident from the case  law  set
    out above that the threshold is significantly higher and because it was
    shown that compulsion has to be shown  and  that  the  child  would  be
    unable to go.

20. The finding that it would be unreasonable to expect the child to go  to
    Nicaragua is not challenged in the grounds of appeal.

21. I consider that when viewed as a whole, the judge's decision  does  set
    out adequately the basis on which she reached the  conclusion  that  it
    would not be reasonable for the child to leave the United Kingdom.  The
    judge also sets out [16] that the claimant  speaks  English,  is  fully
    maintained and accommodated by her husband and has not been a burden on
    the tax payer and the judge does refer [17] to the unjustifiably  harsh
    circumstances test set out in Iftikhar Ahmed [2014] EWHC  300  (Admin).
    That test did not of course deal with the  circumstances  whereas  here
    there are unchallenged findings with regards to the public interest  in
    respect of Section 117B (6) which mirror the test set out in EX.1.

22. Having had regard to  Dasgupta  and  Greenwood,  I  consider  that  the
    challenge here is in fact a rationality challenge.  Whilst the decision
    was clearly generous, it was nonetheless open to the judge to  conclude
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to go  to  live  in
    Nicaragua and she is after all a British citizen and her father has the
    right of residence in the United Kingdom. The  judge  directed  herself
    properly as to the law, and it cannot be shown that  she  did  not,  in
    reaching her conclusion under article 8, follow that self-direction.

23. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the decision in this case involved
    the making of an error of law and I uphold this part of  the  decision.
    I am, however, concerned that the judge appeared to have erred in  this
    case in suggesting that the matter was remitted  to  the  Secretary  of
    State.  I do not consider that appropriate and I  therefore  substitute
    the decision that the appeal is allowed on Article 8  grounds.   I  do,
    however, consider that thought should be  given  whether  in  fact  the
    claimant does meet the requirements of EX1 given the  finding  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the child to relocate to Nicaragua.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law insofar as it concluded that the respondent's decision was
    in breach of the EEA Regulations did involve the making of an error  of
    law and I set it aside. I remake the appeal by dismissing  it  on  that
    ground.

 2. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  that  removing  the  appellant
    would be in breach of article 8 of the Human Rights Convention did  not
    involve the making of an error of law,  and  I  uphold  that  decision,
    subject to the observation that the matter does not need to be remitted
    to the respondent, contrary to what the First-tier Tribunal ordered.



Signed                                  Date:  10 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

