
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/49215/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 January 2016                   |On 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                KAMRUL ISLAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Shah, solicitor, from Taj solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Traynor,  promulgated  on  5  August
2015, which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was  born  on  5  August  1982  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh. On 25 November  2014  the  respondent  refused  the  appellant's
application for leave to remain in the UK as the spouse of a person  present
and settled in the UK, and gave directions for the appellant's removal  from
the UK under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

The Judge's Decision

4.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

5.     Grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  2  December  2015   Judge
Hollingworth gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

         "3.      An arguable error of law has occurred. At paragraph 26 the
         Judge has stated that the  respondent  had  failed  to  adduce  any
         evidence whatsoever to substantiate  the  allegation  contained  in
         paragraph 15 of the refusal letter. It is  clear,  therefore,  that
         the available necessary evidence was not in fact in  front  of  the
         Judge.

         4. In the circumstances an arguable error of law  has  occurred  in
         that the case could not be fairly determined.  The  Judge  did  not
         have all necessary documents before him."

The hearing

6.    (a)    Mr  Avery,  for  the  respondent,  told  me  that  because  the
appellant's immigration history included an  uncertainty  about  an  English
language test certificate produced to support an earlier application  (which
led to a grant of leave to remain as a student),  the  appellant  could  not
fulfil the suitability requirements of appendix FM of the rules. He told  me
that the respondent was unrepresented at the hearing in this case, and  that
the Judge confirmed, at [8]  of  the  decision,  that  he  had  all  of  the
necessary documents to consider the appeal in the respondent's absence.

      (b)   Mr Avery argued that what the  Judge  says  at  [8]  is  starkly
contradicted at [26] where the Judge finds  that  the  respondent  does  not
lead sufficient evidence to substantiate  an  allegation  made  against  the
appellant. He argued that the Judge made a material  error  of  fact  and  a
material misdirection in law because the Judge did not adjourn the case  for
evidence to be produced to support the  Secretary  of  State's  position  in
relation to English language certificates from ETS.

      (c)   Mr Avery moved the third ground of appeal &  told  me  that  the
Judge's assessment of the appellant's  partner's  medical  condition  placed
undue reliance on the medical evidence produced and  did  not  consider  the
availability of treatment in Bangladesh. He told me that at [27]  the  Judge
misinterprets the requirements of appendix FM and so falls into  a  material
error of law. He told me that at [29] the Judge incorrectly interpreted  the
financial requirements imposed on recipients of disability living  allowance
He asked me to set the decision aside and to dismiss the appeal.

7.    (a)   Mr Shah, for the appellant told me that the  decision  does  not
contain any errors of law, material  or  otherwise.  He  told  me  that  the
decision is a well-reasoned decision containing findings of fact  which  led
the Judge to a conclusion which was well within  the  range  of  conclusions
reasonably open to the Judge. He reminded me that no  application  had  been
made by either party  for  an  adjournment,  and  that  the  respondent  had
specifically asked the Judge to deal with the  case  on  the  basis  of  the
documentary evidence available. He told me  that  the  reasons  for  refusal
letter refused to say that the appellant's  English  language  test  results
were based on fraud.  Instead  the  respondent's  position  is  simply  that
questions could  be  raised  about  the  authenticity  of  the  ETS  English
language test certificate earlier relied on by the appellant. He  relied  on
the case of R (on the application of  Gazi)  v  SSHD  (ETS-JR)  [2015]  UKUT
00327.

       (b)    Mr  Shah  told  me  that  the  Judge  carefully  assessed  the
appellant's  credibility  before  finding  that  he  could   rely   on   the
appellant's evidence. The Judge then found that the  appellant  and  sponsor
were enjoy a true  and  subsisting  relationship,  and  placed  reliance  of
comprehensive medical evidence, which indicated that  the  sponsor  requires
blood  transfusions  every  three  weeks,  before  finding  that  there  are
insurmountable  obstacles  which  prevent  the  sponsor  from  joining   the
appellant in Bangladesh.

Analysis

8. The respondent compares [8] and [26] of the decision and argues that  the
Judge should have adjourned this case for production  of  further  evidence.
Rule 4(3)(h) of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 empowers the Tribunal to adjourn  a  hearing.
Rule 2 sets  out  the  overriding  objectives  under  the  Rules  which  the
Tribunal "must seek to give effect to" when exercising any power  under  the
Rules. The overriding objective is to deal with  cases  fairly  and  justly.
This is defined as including  "(a) dealing with the case in ways  which  are
proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity of  the  issues,
the anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of the  Tribunal;
(b)  avoiding  unnecessary  formality  and  seeking   flexibility   in   the
proceedings; (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that  the  parties  are
able to  participate  fully  in  the  proceedings;  (d)  using  any  special
expertise of  the  Tribunal  effectively;  (e)  avoiding  delay  so  far  as
compatible with proper consideration of the issues".

9.    In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it  was
held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds, the  question  for
the Upper Tribunal is not whether the First-tier acted reasonably.   Rather,
the test to be applied is that of fairness:  was there  any  deprivation  of
the affected party's right to a fair hearing?

10.   What the respondent cannot avoid is that not only did  the  respondent
not make an application to adjourn, the respondent specifically  asked  that
the case be determined on the available evidence. That  is  what  the  Judge
did. The respondent had lodged the usual PF1 bundle  and  declared  that  it
was on that evidence that  the  respondent  was  content  to  rely.  It  was
therefore open to the Judge to make what he could of that evidence  and,  if
he felt it was necessary, set out his criticisms of  that  evidence.  It  is
not for the Judge to set off on his own enquiries to  assist  one  party  in
pleading their case. There is no merit in the first ground of appeal.

11.   The first part of the respondent's  decision  is  that  the  appellant
cannot  satisfy  the  suitability  requirements  found  in  S-LTR  2.2.  The
respondent sets out the appellant's history of  applications  for  leave  to
remain as a student. The Judge deals with that aspect of the  decision  that
[25] & [26]. He relies on RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006]  UKAIT  00086
and AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773.

12.   In R (on the application of Gazi) v SSHD (ETS-JR)  [2015]  UKUT  00327
the tribunal considered the Respondent's generic evidence in ETS  cases.  At
paragraph 35 (of that decision) the tribunal found  that  the  evidence  had
the hallmarks of care, thoroughness,  underlying  expertise  and  sufficient
reliability such as to warrant an assessment that an applicant's  TOEIC  had
been procured by deception. However, the tribunal did  not  state  that  the
generic evidence was infallible and, indeed, at paragraph  14  the  tribunal
suggested that all cases involving ETS certificates  would  be  "unavoidably
fact sensitive". The tribunal said that "Each litigant will put forward  his
or her individual disputed  assertions,  agreed  facts,  considerations  and
circumstances", which  must  be  assessed  alongside  the  generic  evidence
submitted on the respondent's behalf. It follows that the tribunal  in  Gazi
did not suggest that the generic evidence would determinative in all  cases.
The implication is that where a judge simply rejects  the  generic  evidence
in ETS cases that is arguably an error of law, but where  a  judge  makes  a
rounded assessment of all the evidence, as required by Gazi,  and  concludes
that overall the evidence is insufficient to show that  deception  has  been
practised then there is no arguable error of law. The Tribunal  is  entitled
to take the appellant's ability to speak English as a factor.  The  tribunal
in Gazi specifically  acknowledged  at  paragraph  40  that  this  might  be
relevant.

13.   It has always been the appellant's position that his  English-language
test certificate is genuine. The respondent has  not  produced  the  generic
evidence referred to both in Gazi and in the grounds  of  appeal  either  to
the First-tier or for the purposes of this appeal, nor  has  the  respondent
produced the decision of 6 May 2014 which did not carry a right  of  appeal.
In this matter the burden of proof rests with the  respondent  so  that  the
Judge's finding that the  burden  of  proof  is  not  discharged  is  not  a
material error of law. It  is,  in  fact,  an  accurate  reflection  of  the
evidence upon which the respondent asked the Judge to decide the case.

14.   In any event the respondent's reliance on S-LTR2.2 is flawed  because,
even if the appellant's English-language certificate had  been  fraudulently
obtained, it is not a document submitted in relation to the application.  It
is a document which  was  submitted  in  2012  in  relation  to  a  separate
application.

15.   The respondent argues that the Judge's finding at [30] that there  are
insurmountable obstacles to the pursuit of  family  life  in  Bangladesh  is
flawed  because  it  is  based  on  medical  evidence  and  not  on  country
background reports.

16.   At [30] the Judge quotes at length from a report from the  appellant's
consultant haematologist. It is beyond dispute that  the  appellant  suffers
from a lifelong illness and requires  blood  transfusion  once  every  three
weeks. The consultant haematologist says that if the sponsor  "...  were  to
go to Bangladesh to receive treatment the outcome would  be  disastrous...".
That is pretty clear and unchallenged evidence from a  reliable  source.  At
[31] the Judge balances  the  evidence  from  the  consultant  haematologist
against the information provided by  the  respondent  from  the  country  of
origin information service use of the Home Office. The Judge carefully  sets
out  his  reasons  for  preferring  the   evidence   from   the   consultant
haematologist.

17.   It is clear from the terms of the  decision  that  the  Judge  had  to
decide which source of evidence he preferred. There is  a  conflict  between
the evidence from the consultant haematologist and  the  evidence  from  the
country  of  information  service  unit.  It  is  pars  judicis  to  resolve
conflicts of evidence. It is not an error of law to  prefer  one  source  of
evidence of another provided adequate reasons  for  finding  one  source  of
evidence more reliable than another are given. At [31] the Judge  does  just
that.

18.   At [31] the Judge  acknowledges  that  there  is  a  conflict  in  the
evidence, and sets out in clear, concise and unambiguous terms  his  reasons
for preferring the evidence of the consultant haematologist. It  is  not  an
error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too little weight or too  much
weight to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged.  Disagreement  with  an
Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of the  evidence  or
assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does not give  rise  to
an error of law.

19.   Finally it is argued the  Judge  did  not  have  grounds  to  consider
article 8 ECHR out-with the rules. In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA  Civ
387 Lord Justice Richards said  at  paragraph  33  "In  our  judgment,  even
though a test of exceptionality does not apply in every case falling  within
the scope of Appendix FM, it is accurate to say that  the  general  position
outside the sorts of special contexts referred to above is  that  compelling
circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of
LTR outside  the  new  Rules  in  Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of  exceptionality  or  a
requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria)  in
the context of the Rules applicable to foreign criminals), but  which  gives
appropriate weight to the focused consideration of public  interest  factors
as finds expression in the Secretary  of  State's  formulation  of  the  new
Rules in Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation  in  Nagre  at  para.
[29], which has been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,
e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ".

20.   At [34] the Judge  concedes  that  consideration  of  article  8  ECHR
outside the rules ".... May not be strictly necessary", but he then goes  on
to clearly identify & define the compelling circumstances which may  not  be
recognised under the rules - so that article 8 ECHR requires  consideration.
The Judge then sets out in summary form at [34] and [35] the  factors  which
he finds to be compelling considerations. At [36] he considers  section  117
of the 2002 act

21.   There is no criticism of the actual proportionality  exercise  carried
out by the Judge. The respondent's challenge is an assertion that the  Judge
has gone too far, that there are no compelling reasons to  consider  article
8 ECHR out-with the rules.

22.   There is no merit in that ground of appeal because the  Judge  clearly
identifies the correct test in law.  The  Judge  correctly  identifies  that
only compelling circumstances are the catalyst for the  consideration  of  a
freestanding article 8 ECHR claim. The Judge  then  considers  the  relevant
factors on the facts as he finds find them to be. The  Judge  considers  the
impact of the facts as he finds them to be, and  finds  that  the  appellant
establishes compelling circumstances which justify consideration of  article
8 ECHR.

23.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

24.   The Judge carefully considered each strand of evidence  placed  before
him. He carefully records the submissions that were  made  and  then,  after
correctly directing himself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to the Judge to reach.

25.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

26.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

27.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 5 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
