
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/49496/2014
                                                               IA/49497/2014
                                                               IA/49499/2014
                                                               IA/49498/2014
                                                               IA/49500/2014
                                                               IA/49501/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          | Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 October 2015                            | On 30 December 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                            AS (first Appellant)
                            jC (second Appellant)
                            Hc (third Appellant)
                           RoC (fourth Appellant)
                            RIc (fifth Appellant)
                            rac (sixth Appellant)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Jacobs, Counsel instructed by Bureau for
Migrant Advice
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are all citizens of  Lebanon.   They  were  born  on  13
    February 1953, 17 June 1948, 30 January 1982, 20  May  1984,  13  March
    1987 and 13 March 1992, respectively.  The first and second  appellants
    are the parents of the remaining appellants.

 2. They came to the UK from Lebanon in July 2006 having been evacuated  by
    the UK government because of military action by Israel  in  Lebanon  at
    that time.  The first appellant had a British  passport  as  a  British
    Protected Person.  They were  granted  leave  until  January  2007.   A
    further period of leave was granted but  subsequent  applications  were
    refused.

 3. The latest applications were made on 18 June  2014,  according  to  the
    respondent's refusal letter, being applications for leave to remain  on
    human rights grounds in respect  of  each  of  the  appellants.   Those
    applications were refused  and  decisions  made  in  each  case  on  21
    November 2014 to remove them to Lebanon pursuant to Section 10  of  the
    Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.   The   respondent's   immigration
    summaries for  the  appellants  indicate  that  the  claims  have  been
    certified as clearly unfounded under Section 94(2) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act"), although that appears
    to be an error, not being reflected in the decision letters in  any  of
    their cases.

 4. The appellants appealed against the respondent's  decisions  and  their
    appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge R. J. N. B. Morris  at  a
    hearing on 5 May  2015,  whereby  she  dismissed  the  appeal  of  each
    appellant.  Permission to  appeal  against  her  decision  having  been
    granted in respect of each appellant, the appeals came before me.

    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The following is a summary of the proceedings before Judge  Morris  and
    her conclusions.  At [12] there is reference to a  concession  made  on
    behalf of the appellants at the hearing to the effect  that  they  were
    not able to satisfy the requirements of the Article 8 Immigration Rules
    in terms of family or private life.  Similarly, it was  confirmed  that
    there was no reliance on Articles 3 or 8 in isolation, in terms of  the
    health issues of any particular appellants, although those matters were
    to be taken into account overall.

 6. Consideration was given to whether there should be a 'pure'  Article  8
    consideration, and although  not  expressly  stating  that  there  were
    exceptional or compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Rules, the judge did in  fact  undertake  a  full  Article  8
    assessment.

 7.  In  that  assessment  she  concluded  that  all  the  appellants   had
    established a private life in the UK, with each  other  and  the  wider
    community.  She was also satisfied that family life exists between  the
    appellants and between WC and MC.  They are also children of the  first
    and  second  appellants  and  therefore  siblings  of   the   remaining
    appellants.

 8. Noting that the first appellant is a British Protected Person the judge
    decided that it was nevertheless  the  case  that  she  is  subject  to
    immigration control and has no right to live or work in the UK.

 9. Consideration was given to the appellants' circumstances in the UK  and
    the extent to which they had all maximised the opportunities  available
    to them.  Medical considerations in terms of some of the appellants, to
    whom such considerations applied, were taken into account.

10. The conclusion was reached that none of the appellants  in  respect  of
    whom health issues were raised, were able to establish  that  the  high
    threshold for engagement was reached in terms of a 'health case'  under
    Articles 3 or 8.

11. Consideration was also given to the appellants' prospects  in  Lebanon,
    for example in terms of employment.  There is reference at [30] to  the
    security situation.  The extent to which they would be able to  receive
    continued financial support from WC was also considered.

12. It was ultimately concluded that the respondent's  decision  would  not
    amount to a disproportionate interference with the  family  or  private
    lives of any of the appellants.

    The Grounds and Submissions

13. The grounds raise a  number  of  issues  in  relation  to  the  judge's
    assessment of Article 8.  It is suggested that she erred in law in  her
    consideration of Section 117B of the 2002 Act, that the conclusions  in
    terms of the proportionality of removal with reference to  family  life
    with relatives in the UK is flawed and that the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the family's reputation for  collaboration  with  Israelis  in
    Lebanon.   It  is  argued  in  relation  to  the   last   matter   that
    notwithstanding that there had been no asylum or Article 3  claim,  the
    issues in this respect were required to be determined by the judge.

14. Furthermore, it is contended in the  grounds  that  the  judge  wrongly
    failed to treat the evacuation of  the  family  from  Lebanon  and  the
    British Protected Person status of the first appellant as not amounting
    to  an  exceptional  distinguishing  factor  in   the   proportionality
    assessment. In other words, the appellants were not voluntary migrants.



15. Those submissions were developed  before  me  by  Mr  Jacobs.   It  was
    submitted that there was an unusually strong family  life  amongst  the
    appellants and with WC and MC, amounting to a degree of exceptionality.



16. The appellants had established a private life since 2006 and the  judge
    commented on their creditable behaviour since they have been in the UK.
     There was also evidence of the first appellant's breast cancer and the
    second appellant's bladder cancer.  These all  amounted  to  cumulative
    factors that needed to be taken into account.

17. Although the judge had found that little weight was to be given to  the
    appellants' private life in accordance with S.117B(5) of the 2002  Act,
    that finding should not have been allowed to  encroach  on  the  family
    life considerations.  At [25(i) and (j)] the judge had not acknowledged
    that that assessment of private life under S.117B(v) could not apply to
    family life.  The judge was required  to  disregard  the  private  life
    finding in that respect when considering the family life that had  been
    established with other members of the family  over  a  period  of  nine
    years in the UK.  There needed to  be  a  separate  assessment  of  the
    weight to be given to family life, unencumbered by S.117B(5).

18. I was referred to the decisions in Forman  (ss  117A-C  considerations)
    [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC) and Deelah and others (section  117B  -  ambit)
    [2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC) in relation to 'precariousness' with  reference
    to private life.

19. With reference to AM (S 117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  0260  (IAC)  which
    decided that an appellant can obtain no positive right to  a  grant  of
    leave to remain in terms of S.117B(2) or (3) whatever the degree of his
    fluency in English or the strength of his financial resources, that did
    not apply in terms of  family  life,  the  case  being  concerned  with
    private life only.  In this respect I was also referred to  R  (on  the
    application of Luma  Sh Khairdin v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (NIA 2002: Part 5A) IJR [2014]  UKUT  00566  (IAC)  at  [59]
    which it was submitted supported the proposition  that  the  appellants
    are entitled to the benefit of S.117B considerations in terms of family
    life claims.

20. Mr Jacobs contended  that  the  judge  was  not  entitled  to  use  the
    appellants' financial independence as a matter adverse to them in terms
    of the proportionality assessment when statute in the  form  of  S.117B
    points to that being a positive factor in  their  favour  in  terms  of
    family life.  It was accepted that this argument was parasitic  on  the
    earlier argument about the application of S.117B(2) and (3)  to  family
    life cases.

21. It was further argued that the judge was wrong to find that there would
    be no interference with family life between the appellants and  WC  and
    MC on the basis that they left Lebanon fifteen  years  and  five  years
    earlier, respectively, before the appellants  came  to  the  UK.   That
    overlooks the fact that family life has been established  amongst  them
    all since 2006 when the appellants arrived.  They had become accustomed
    to family life since 2006, which is the starting point.

22. If there had only been an issue of family life in the appeal,  and  not
    one of private life, the appellants, it was suggested,  would  actually
    be in a better position which suggests that the judge's conclusions  in
    relation to precariousness and no benefit from  financial  independence
    or English language infected her findings in relation to  family  life.
    Mr  Jacobs  adopted  my  distillation  of  his  argument:  the  judge's
    consideration  of  the  appellants'  private  life  had  "diluted"  her
    assessment of family life in terms of the proportionality  of  removal.
    The suggestion that the appellants  would  be  able  to  use  Skype  to
    maintain their family life was a perverse conclusion it was  submitted.



23. As regards [30] the judge was wrong to disregard the issues of fear  of
    return raised by the appellants simply on the basis that they  had  not
    applied for asylum or made an Article 3 claim.   That  could  not  mean
    that their fear was not relevant to Article 8 of the ECHR.  It  appears
    to have been accepted by  the  respondent  at  [5]  of  the  'rule  24'
    response that the family were harassed in 2006 because of collaboration
    with the Israelis by the first  appellant's  brother.   The  appellants
    would be returning with some measure of  fear.   There  was  background
    evidence in relation to ISIS trying to penetrate the north  of  Lebanon
    and the background material before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  this
    respect which was not taken into account.

24. Lastly, it was  submitted  that  the  health  issues  of  some  of  the
    appellants were inappropriately compartmentalised and  not  taken  into
    account on a cumulative basis.  The fact that no individual  Article  3
    claim on health grounds was advanced did not mean that it did not  need
    to be taken into account under Article 8.

25. Lastly, the first appellant's British Protected Person's status  was  a
    factor to be taken  into  account  in  the  public  interest  in  their
    removal.  The judge erred  in  not  taking  that  into  account  as  an
    exceptional fact in their cases.  They are involuntary migrants.  There
    is no public interest in removing the family  of  a  British  protected
    passport holder which the British military brought to the UK.

26. It was contended that there were similarities with the Ghurkha cases in
    terms of the 'historic' dimension.

27. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that there was no error of  law  in  the
    judge's determination in any respect.  The arguments advanced on behalf
    of the appellants are essentially disagreements with the outcome.

28. As regards the s.117B(5) point in terms of precarious private life, the
    fact that the judge did not say that little weight should be  given  to
    family life  where  it  was  established  in  precarious  circumstances
    undermines the argument advanced on  behalf  of  the  appellants.   The
    judge did not come to the view that their family  life  was  undermined
    for that reason.  She clearly confined it to private life, as  set  out
    in the statute.  She then went on at [25(i)] to  consider  family  life
    separately.  There is nothing to indicate that there was any  confusion
    between her considerations of family and private life.

29. The decision in AM (Malawi) is to the effect that there is no  positive
    benefit to the appellants in Article 8 terms  by  reason  of  financial
    independence or proficiency in English.  The decision  in  Khairdin  at
    [59] is wholly supportive of that proposition.  None of the other cases
    relied on, for example Forman,  assist  the  appellants,  Forman  being
    consistent with AM (Malawi).

30. The financial support that they could expect on return to  Lebanon  was
    relevant to the judge's assessment  of  the  proportionality  of  their
    return.  They would be able to "reconstitute" their  private  lives  on
    return.  It was relevant that they would be going back, in the case  of
    some of them, with skills and financial support.   They  would  not  be
    able to advance any argument in terms of destitution.  It was  conceded
    that none of the appellants could meet the Article 8 Immigration  Rules
    in terms of private life.  There was thus an acknowledgement that  they
    were not able to demonstrate very significant obstacles to  integration
    on return.

31. Their family life in the UK was found to be very strong but there is no
    contradiction in relation to the judge's consideration of the period of
    time they had spent in the UK.  That period of time  was  presumably  a
    relevant factor in the finding that they had established  family  life.
    The judge had dealt with the issue of how  they  could  continue  their
    relationship with those family members still in the UK.

32. As was pointed out at [29(iv)(b)],  WC  had  considered  exporting  his
    business to Lebanon and paid a visit there last  year  to  explore  the
    Lebanese markets in CCTVs.

33. As regards the assertion of the  potential  for  harassment  on  return
    because  of  the  point  made  about   a   family   member's   previous
    collaboration with the Israelis, it does not appear  that  this  was  a
    live point taken before the  Tribunal.   As  was  pointed  out  in  the
    determination at [25[ii](a)], there is no evidence that  they  intended
    to leave Lebanon before they  were  evacuated.   Similarly,  there  was
    nothing to indicate that in the nine years' interval between  2006  and
    now, any such problem would persist.

34. The rule 24 response could not  be  interpreted  as  meaning  that  the
    respondent  accepted  any  assertions  as   to   previous   harassment,
    particularly in circumstances where it was submitted that not  all  the
    documents would have been before the writer of the rule 24 response.

35. It has not been disputed that  in  terms  of  health  issues  there  is
    adequate treatment available to the appellants on  return  to  Lebanon.
    They are in the fortunate position of being able to  receive  financial
    support in  order  to  access  treatment.   The  fourth  appellant  had
    treatment in Lebanon prior to arriving in the UK.  The monitoring  that
    the first and second appellants need could continue in Lebanon.

36. The judge was aware of the British Protected Person status of the first
    appellant, as is expressly pointed out in the  determination  at  [25].
    However, she is nevertheless still subject to immigration control.   It
    is the case that none of the appellants have any basis of stay  in  the
    UK and had made applications for further leave to remain in  the  past.
    They did not have to leave Lebanon in 2006 and did not have  to  remain
    either.  There is nothing particularly unusual in their  circumstances.



37. In reply, Mr Jacobs reiterated some of his earlier arguments, referring
    to the authorities already cited.  It was not accepted that  the  judge
    had in effect 'changed direction' from a consideration of private  life
    to family life, there was a continued consideration of both issues, all
    in the same paragraph.  The family life findings  follow  on  from  the
    findings in relation to private life.

38. It is not simply  a  case  of  disagreeing  with  the  outcome  but  of
    advancing legal arguments in relation to the judge's conclusions.

39. In terms of the suggestion that the concession that the appellants were
    not able to meet the requirements of the Article  8  Immigration  Rules
    meant that it  was  conceded  that  there  were  not  very  significant
    obstacles to their integration, that is not correct.

40. The judge should have dealt with the issue of fear of  return  and  the
    rule 24 response does amount to a concession.

41. The appellants left Lebanon because they were in danger if they stayed.
     They came here involuntarily as a result of events in Lebanon.

    My assessment

42. I deal with the arguments in the order in which they were  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellants before me.  As  a  general  comment,  I  would
    conclude that all the particular circumstances  of  the  appellants  as
    outlined in submissions and in the grounds do feature  in  the  judge's
    determination.  That is, arguably, aside from the issue of what is said
    to be a fear on return and previous harassment of the  family,  because
    of the first appellant's brother's collaboration with the Israelis.  It
    is not suggested on behalf of the appellants that the judge has  failed
    to identify any particular fact or matter relied  on,  aside  from  the
    issue to which I have just referred.

43. Once that is recognised, the question arises as to whether in fact  the
    detailed arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants amount only  to
    a disagreement with the judge's assessment of the facts.

44. It is necessarily the case that the judge will have had to  have  dealt
    with the different features  of  the  appellant's  circumstances  in  a
    sequential way in the determination.  That however, of course does  not
    mean that there was an impermissible  compartmentalisation  of  issues.
    There was a considerable amount of material for the judge to  consider,
    with many different facets of the appellants' private and family lives.
     I note that at [12] the judge recorded the essence of the  appellants'
    claim as  including  their  health  problems,  being  one  of  "several
    factors" to be taken into account when considering  "the  circumstances
    in the round".

45. At [25] relevant Immigration Directorate  Instructions  ("IDI's")  were
    quoted, including the instruction to case  workers  that  the  decision
    maker must consider all relevant  factors.   At  [25(ii)(i)]  there  is
    further reference to the  "Guidance"  to  the  effect  that  cumulative
    factors should be considered.

46. At [29], with reference to positive factors advanced on behalf  of  the
    appellants, the judge came to her conclusions on that particular  issue
    "having considered all the evidence".

47. It is not apparent from the determination that the judge  came  to  the
    view that any one particular factor was  determinative  of  the  appeal
    against any one of the appellants.  Looking at the determination  as  a
    whole, I am satisfied that it  involves  a  rounded  assessment,  on  a
    holistic basis, of the factors to be taken into account both  'for  and
    against' the appellants in terms of proportionality.

48. I do not accept that there was any impermissible eliding of the  issues
    of private and family  life  with  reference  to  the  'precariousness'
    issue.  At [10] the judge quoted s.117A-B, and D of the 2002  Act.   At
    [24], after consideration of the circumstances of the appellants' leave
    in the UK, she concluded at (e) that the appellants' private  lives  in
    the UK were established at a time when they knew that their ability  to
    stay was by  no  means  certain.   At  subparagraph  (f)  she  referred
    specifically to s.117B(5) to the effect that little  weight  should  be
    given to a private life established by a person  at  a  time  when  the
    person's immigration  status  is  precarious.   She  squarely  in  that
    subparagraph linked precariousness to the  appellants'  private  lives.
    At subparagraph (i) she gave consideration to family life.  Nowhere  in
    the determination is there any either  express  or  implied  suggestion
    that the judge read over the  precarious  issue  from  the  appellants'
    private lives into the family life consideration.

49. It was not necessary for her expressly to state that precariousness had
    no application so far as s.117B(5)  is  concerned  in  terms  of  their
    family life.   It  is  apparent  that  the  judge  was  aware  of  that
    provision's limited application in terms of private life only.

50. It was argued that the appellants  should  have  been  entitled,  in  a
    positive way, to the benefit of s.117B(2) and (3), that is the  ability
    to speak English and their being financial independent (relying on WC).
    It was submitted that although the decision in  AM  (Malawi)  could  be
    said to suggest otherwise, its application is limited to  private  life
    cases.

51. I do not agree with that submission.  In the first place,  AM  (Malawi)
    was in fact a case involving family life.   Furthermore,  the  Tribunal
    did not suggest that its reasoning  in  relation  to  English  language
    ability and financial independence in terms of positive  benefits,  was
    limited to private life cases.  Indeed, it seems to me that there is no
    rational distinction to be made in terms of family or private  life  on
    that distinct issue.  The provision to be found at  s.117B(2)  and  (3)
    makes no such distinction.

52. Insofar as reliance is placed on the decision in Khairdin, the Tribunal
    in AM (Malawi) disposed of the same argument at [17], disagreeing  with
    the proposition at [59] relied on in the case of the appellants  before
    me.  In actual fact, on close analysis it seems to me that  what  Judge
    Lane said at [59] of Khairdin  is  not  at  all  inconsistent  with  AM
    (Malawi).  The "mild support" that was referred to seems to  have  been
    limited to the fact that the respondent  could  not  rely  on  lack  of
    financial independence as a public interest factor.  Although I am  not
    bound by the decision in AM (Malawi), I find its  reasoning  persuasive
    and I agree with its conclusions on this issue.

53. It is not the case that Judge Morris  concluded  at  [25(i)]  that  the
    appellants' removal would not amount to  an  interference  with  family
    life with WC and MC.  In that paragraph she stated as follows:

         "Whilst there would be an interference with the  family  life  they
         enjoy with [WC] and [MC], [WC] left the Lebanon fifteen  years  and
         [MC] five years before the Appellants arrived in 2006.   They  were
         therefore  accustomed  to  living  apart.   Family  life   can   be
         maintained in the  same  way  as  it  was  before  the  Appellants'
         arrival, and it could also carry on through electronic  means  such
         as Skype.  Whilst this is by no means the same as the  family  life
         they  would  have  were  the  Appellants  to   remain   here,   the
         inconvenience and less favourable means of  enjoying  their  family
         life is not such as would outweigh the public interest in firm  and
         fair immigration control".

54. There was therefore a finding of  interference  with  family  life  and
    necessarily  this  would  have  taken  into  account  that   that   was
    established more recently, in any event since 2006.  Earlier,  at  [22]
    she had concluded that there was family life between the appellants and
    WC and MC, and that this was evidently a very close family for whom  WC
    has been financially responsible for many years.  She referred to their
    living in close proximity with each other meaning that they meet on  an
    almost  daily  basis.   She  referred  to  the  Friday  evening  family
    gatherings that are evidently very important to them.

55. As is evident in the quotation above, the judge recognised that contact
    from Lebanon would by no means be the same as the family life that they
    would have were the appellants to remain in the UK.  She  was  entitled
    to refer to the extent to which the families would be able to  maintain
    contact.  She did not conclude that that family life would in  any  way
    be equivalent if the only contact were by means of Skype.

56. It is argued that the judge impermissibly disregarded the fear that the
    appellants expressed of return in relation to retaliation on account of
    the first appellant's brother's collaboration with the Israelis.  It is
    submitted that even though what may be asserted  falls  short  of  what
    would be required in order to be granted international protection, that
    does not mean that it is an issue that is irrelevant to Article 8.  The
    phrase "fear of retaliation" was the one used in submissions before me.
     In the written grounds at [5] it is asserted that the judge  erred  at
    [30] "in refusing  to  entertain"  the  point  raised  earlier  in  the
    determination at [13(i)], being the difficulties experienced because of
    the collaboration which was publicly known.

57. I do not accept that there is any concession in the rule 24 response at
    [5] which states that "The family were only harassed in 2006 and  there
    was no evidence to suggest that this would still occur some nine  years
    later, or, if it did, it amounted to serious  ill-treatment."   Stating
    that they were only harassed in 2006 is simply a  re-statement  of  the
    appellants' claim in this respect, or at least as  articulated  in  the
    grounds.

58. It is not the case that  the  judge  did  not  take  into  account  the
    appellants' expressed security concerns in  relation  to  Lebanon.   At
    [30] there is reference  to  concerns  expressed  about  the  political
    situation in Lebanon.  The judge concluded that "undoubtedly" there was
    serious political and social disruption in Lebanon.   She  referred  to
    Foreign and Commonwealth Office Guidance, included in  the  bundles  of
    the first and second appellants.  That guidance was quoted by the judge
    as including that the  security  situation  in  parts  of  Lebanon  can
    deteriorate quickly and that there is a potential for further violence.
     She referred to the fifth appellant's witness statement dated 20 March
    2015 which stated that although the security situation may not be life-
    threatening that was just one part of the fifth appellant's concerns as
    expressed in the witness statement.

59. In [30] there is reference to the fact that  the  appellants  had  been
    advised that should they wish to make a claim on asylum  or  Article  3
    grounds they could have done so.  It is evident from [11] that no  such
    applications had been made and their solicitors  in  January  2014  had
    said that they did not wish to make a claim for asylum in the UK.

60. Returning to the 'collaboration risk issue', given that the  issue  was
    raised I do consider that the determination would have  benefited  from
    explicit consideration  of  that  point  where  the  judge  dealt  with
    security issues generally.  However, it is not the case that the  judge
    ignored the 'security' issue in general terms, as  is  demonstrated  by
    [30].  She was entitled to take into account that no asylum or  Article
    3 claim in a distinct sense had been made.   It  is  evident  from  the
    determination that she took the security  issue  into  account  in  her
    overall assessment of proportionality under Article 8.

61. On the question of what was said  in  submissions  to  be  a  "fear  of
    retaliation", I have for my part considered carefully all  the  witness
    statements put before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  both  those  witness
    statements in the case of  each  appellant  dated  in  2015,  and  such
    witness statements dating from 2012 as  were  also  included.   In  the
    witness statements before the First-tier Tribunal, those of  the  first
    and second appellants say nothing of any fear of return on the basis of
    retaliation.  Indeed, those witness statements do not mention the issue
    of collaboration  by  the  first  appellant's  brother.   WC's  witness
    statement dated 10 April 2015 says nothing  about  that  issue  either,
    although a witness statement dated 14 August 2011 refers  to  it  on  a
    'historic' basis, without expressing any concern about future  risk  in
    this regard.

62. The witness statement of MC of the same date in 2015 is silent  on  the
    issue.  The third appellant's witness statement, undated  but  presumed
    to be prepared for the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  does
    refer to historic incidents of harassment in relation to that issue but
    does not give any indication of any future difficulty  because  of  it.
    The earlier statement of 27 July 2012 from  the  third  appellant  does
    deal with the issue both in its historic sense and in terms  of  future
    job prospects.   Neither  of  the  witness  statements  of  the  fourth
    appellant, dated 1 April 2015 or 27 July 2012 mention  the  issue,  and
    nor does the witness statement of the sixth  appellant  dated  6  March
    2015 or that  dated  27  July  2012.   The  fifth  appellant's  witness
    statement dated 20 March 2015 deals with the point in a historic  sense
    but not in much detail, stating that she does not know  how  the  issue
    would affect their future prospects.  Her witness  statement  dated  27
    July 2012 does deal with the issue in more detail including in terms of
    future job prospects.

63. In the light of the fact that there was scant suggestion by any of  the
    appellants  of  any  future  risk  in  terms   of   apparent   previous
    collaboration by the first appellant's brother, I cannot see that  even
    if it could be said that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  in
    failing to make express reference to that issue and  to  take  it  into
    account, it could have affected the outcome of the appeal.  If  it  was
    such a pressing issue in terms of any risk or future prospects,  it  is
    reasonable to conclude that it would have been raised more  prominently
    in witness statements.

64. So far as the health concerns of some of the appellants are  concerned,
    these issues were dealt with in detail in the determination  and  I  do
    not accept that there was  any  inappropriate  compartmentalisation  of
    health issues, which were considered on a cumulative basis.

65. The issues in terms  of  employment  prospects  are  also  referred  to
    generally at [30] and more specifically at [30(ii)] in  the  subsequent
    subparagraphs.   The  judge  concluded  that  financial  support  would
    probably continue for the appellants, giving reasons for coming to that
    view  which  are  sustainable.   She  referred   to   the   educational
    qualifications that the appellants had obtained in the UK,  where  that
    applies, and to work experience in relation to the fifth appellant.

66. She considered the fourth appellant's circumstances  in  terms  of  her
    being married to a person with leave to  remain  until  November  2015,
    with the possibility of his being able to renew that leave  to  remain.
    She gave separate consideration to their circumstances in terms of  the
    options available to them.

67. Judge Morris did undoubtedly take into  account  the  circumstances  in
    which the appellants  came  to  the  UK  and  the  fact  of  the  first
    appellant's British Protected Person's status.  At [24] she  stated  as
    follows:

         "It is a material consideration  in  this  matter  that  the  First
         Appellant is a British Protected Person  and  that  the  Appellants
         arrived in this country as a result of  being  evacuated  from  the
         Lebanon by the British government".

68. However, as was also pointed out, the first appellant's status did  not
    give that appellant or indeed any of the others a right to stay in  the
    UK.  She also noted that there was no  evidence  that  the  appellants'
    circumstances were such that they had intended to leave Lebanon but for
    the need for them to be evacuated in 2006.

69. Having considered in detail the arguments advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants, I am not satisfied that it has been established that  there
    is any error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

70. Whilst for the reasons  I  have  given  the  determination  would  have
    benefited from an explicit consideration of the 'collaboration'  issue,
    I do not consider that the judge's failure to refer to this  in  detail
    in the findings section of the determination amounts  to  an  error  of
    law. Even if I am wrong about that, I am not satisfied that  it  is  an
    error of law which could have affected the outcome of the appeal on the
    basis of the evidence put before the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal of each
    appellant therefore stands.


ANONYMITY

I make an order pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008. Consequently, this determination  identifies  each  of
the appellants and others associated with them by initials only in order  to
preserve the anonymity of the appellants. No  report  of  these  proceedings
shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants or any member of  their
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  appellants  and  to   the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Signed                                                                 Date:
    17/12/15




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
