
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/49644/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 27th August 2014                             |On 29th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

               the SECRETARY OF State for the home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                               MR owais ahmad
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the Appellant:     The appellant attended in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Owais Ahmad date of birth 19th of  July  1982,  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking account  all
    of the circumstances  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department. To
    avoid confusion I have used the term claimant to identify the appellant
    in the original hearing.

 4. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Law promulgated on 19th  March  2014.   By
    the determination the judge allowed the appeal against the decisions of
    the Secretary of State dated 12th  November 2013 to refuse to grant the
    claimant further leave to remain in the United Kingdom and thereupon to
    remove the claimant from the United Kingdom to Pakistan.  The  claimant
    was seeking to remain in the United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  (General)
    Migrant under the Points Based System [PBS].

 5. As this is an application under the PBS, the provisions of section  85A
    as amended  of  the  2002  Act  apply.  Those  provisions  specifically
    prescribe that evidence has to be submitted with  the  application  and
    only evidence submitted at the time of making the  application  can  be
    considered. The relevant provisions of section 85A are: --

        Section 85A Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions

        1) Those sections sets out the exceptions mentioned in  section  85
           (5).

        2) .....

        3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82 (one) if -

         a) the appeal is against an immigration decision  of  the  kind  as
            specified in section 82 (2) (a) or (d),

         b) the immigration decision concerned in application  of  the  kind
            identified in immigration rules as requiring  to  be  considered
            under a ' Points Based System ' , and

         c) the appeal relies wholly  or  partly  on  grounds  specified  in
            section 84 (1)(a), (e) or (f).

        4) Where Exception 2 applies the  tribunal  may  consider  evidence
           adduced by the appellant only if it-

        a) was submitted in support of, and at  the  time  of  making,  the
           application to which the immigration decision related,

        b) relates to the appeal in so far as it relies  on  grounds  other
           than those specified in subsection (3) (c),

        c) is adduced to prove that the document is genuine or valid, or

        d) is adduced in connection with the Secretary of  States  reliance
           on a discretion under immigration rules, or in  compliance  with
           the requirement of immigration rules, to refuse  an  application
           on grounds not related to the acquisition of '  points  '  under
           the Points Based System



 6. Thus in respect of an application under the  PBS  the  evidence  relied
    upon by the claimant has to be submitted at  the  time  of  making  the
    application.

 7. As identified in the refusal letter of 13 November 2013 under  the  PBS
    the  claimant  was  required  to  score  80  points  under  Appendix  A
    (Attributes). Under appendix A the appellant scored 55 points according
    to the letter of refusal.

 8. Under two headings/categories identified within the refusal letter  the
    claimant had  for  Previous  Earnings  scored  no  points  and  for  UK
    Experience scored no points. The explanation for that is clearly  given
    the refusal letter. The documentation submitted by  the  appellant  did
    not meet the requirements of the rules.

 9. The requirements of the rules:-
        245CA. Requirements for leave to remain
        To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, an
        applicant must meet the requirements listed below. If the applicant
        meets these requirements, leave to remain will be granted. If the
        applicant does not meet these requirements, the application will be
        refused.

        Requirements:

        (a) The applicant must not fall for refusal under the general
        grounds for refusal, and must not be an illegal entrant.

        (b) if the applicant has, or has had, leave as a Highly Skilled
        Migrant, as a Writer, Composer or Artist, Self-Employed Lawyer, or
        as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant under the Rules in place before 19
        July 2010, and has not been granted leave in any categories other
        than these under the Rules in place since 19 July 2010, the
        applicant must have 75 points under paragraphs 7 to 34 of Appendix
        A.

        (c) in all cases other than those referred to in (b) above, the
        applicant must have 80 points under paragraphs 7 to 34 of Appendix
        A.

        (d) The applicant must have 10 points under paragraphs 1 to 15 of
        Appendix B.

        (e) The applicant must have 10 points under paragraphs 1 to 3 of
        appendix C.

        (f) The applicant must have, or have last been granted, entry
        clearance, leave to enter or remain:

        (i) as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant,

        (ii) as a Highly Skilled Migrant,

        (iii) as a Writer, Composer or Artist, or

        (iv) as a self-employed lawyer.

        (g) The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
        laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of 28 days
        or less will be disregarded.





10. Appendix A paragraphs 7-35 are relevant specifically paragraphs  21  SD
    3(b)(ii) where original payslips have to be produced and  paragraph  24
    and 25 with reference to paragraph 19SD where specified documents  have
    to be produced including dividend vouchers and personal bank statements
    showing the amount of money paid to the recipient from a company.

11. With regard to previous earnings no personal bank statements have  been
    provided by the claimant as required by the  rules.  No  personal  bank
    statements had  been  provided  which  demonstrated  the  net  dividend
    payments being credited into the appellant's account.  Whilst  business
    bank statements had  been  submitted,  those  were  not  an  acceptable
    secondary form of evidence as  they  did  not  show  the  net  dividend
    payments leaving the business bank account.  The required  evidence  to
    show that the claimant was in receipt of net dividend payments from SEO
    On line Ltd had not been submitted.

12.  Payslips  had  been  submitted  to  confirm  the  earnings  from   CCA
    Applications Ltd but those were photocopies and the original  documents
    were required as specified above.

13. With regard to category "UK Experience" for the reasons already set out
    in the claimant was not entitled to the five points claimed. It has  to
    be noted that in other categories  the  claimant  had  met  and  indeed
    exceeded the requirements of the rules but had failed  to  achieve  the
    overall score required, i.e.  80 points.

14. Before the judge additional documentation had  been  submitted  by  the
    claimant. In coming to a decision in respect of this matter  the  judge
    took into account that additional documentation. In so doing the  judge
    failed to apply the provisions of section 85A set out above.

15. It is for an applicant to ensure that at the  time  of  submitting  the
    documentation to the respondent all of the documents are  submitted  to
    meet the requirements of the rules. As here many people genuinely  find
    the rules themselves very difficult to understand. The rules  impose  a
    strict regime that has to be met. It is not for a judge to  ignore  the
    requirements of the rules or the law even where an individual is honest
    and credible.

16. It was accepted in respect of the claimant that he is and  was  genuine
    and that any failure to meet the requirements of the rules was  due  to
    inadvertence. It was accepted on the basis of the documentation at  the
    hearing that the claimant at that time did meet the requirements of the
    rules.

17. However it was also accepted that the claimant had  not  submitted  the
    required documentation with the original application.

18. The consequence to the claimant is that the claimant will have to  make
    a further application. It was accepted that he would have 28 days  from
    the date of his appeal being dismissed to  make  an  application.  Thus
    from any decision made in the Upper Tribunal the claimant will have  28
    days to present a fresh application. Whilst I appreciate that that will
    require him to pay a further fee it is the failure of the  claimant  in
    the first instance to comply with the requirements of the rules  as  to
    the documentation that had to be submitted that has  resulted  in  this
    outcome.

19. The claimant would do well to carefully consider  the  requirements  of
    the rules and ensure that all  documentation  submitted  complies  with
    those requirements. That having been said however it is clear that  the
    judge has failed to apply the provisions of section 85A and  has  based
    his findings of fact on evidence which in  the  circumstances  had  not
    been submitted with the application. That is a material error of law on
    the part of the judge and the decision has to be set aside.

20. In this case this was a matter  of  assessing  what  documentation  was
    submitted with the application and whether that met the requirements of
    the rules. The claimant accepted that he  had  had  to  submit  further
    documentation in order to meet the requirements of the rules.

21. In those circumstances I was satisfied that this appeal  can  be  dealt
    with on the basis of the evidence and  documents  currently  submitted.
    Unfortunately for the claimant who is a genuine applicant he  does  not
    meet the requirements of the rules with  regard  to  the  documentation
    submitted for the reasons set out above. Accordingly this appeal has to
    be dismissed.

22. In  the  circumstances  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.  I set aside the original decision  and  substitute  the
    following decision

         a) The appeal is dismissed on Immigration Rules grounds.

         b) The appeal is dismissed on ECHR grounds.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

