
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50154/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 12 August 2014            |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Ms Florence Asante Denkyirah

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant (Secretary of State): Mr T Wilding, Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent (Ms Denkyirah): Mr B Owusu (Solicitor) of Bennard
Wiseman Family Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against a  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge L Murray promulgated on 25 April 2014  following  a
    hearing at Columbus House, Newport on 9 April 2014  in  which  she  had
    allowed Ms Denkyirah's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of
    State of 19 November 2013 to refuse to issue her with a residence  card
    as confirmation of a right  of  residence  in  the  UK.   For  ease  of
    reference I shall throughout this determination refer to the  Secretary
    of State, who was the original respondent, as "the Secretary of  State"
    and to Ms Denkyirah, who was the original appellant, as "the claimant".

 2. Following the determination which as noted above found in favour of the
    claimant the Secretary of State appealed and permission to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on 22 May 2014.

 3. The issues in this appeal can  be  set  out  relatively  briefly.   The
    claimant is a Ghanaian national who was born  on  1  April  1969.   She
    applied for the grant of a residence card on 4 October 2013 claiming to
    be entitled to  this  pursuant  to  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 on the basis of her  marriage
    to a national of the  Netherlands  who  was  exercising  treaty  rights
    within the UK.   She  had  provided  a  marriage  certificate  dated  6
    September 2013 which showed the date of marriage as  26  February  2013
    the marriage having taken place in Ghana.  It was the  claimant's  case
    that this was a marriage which had taken place by proxy.

 4. This application was refused by the Secretary of State.   The  claimant
    appealed and as noted above her appeal was heard  before  Judge  Murray
    sitting at Columbus House, Newport on 9 April 2014.  In support of  her
    appeal the claimant submitted a bundle which included what was said  to
    be expert evidence provided by a Dutch  lawyer,  a  Ms  M  van  Yperen-
    Groenleer, and also a document which was produced at the  hearing  from
    the Dutch Embassy in the UK dated 13 March  2014.   I  shall  refer  to
    these documents below.

 5. At paragraph 13 of her determination, when considering the decision  of
    this Tribunal in Kareem (Proxy marriages -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  24,
    Judge Murray stated as follows:

         "...  At paragraph 68D Kareem stated that only if  it  was  doubted
         [that is that the claimant was married] then  the  appellant  would
         need to prove the validity of marriage.   In  any  case  there  was
         evidence with regard to the Netherlands and there was a letter from
         a Dutch lawyer from B9 to B10.  The  Netherlands  Embassy  did  not
         give a conclusive response.  Proxy marriages were not bad in  Dutch
         law and the lawyer's opinion was they were not bad in  Dutch  civil
         code.  I was asked to allow  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  valid
         marriage certificate but there was also evidence that the  marriage
         is valid in the Netherlands."

 6. When setting out her "Findings and Reasons" from paragraph 16  onwards,
    the judge did not make any finding as to whether or not the letter from
    the Dutch lawyer referred to at  paragraph  13  was  reliable  evidence
    which could justify the Tribunal in making a finding that the  marriage
    would be regarded as valid in the Netherlands.  It  was  also  accepted
    before me on behalf of the claimant that  the  view  expressed  by  the
    judge in her determination that following Kareem it was only  necessary
    to consider whether a marriage was valid in the country of  nationality
    of the EU resident in circumstances  where  a  valid  marriage  in  the
    country in which  it  was  said  to  have  taken  place  had  not  been
    established was not correct and that in fact it was necessary  to  show
    that the marriage in addition to being a valid marriage also had to  be
    regarded as valid in the country of  nationality  of  the  EU  national
    through whom the right of residence was said to be  derived.   I  shall
    deal with the submissions made on behalf of the claimant below.

 7. The grounds of appeal argue that there was a material error of  law  in
    the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  because  there  was  not
    "independent or reliable evidence about the recognition of the marriage
    under the laws of the EEA country" (in this case  the  Netherlands)  as
    required as stated in head note g. of Kareem.  It is also said that the
    judge had failed either to address the issue  or  to  provide  adequate
    reasons for accepting that the marriage was valid  according  to  Dutch
    law.

The Hearing

 8. I heard  submissions  on  behalf  of  both  parties  which  I  recorded
    contemporaneously.   As  these  are  contained  within  the  Record  of
    Proceedings I shall not set out below everything which was said  to  me
    but I shall set out only such parts of the submissions as are necessary
    for the purposes of this determination.  However, I have had regard  to
    everything which was said to  me  as  well  as  to  all  the  documents
    contained within the file whether or not the same is  specifically  set
    out below.

 9. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr Wilding essentially relied upon
    the grounds.  He submitted  that  the  head  note  in  Kareem  was  not
    entirely helpful because it did not set out  entirely  accurately  what
    was contained within paragraph 11 of that determination,  which  is  as
    follows:

         "We conclude that in EU law the question of whether a person is  in
         a marital relationship is governed by  the  national  laws  of  the
         member states.  In other words, whether a person is  married  is  a
         matter that falls within the competence of  the  individual  member
         states."

10. It was clear from Kareem that it was essential that  in  order  for  an
    appeal under the  EEA  Regulations  to  succeed  an  applicant  had  to
    establish not just that the  marriage  was  a  valid  marriage  in  the
    country where it is said to have taken  place  but  that  it  would  be
    regarded as valid in the country of nationality of the EU national  who
    was the other party to that marriage.  Mr Owusu did not seek to contest
    this interpretation of what the Tribunal had found in Kareem.

11. Mr Wilding also referred the Tribunal to what was said by the  Tribunal
    in Kareem at paragraph 14, as follows:

         "Whilst considering the issue of evidence of  marriage,  we  remind
         ourselves that the proof of  the  law  of  another  country  is  by
         evidence, including proof of  private  international  law  of  that
         other country.  Such  evidence  will  not  only  have  to  identify
         relevant legal provisions in the other  country  but  identify  how
         they apply in practice.  A lack of evidence of relevant foreign law
         will normally mean that the party with the  burden  of  proving  it
         will fail."

12. Accordingly the key question was whether or not the marriage was  valid
    in Holland and the judge had made no finding with regard to that.

13. Even though the judge had referred at paragraph 11 of her determination
    to the claimant's assertion that there was evidence from the lawyer  to
    the effect that the marriage would be recognised  in  the  Netherlands,
    she had not made any finding on this point and had not even  implicitly
    accepted that evidence.  In any event, if  the  Tribunal  had  actually
    looked at the letter from the lawyer this did not even go as far as  to
    say that the marriage would be considered as valid in the Netherlands.

14. On behalf of  the  claimant  Mr  Owusu  accepted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had been wrong to find that it was only if it did not consider
    that there was a valid marriage in Ghana that it would have to go on to
    consider the second requirement which was whether or not  the  marriage
    would be considered as valid in the Netherlands.  However, he  referred
    to paragraph 13 of the determination (which  I  have  already  set  out
    above)  and  sought  to  argue  that  it  was   implicit   within   the
    determination that the judge had considered  that  there  was  evidence
    supporting the contention that the marriage would be regarded as  valid
    in the Netherlands.  Although Mr Owusu accepted that the judge had  not
    expressly stated that she found that the marriage was  valid  according
    to Dutch law, at paragraph 19 reference was made to the  head  note  in
    Kareem and it was implicit in her decision that the marriage was  valid
    in the Netherlands because not only was there a letter from  the  Dutch
    lawyer but there was  also  a  letter  from  the  Dutch  Embassy  which
    referred to paragraphs 27 and 28 of Kareem.

15. In answer to a question from the Tribunal, it  was  accepted,  however,
    that the letter from the Dutch Embassy did not make  any  reference  to
    what was said at paragraph 29 of Kareem to which reference will be made
    below.

16. Mr Owusu then addressed the Tribunal with regards to what was  said  in
    the letter from the Dutch lawyer and acknowledged that in  that  letter
    she only said that the marriage was "probably not  against  our  public
    order".

Discussion

17. In my judgment it is quite clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge did
    not have proper regard to the guidance given  in  Kareem,  which  as  a
    reported decision was binding upon her.  It is clear  from paragraph 11
    of Kareem (as Mr Owusu acknowledged he was obliged to accept)  that  in
    the words of the Tribunal the issue of "whether a person is married  is
    a matter that falls within the  competence  of  the  individual  member
    states".  In other words, in order for this claim to succeed it has  to
    be established that the marriage would be  regarded  as  valid  in  the
    Netherlands.  As the Tribunal in Kareem made clear at paragraph 14  the
    evidence to justify this  finding  "will  not  only  have  to  identify
    relevant legal provisions in the other country but  identify  how  they
    apply in practice" and that "a lack of evidence of relevant foreign law
    will normally mean that the party with the burden of  proving  it  will
    fail."

18. Kareem was concerned with the position in Holland and sets out relevant
    extracts from the Dutch Civil Code (that is Articles 10.31  and  10.32)
    at paragraphs 27 and 28 but then at paragraph 29 states as follows:

         "The passages we cite are silent on whether a  proxy  or  customary
         marriage would be recognised in the Netherlands or whether  such  a
         marriage would be incompatible with Dutch public order."

19. This must be seen in the context of the Tribunal's finding at paragraph
    68 which forms the substance of the head note of Kareem  of  which  for
    present purposes the relevant passage is that  contained  at  paragraph
    68(g) (set out at the beginning of the reported decision  in  the  head
    note) which is as follows:

         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.   Mere
         production of legal materials from the EEA country or country where
         the marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because  they
         will rarely show how such law is understood  or  applied  in  those
         countries.  Mere assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for
         similar reasons, carry no weight."

20. Before turning to consider the "evidence" provided  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (and no  further  evidence  has  been  produced  to  this
    Tribunal for the purposes of this appeal)  I  must  first  make  formal
    findings with regard  to  Judge  Murray's  determination.   As  I  have
    indicated above it is in my judgment quite clear that she misunderstood
    the effect of  the  guidance  given  in  Kareem  because  she  did  not
    understand that the validity of the marriage in Holland  needed  to  be
    established in addition to the validity of the marriage  in  Ghana  and
    that this was necessary  even  if  a  decision  was  reached  that  the
    marriage would be regarded as a valid marriage in Ghana.  This  was  an
    error of law.  Whether this was  a  material  error  such  that  it  is
    necessary to set aside the decision and remake depends upon whether  or
    not there was anyway a finding that the marriage would be  regarded  as
    valid in the Netherlands, or whether such a finding was implicit in the
    determination, and if so whether it would have been open to  the  judge
    to make such a finding; this is because if there  was  an  explicit  or
    even implicit finding to this effect which  is  sustainable,  then  the
    error which I have just identified would not be a material one.

21. Plainly, and as accepted on behalf of the claimant by Mr  Owusu,  there
    was no explicit finding that the marriage was valid in the Netherlands.
     In my judgment also there was not even an  implicit  finding  to  this
    effect.  The judge simply recorded the assertion by  Counsel  that  the
    marriage would be treated as valid  in  the  Netherlands  but  did  not
    consider this aspect of the case at  all  in  her  findings.   This  is
    possibly because having found that the marriage was valid in Ghana  she
    did not appreciate that it was necessary also to  consider  whether  or
    not the marriage would be treated as valid in the Netherlands.  Indeed,
    as already recorded above she stated in terms  that  it  would  not  in
    those circumstances be necessary to  reach  such  a  finding.   In  the
    absence of such a finding, therefore, clearly the judge was  not  in  a
    position to find in light of the guidance in Kareem  that  this  was  a
    valid marriage.  It is accordingly incumbent upon this Tribunal now  to
    remake the decision.

22. I now turn to remake the decision.  The only issue before me is whether
    on the evidence which is now before this  Tribunal  it  is  established
    that the marriage is recognised or would be recognised as valid in  the
    Netherlands.  If it is, then in light of the judge's finding  that  the
    marriage would be regarded as valid in Ghana the conditions set out  in
    Kareem would be satisfied; however, if there is  insufficient  evidence
    which can satisfy this Tribunal that the marriage would be regarded  as
    valid in the Netherlands, then I cannot  so  find  and  the  claimant's
    appeal must be dismissed.

23. I turn first of all to the letter from the Dutch Embassy  which  is  in
    very brief terms and while referring to the relevant Articles contained
    within the Dutch Civil Code merely says that

         "an English summary of the relevant parts is given in  [paragraphs]
         27 and 28 of the Upper Tribunal's  determination  in  the  case  of
         Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024",

    but which very significantly does not refer to the finding at paragraph
    29 of Kareem that

         "the passages we cite are silent on whether a  proxy  or  customary
         marriage would be recognised in the Netherlands or whether  such  a
         marriage would be incompatible with Dutch public order."

24. It is in this context that I set out the final paragraph of this letter
    which is as follows:

         "The Dutch Embassy will only draw conclusions on the recognition of
         a marriage in the  context  of  an  application  such  as  a  Dutch
         passport application.  It is therefore not possible to  comment  on
         the documentary evidence required."

25. Plainly this cannot by any stretch of the imagination  be  regarded  as
    "reliable evidence about the recognition  of  the  marriage  under  the
    laws" of the Netherlands.

26. I therefore have to turn to what is said to be the expert  evidence  of
    the Dutch lawyer and as it is short I set this out in  full  (it  is  a
    letter which was written to the  claimant's  solicitor,  Mr  Owusu  who
    represented the claimant today).  This letter is as follows:

         "Dear Mr Owusu,

         You asked me if a proxy Ghanaian marriage will be recognised in the
         Netherlands.

         I am specialised in international family law.  As a family lawyer I
         represent a lot of expats with their divorce or  other  family  law
         related matters.  My clients live all around the  world.   I  am  a
         publisher  in  specialist  journals  as  well.   I  am  a   teacher
         international private law at the University in Leiden  next  to  my
         job as a lawyer.  For answering your question I  also  had  contact
         with a specialist working at the municipality in Amsterdam.  He  is
         an expert in international lineage law and we once  gave  a  course
         together about problems in the area of international family law.

         According to Article 10:31 from the Dutch Civil Code an  outer  the
         Netherlands closed marriage that is legally follow the law  of  the
         state where the marriage took place will  be  recognised  as  such.
         There is one exception.  Article 10:32  of  the  Dutch  Civil  Code
         stipulates  that  approval  to  an  enclosed  outdoor  wedding   is
         dismissed when the marriage is incompatible with the public policy.
          A valid foreign proxy  marriage  is  (probably)  not  against  our
         public order, so the proxy part will not be a stay in the  way  for
         recognition.  Almost all valid foreign marriages are recognised  in
         the Netherlands as long as they are not bigamies.

         However, I expect that  the  municipality  will  not  consider  for
         granted proved the existence of the marriage.  Therefore  I  assume
         that recognition in the Netherlands should start with  proving  the
         marriage.  If this marriage can be proven and if  it  is  a  formal
         marriage as you informed me,  I  don't  expect  problems  with  the
         recognition of this marriage in the Netherlands.  Of course I can't
         give you guarantees.  If you want to be sure, you  should  ask  the
         municipality where the registration of  the  marriage  should  take
         place.

         I hope I informed you sufficiently.  If any questions arise, please
         do not hesitate to contact me.

         ..."

27. This is in my judgment again clearly not "reliable evidence" about  the
    recognition of this marriage under the laws of the Netherlands.  It  is
    clear from the use of the word  "probably"  that  the  writer  of  this
    letter is unable to give definitive evidence as to  whether  a  foreign
    proxy marriage would be held to be against  the  public  order  of  the
    Netherlands which  is  the  issue  on  which  the  Tribunal  in  Kareem
    recognised the relevant Articles were silent and it is also clear  from
    the use of the words "I can't give you guarantees" and "if you want  to
    be sure, you should ask..." that the writer recognises that her advice,
    whatever it is, might be open to challenge.  Further,  this  "evidence"
    does not "identify relevant legal provisions" in  the  Netherlands  nor
    "identify how they apply  in  practice".   Although  it  sets  out  the
    relevant codes it clearly does not purport to give a definitive  answer
    to the question which at paragraph 29 the Tribunal in Kareem stated had
    not yet been answered.

28. In these circumstances the claimant has not  satisfied  the  evidential
    burden which is upon her and in accordance with what was  said  by  the
    Tribunal in Kareem at the end of paragraph 14, and I repeat "a lack  of
    evidence of relevant foreign law will normally mean that the party with
    the burden of proving it will fail."

29. In this case the party with the burden of proving the relevant  foreign
    law, which is this claimant, has failed to prove it and the  inevitable
    consequence must be that her appeal fails and I will so find.

30. Before so doing, it is right that I deal briefly with one  point  which
    was made on behalf of the claimant when I had almost  concluded  giving
    my oral determination which was that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    not made any  finding  as  to  whether  or  not  there  was  a  durable
    relationship between the claimant and  her  alleged  spouse.   Had  the
    Judge made a finding with regard to this it might have been open to the
    claimant to argue that the Secretary of State's  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because she had not considered whether  or  not
    to grant a  residence  card  under  the  provisions  of  Regulation  8.
    However, no application was made on behalf of the  claimant  to  cross-
    appeal this aspect of the decision and in these circumstances  such  an
    argument is not before me and cannot be considered.



Decision

I set aside the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  as  containing  a
material error of law and substitute the following decision:

The claimant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
refusing to issue her with a residence card, is dismissed.


Signed:

     [pic]

Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
                          Date: 11 August 2014


