
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50652/2014
                                                               IA/50653/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 25 February 2016                  |On 9 March 2016                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE


                                   Between
                             MR HASSAN ATTIQUE &
                               MISS MITALY DEY
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr M Iqbal of Counsel instructed by Britain
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is a national of  Pakistan  and  the  second  is  a
    citizen of Bangladesh.  Their  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 1 December 2014 refusing to grant them leave to remain
    as Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant were dismissed by First tier  Tribunal
    Judge Howard following a hearing at Richmond on 26 June for reasons  he
    has given on 9 September 2015. The appellants sought and  were  granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by Judge Pooler of the First
    Tier Tribunal on 19 January 2016 in his written determination.

 2. At the hearing Tribunal before me Mr Jarvis representing the respondent
    quite properly conceded that the decision of the First tier Tribunal is
    unsustainable as Judge Howard had failed to engage  with  the  evidence
    that had been placed before him. Mr Iqbal of  counsel  the  appellant's
    representative agreed and the parties asked that the case  be  remitted
    to the First tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh  hearing.  Having  read  the
    determination of Judge Howard I was satisfied that the proposed outcome
    of the appeal before me and the future course of action  accorded  with
    my own view.

 3. These appeals are allowed and remitted to the First tier  to  be  heard
    afresh by any Judge other than Judge Howard.

 4. I would like to request  the  First  tier  Tribunal  to  use  its  best
    endeavours to list these appeals at the earliest as the appellants have
    been in a limbo for a long time and the nature of the claims demand  an
    early resolution.


K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
27 February 2016

