
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50866/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th November 2015                |On 16th December 2015                |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                              JABIN BEGUM POLY
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Pretzell, Counsel, instructed by Makka
Solicitors Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Bangladesh born on  10th  December
    1987.  She first arrived in the UK on 25th May 2013 when she was  given
    leave to enter as a visitor until 21st October 2013.  On  18th  October
    2013 the Appellant applied for leave to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a
    British citizen,  the  Sponsor  Capitan  Miah.   That  application  was
    refused for the reasons given  in  a  Notice  of  Decision  dated  15th
    November 2013.  At the same time the Respondent decided to  remove  the
    Appellant under the provisions of Section 47  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The Appellant appealed that decision,  and  that
    appeal was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal on  5th  September  2014.
    However, the Respondent successfully  appealed  that  decision  to  the
    Upper Tribunal which on 1st December 2014 remitted the appeal again  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.   Hence  the  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Del Fabbro (the Judge) sitting at Taylor  House  on  7th
    May 2015.  He decided to allow the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds for
    the reasons given in his Decision dated 2nd June 2015.  The  Respondent
    sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 3rd  September  2015  such
    permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  It is to be noted  that
    when the appeal came before Judge Del Fabbro it was agreed between  the
    parties that the original finding of the First-tier Tribunal  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor enjoyed a genuine and subsisting relationship
    was to be preserved.  It was further agreed that  the  Appellant  could
    not succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  and  in  particular
    paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM thereof.   Therefore  the  only  issue
    before Judge Del Fabbro was whether the Respondent's original  decision
    amounted to a disproportionate breach of the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR
    rights.

 3. The Judge allowed the  appeal  because  he  found  that  the  Appellant
    satisfied all the requirements for leave to remain in  the  UK  as  the
    spouse of the Sponsor except for paragraph E-LTRP.2.1  of  Appendix  FM
    known as the "switching prohibition."  In other words, the only  defect
    in the Appellant's application for leave to remain was that having been
    granted leave to enter as a visitor, the Rule prevented  the  Appellant
    from obtaining leave to remain as a spouse.  The Judge found this to be
    an exceptional circumstance allowing consideration of  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights.  The  Judge  then  went  on  to  find  that  the
    Appellant had a family and private  life  in  the  UK  which  would  be
    interfered with by the  Respondent's  decision  so  as  to  engage  the
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights.  Finally the Judge found  that  such
    interference was disproportionate.

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Whitwell submitted that in coming to  that
    decision, the Judge had erred in law.  He referred to  the  grounds  of
    application and argued that the Judge had failed to appreciate that  it
    was a fundamental element of the relevant  Immigration  Rule  that  the
    Appellant was not present in the UK when seeking  leave  as  a  spouse.
    The Judge had allowed the appeal on a "near  miss"  basis  because  the
    Appellant had met all the requirements of the relevant Immigration Rule
    except for this provision.  This was an error of law.   The  Judge  had
    not carried out a proper balancing exercise.  He had not considered all
    the relevant factors, only the "near miss."  The Judge had not assessed
    the weight to be attached to the public interest, and had made  only  a
    passing reference to the factors  contained  in  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It was apparent from the
    decision in R (On the Application  of  Chen)  v  SSHD  (Appendix  FM  -
    Chikwamba - Temporary Separation -  Proportionality)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT
    00189 (IAC) that more was required.

 5. In  response,  Mr  Pretzell  referred  to  his  Skeleton  Argument  and
    submitted that there was no such error of law.  He  argued  that  there
    was no good reason to require this Appellant to return to Bangladesh in
    order to apply for entry clearance as a spouse from there  because  she
    satisfied all of the other  requirements  of  Appendix  FM.   For  that
    reason the Judge had  found  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  to  be
    disproportionate.  In doing so,  the  Judge  was  doing  no  more  than
    following the decision in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 as explained in SSHD
    v Hayat (Pakistan) [2012] EWCA Civ 1054.  In the latter case, Elias  LJ
    said as follows:

         "(a) Where an applicant who does not have  lawful  entry  clearance
             pursues an Article 8 claim, a dismissal of the  claim  on  the
             procedural ground that the policy requires that the  applicant
             should have made the application from his home state may  (but
             not necessarily will) constitute a  disruption  of  family  or
             private life sufficient  to  engage  Article  8,  particularly
             where children are adversely affected.

         (b)  Where Article 8 is engaged,  it  will  be  a  disproportionate
             interference with family or private life  to  enforce  such  a
             policy unless, to use the language of Sullivan LJ, there is  a
             sensible reason for doing so."

 6. Applying that decision, it had not been  necessary  for  the  Judge  to
    carry out a full assessment of proportionality in this case as he found
    there was no  good  reason  to  require  the  Appellant  to  return  to
    Bangladesh to seek entry clearance there, particularly as she  met  the
    requirements of the relevant Immigration Rule.  In any event, the Judge
    had considered the weight to be attached to the public interest when he
    wrote at paragraph 31 of the Decision that he had  had  regard  to  the
    provisions of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

 7. I do find an error of law in the decision  of  the  Judge  so  that  it
    should be set aside.  It is apparent that the Judge found the  decision
    of the  Respondent  to  be  disproportionate  because  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain only failed because of  the  "switching
    prohibition" contained in paragraph E-LTRP.2.1.  In my view that is  an
    insufficient  reason.   The  case  of  Hayat  was  decided  before  the
    introduction of Appendix FM, and I do  not  think  that  the  provision
    contained in paragraph  E-LTRP.2.1  can  be  considered  a  "procedural
    ground" as referred to in Hayat.  In any event, in that case  Elias  LJ
    went on to write:

         "(c) Whether it is sensible to enforce that policy will necessarily
             be fact-sensitive; Lord Brown identified  certain  potentially
             relevant  factors  in  Chikwamba.   They  will   include   the
             prospective length and degree and disruption  of  family  life
             and whether other members of the family are settled in the UK.



         (d)  Where Article 8 is engaged and there is no sensible reason for
             enforcing the policy, the decision maker should determine  the
             Article 8 claim on its substantive merits,  having  regard  to
             all material factors, notwithstanding that the  applicant  has
             no lawful entry clearance."

 8. Further, in Chen it was decided as follows:

         "(i) Appendix FM does not include  consideration  of  the  question
             whether it would be disproportionate to expect  an  individual
             to return to his home  country  to  make  an  entry  clearance
             application to re-join family members in the UK.  There may be
             cases in which there are no insurmountable obstacles to family
             life  being  enjoyed  outside  the  UK  but  where   temporary
             separation to enable an individual to make an application  for
             entry clearance may be disproportionate.   In  all  cases,  it
             will be for the individual to place before  the  Secretary  of
             State evidence that such temporary separation  will  interfere
             disproportionately with protected  rights.   It  will  not  be
             enough to rely solely upon the case law concerning Chikwamba v
             SSHD [2008] UKHL 40."

 9. It is therefore apparent that in considering proportionality, it is not
    sufficient to merely take into account a "near miss."  All the relevant
    factors  including  those  relating  to  the  public  interest  and  in
    particular Section 117B of the 2002 Act must  be  taken  into  account.
    This the Judge failed to do.  There is reference at paragraph 30 of the
    Decision to some very brief details  of  the  Appellant's  family,  but
    there are no findings at all as to the degree of  interference  to  the
    Appellant's family life of requiring her to  return  to  Bangladesh  to
    seek entry clearance from there.  There is no evidence to  sustain  the
    finding of "significant interference"  made  at  paragraph  33  of  the
    Decision.  Further, the public interest merits only a passing reference
    at paragraph 31 of  the  Decision  where  the  Judge  decided  that  it
    attracted only "little countervailing  weight"  because  there  was  no
    sensible reason to expect the Appellant to return to Bangladesh.   This
    amounts to an insufficient consideration of the weight to  be  attached
    to the public interest.  For these reasons, the  Judge's  consideration
    of proportionality is flawed and amounts to an error of law.

10. At the hearing, I reserved my error of law decision which  I  have  now
    made.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  will
    have to be re-made.  I decide that it should be re-made in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in accordance  with  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Practice
    Statements.  For that purpose the original  finding  that  there  is  a
    genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor is preserved.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

The decision will be re-made by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  an  order  for  anonymity.   There  was  no
application to me to continue that order and I find no reason for it  to  be
continued.  I lift the order.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton

