
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50064/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 June 2014                                |On 18 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN



                                   Between

                                janet Abrafi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Akohene, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms S L Ong, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  She appealed to a  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision  of  13  November
    2013 refusing her application for a residence card which she sought  on
    the basis of marriage to an EEA national exercising  treaty  rights  in
    the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant claimed to be  the  wife  of  Isaac  Kwadwo  Amponsah,  a
    Belgian national, and to have married him by proxy in Ghana.

3.   The respondent noted that she had provided  a  copy  of  her  husband's
    Belgian ID card, her Ghanaian passport,  employment  evidence  for  her
    husband including his bank statements and a bank letter, a letter  from
    the Ghana High  Commission,  two  statutory  declarations,  a  Ghanaian
    customary marriage certificate and photographs.

4.   The  Ghanaian  customary  marriage  certificate  stated  that  she  had
    married her husband in Ghana on 28 February 2013 by proxy, and that the
    marriage was registered with the district registrar on  7  March  2013.
    It was noted by the respondent that there was no mandatory  requirement
    under Ghanaian law to register a customary marriage  within  a  certain
    timeframe, and there was no legal obligation  indeed  to  register  the
    marriage at all.  The respondent was of the view however that since the
    appellant had provided a Ghanaian customary  marriage  certificate  she
    had shown that she had voluntarily  registered  her  marriage  and  the
    burden of proof was therefore on her to show that the registration  was
    done  in  accordance  with   the   Customary   Marriage   and   Divorce
    (Registration)  Law  1985.   This  included  a  requirement  that   the
    registration of the marriage be accompanied by a statutory  declaration
    which must state the names of the parties to the marriage,  the  places
    of residence of the parties at the time of the marriage  and  that  the
    conditions essential to the validity of the marriage in accordance with
    the applicable customary law have been complied with.

5.   The respondent also noted from the decision of NA  (Customary  marriage
    and divorce -  evidence)  Ghana  [2009]  UKAIT  00009  that  there  are
    additional criteria which  require  to  be  satisfied  before  a  proxy
    marriage contracted under Ghanaian customary law  might  be  considered
    legal.  Various paragraphs of that decision were noted.

6.   The respondent went  on  to  note  section  3(1)(c)  of  the  Customary
    Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985 which required to be shown
    that the parties had capacity to marry  and  that  the  parties  (which
    covered the spouses parents or  extended  family)  consented  and  that
    dowry had been received in some form applicable to the customs  of  the
    tribes.  It was necessary to show that both  parties  to  the  marriage
    must be either Ghanaian citizens themselves or able to demonstrate that
    their parents were Ghanaian citizens in order for  the  marriage  under
    customary law to be considered legal.  The  point  was  made  that  the
    appellant had submitted no  evidence  to  prove  she  was  of  Ghanaian
    descent other than her passport and no evidence had  been  provided  to
    prove that her spouse was of Ghanaian descent.  She also noted evidence
    from the Ghana COI Report  of  11  May  2012  that  birth  certificates
    registered over a year after an individual's  birth  are  not  reliable
    evidence  of  relationships  and  so   registration,   including   late
    registration, might often be accomplished on demand with little  or  no
    supporting documentation required.  Ghanaian legislation made it  clear
    that registration of birth was required to be done within  21  days  of
    the birth taking place.

7.   The respondent did not consider that the appellant  had  satisfied  the
    requirements of showing  both  parties  to  the  marriage  were  either
    Ghanaian nationals or had direct familial links to Ghana that  even  if
    they had been able to do so that the customary marriage certificate was
    not accepted as being validly registered in accordance  with  the  1985
    Act, since, having set out the terms of the declaration, it  was  noted
    that no evidence had been provided in the form of birth certificates or
    marriage certificates that her claimed father was  related  to  her  as
    claimed and likewise with respect to her spouse's claimed father, and a
    letter that had been provided purporting to be from the  Ghanaian  High
    Commission in London  stating  that  the  marriage  was  registered  in
    accordance  with  Ghanaian  law  could  not  be  verified  because  the
    telephone number provided on the letter providing that information  was
    not answered when it was called and when the number  was  cross-checked
    with the Ghanaian High Commission in London website it was  found  that
    the number did not exist and therefore the genuineness  of  the  letter
    was not accepted.

8.    The  respondent  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  provisions   of
    Regulation 8(5) of the EEA Regulations had been satisfied on the  basis
    of the couple being unmarried  partners,  but  to  assess  whether  the
    relationship was durable the respondent would expect the  appellant  to
    demonstrate that she had been living together  with  her  EEA  national
    sponsor for at least two years.  No evidence had been provided to  show
    that they resided together as a couple at the same address prior to the
    date of the customary marriage certificate nor had  they  provided  any
    evidence that they knew each other or had met prior to the date of  the
    customary  marriage  certificate  being  issued  abroad.   It  was  not
    accepted that she had been in a durable relationship with  her  claimed
    husband for a two  year  period.   She  had  provided  no  evidence  of
    cohabitation with him and no joint evidence in the form of  bills  etc.
    The only photographs provided appeared to have been taken over a period
    of a few  days.   Accordingly  it  was  concluded  that  the  terms  of
    Regulation 8(5) were not  met.   The  matter  was  also  considered  in
    respect of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights but  it
    was concluded that a separate  application  had  to  be  made  in  this
    regard.

9.   The judge did not accept that the appellant had  produced  evidence  to
    show that she was married to  her  EU  sponsor  as  claimed.   She  had
    produced a Ghanaian passport as evidence of her descent but her sponsor
    had not done so.  A translated copy of a birth certificate bearing  his
    name and stated as being from the Republic of Ghana had been  submitted
    as evidence of his descent and was also produced  as  evidence  of  his
    relationship to the person cited on  the  statutory  declaration  of  4
    March 2013 indicating the individuals who acted on  the  sponsor's  and
    the appellant's behalf at their marriage in Ghana.  The  appellant  had
    produced a birth certificate which the judge again considered  appeared
    to have been produced for  the  same  purposes.   He  considered  these
    documents in the  round  and  in  accordance  with  the  Tanveer  Ahmed
    guidelines.  He noted they appeared all to  have  been  attested  by  a
    registrar but there was no information or explanation  as  to  why  the
    appellant's birth was registered so long after it took place.  This was
    also true of the sponsor.  He also noted that the certification  stamps
    on both of them were of very poor quality and barely readable and found
    them ultimately to be of no evidential  value  and  to  provide  little
    support or  corroboration  for  the  appellant's  claims  to  identity,
    relationships and nationality.

10.  He  said  that  whilst  registration  was  optional,  the  parties  had
    voluntarily registered their marriage and he was  not  satisfied  given
    his earlier findings and in the absence of evidence about  the  sponsor
    to the contrary that both parties were Ghanaian nationals or had direct
    familial links to Ghana as required.  He observed and in effect adopted
    the concerns of the respondent about the letters from the Ghanaian High
    Commission in London.  He  also  noted  with  regard  to  the  marriage
    certificate that it said that the appellant was a spinster rather  than
    being divorced as she claimed she was at the time of the  marriage  and
    she had provided no explanation as to why her status would be indicated
    in that way.  Again he regarded this to be a document of poor quality.

11.  He went on to consider the situation in respect of Regulation 8(5)  and
    concluded that if the couple had been cohabiting for the period of time
    they claimed to have done subsequent to their marriage they would  have
    been able to provide far more detailed evidence of their lives together
    than one payslip and one letter from Npower, neither of  which  in  any
    event was in joint names.  He  regarded  the  photographs  produced  as
    being of very poor quality and that there was no supporting evidence as
    to when and where they were taken or even whether they clearly  related
    to the appellant and the sponsor.  He  was  not  satisfied,  given  the
    history, circumstances and documentation produced  that  the  appellant
    had provided sufficient evidence to show that  she  was  in  a  durable
    relationship with her sponsor and therefore did not consider  that  she
    had made out the requirements of the Regulations.

12.  He went on to consider the matter  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and concluded that, bearing in mind the best
    interests of the child, refusal would not be a disproportionate  breach
    of the appellant's family or private life.  He therefore dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

13.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that it was arguable that the judge should have ordered the  production
    of the original documents given his concerns that the documents were of
    poor quality generally and the certification stamps  on  both  were  of
    very poor quality and barely readable.   It  was  also  argued  in  the
    grounds that the judge had not  understood  the  law  and  capacity  of
    parties to contract a valid customary marriage relative  to  the  their
    Ghanaian descent, noting that registration of marriages  in  Ghana  was
    now optional, and that the  judge  had  also  erred  on  the  issue  of
    "durable relationship".

14.  At the hearing Mr Akohene identified three  specific  issues  which  he
    said showed errors of law in the judge's decision.   The  first  was  a
    failure to understand properly the issues about the  marriage  contract
    in Ghana.  He argued that the judge had simply followed what  had  been
    said by the Secretary of State in her decision letter.  The  respondent
    had accepted at page 4 of the decision letter that  registration  of  a
    marriage was no longer  compulsory.   It  would  confirm  the  marriage
    rather than validating it.  The respondent had quoted from  NA  in  the
    decision letter but had omitted paragraph 8 where  it  was  made  clear
    that a marriage could be concluded where a couple agreed to  marry  and
    the woman's parents or family agreed to the marriage and the man made a
    present or presents in cash or kind  as  required  by  the  appropriate
    custom  to  her  parents  or  family.   There  were  no  documents  nor
    certificates and in many cases no ceremony.  The  Regulations  required
    no more than that she be a family member by marriage and there  was  no
    further definition.  She was therefore married according to custom  and
    the registration was not material.  The contract was evidenced  by  the
    statutory declaration.   The  judge  therefore  misunderstood  Ghanaian
    customary law.

15.  But even if one looked at the registration certificate, what  had  been
    decided by the Tribunal in CB (validity of  marriage:  proxy  marriage)
    Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080 applied.  There had  been  no  allegation  or
    evidence by the respondent that the marriage certificate was fraudulent
    so in the absence of such matters the rules  of  private  international
    law were required to be observed and it was clear  from  that  decision
    that the United Kingdom would recognise the validity of proxy marriages
    for immigration purposes provided the proxy marriage was legal  in  the
    country in which the marriage was  celebrated.   It  would  then  be  a
    matter for the registrar and that was in any event  irrelevant  to  the
    question of whether the couple were married.

16.  The second point was the reference at paragraph  9  to  Tanveer  Ahmed.
    If the judge was relying on Tanveer Ahmed then he would  need  to  have
    the original documents and they had  been  kept  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  If the judge had needed to see them  he  could  have  requested
    them from the appellant who  would  then  have  sought  them  from  the
    Secretary of State.

17.   The  third  point  of  challenge  was  that  concerning  the   durable
    relationship issue.  The matter had been dealt with on the  papers  but
    one would expect a judge to hear evidence from both parties if making a
    finding about a durable relationship.   If  the  judge  had  considered
    matters differently he might have come to a different outcome.

18.  A final point was whether both needed to be  Ghanaian.   It  was  clear
    from the document referred  to  in  an  unreported  decision  which  Mr
    Akohene had produced that both being Ghanaian was not a requirement: it
    needed only one of them to be.

19.  In her submissions Ms Ong argued  that  though  registration  might  be
    optional, if there were no registration the marriage would need  to  be
    proved as a customary marriage by other means but  where  it  had  been
    registered there were certain requirements to be complied with, and the
    Secretary of State  was  entitled  to  take  issue  if  there  was  not
    compliance.  There was the point which the judge had referred to  about
    the certificate stating that the appellant was a spinster  rather  than
    being divorced as she claimed she was at  the  time  of  the  marriage.
    There were also concerns about other evidence provided as  set  out  at
    paragraph 9 of the determination and referred  to  at  page  5  of  the
    refusal  letter  concerning   the   reliability   of   Ghanaian   birth
    certificates dated so many years after the birth.   The  Ghanaian  COIR
    addressed points about poor quality  documents  and  there  were  other
    concerns.   This  was  relevant  because  of  the  birth  certificates'
    reference to parents and the need to prove  the  people  named  on  the
    statutory declaration were able to do so.  There  were  concerns  about
    that evidence.  It was the case in fact that  the  respondent  did  not
    have the original documents on  file  but  it  was  not  clear  whether
    anything turned on that.

20.  Ms Ong also relied upon what had been said by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU Law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT  24  (IAC)  which
    among other things said that the starting  point  would  be  to  decide
    whether a  marriage  was  contracted  between  the  appellant  and  the
    qualified person according to the national law of the  EEA  country  of
    the qualified person's nationality, and no evidence had  been  provided
    about Belgian law with regard to this.  The judge had been entitled  to
    conclude as he did and  the  evidence  was  insufficient  to  meet  the
    standard of proof.

21.  By way of  reply  Mr  Akohene  argued  that  the  issue  of  the  birth
    certificates was irrelevant.  The appellant  had  produced  a  Ghanaian
    passport and that  was  the  time  to  take  issue  with  the  Ghanaian
    nationality point.  It was clear from  the  documentary  evidence  that
    both parties to the marriage did not need to be Ghanaian.

22.  The appellant maintained that the originals of the documents were  with
    the Home Office.  If the judge was not looking at copies he  could  not
    make a proper Tanveer Ahmed finding.  As to what  constituted  a  valid
    marriage, registration was simply confirmation.  The United Kingdom had
    to apply the principles of private international law and could not find
    fault in another country's processes.  If the respondent thought  there
    was a discrepancy or defect in the process  then  that  could  only  be
    challenged in the Ghanaian High Court.

23.  With regard to Kareem, it was clear from paragraph 68(b) that this  was
    a two stage process.  It would usually be sufficient where  a  marriage
    certificate issued by a competent authority was  produced.   There  was
    nothing in this case to challenge there being a competent authority and
    no allegation of deception or fraud.  It  must  be  accepted  that  the
    registrar had taken it on him or herself to decide that a marriage  had
    taken place.  Paragraph 68(d) provided that where there was no marriage
    certificate or doubts then the marital relationship could be proved  by
    other evidence and that was the second stage which required a judge  to
    decide whether a marriage had been contracted.  At paragraph 68(g)  was
    the and/or point and that made it an alternative whether or  not  there
    was independent and reliable evidence  about  the  recognition  of  the
    marriage under the laws of the EEA country  where  it  was  clear  that
    there was independent reliable evidence  from  the  country  where  the
    marriage took place.   That  took  one  back  to  the  starting  point.
    Clearly paragraph 17 was the panel's preference, but the  Tribunal  was
    also referred to paragraph 19 which provided for  other  possibilities.
    The appeal should be allowed.

24.  I reserved my determination.

25.  I think it is right to begin assessment of the judgment  in  this  case
    with the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Kareem  which  I  think  had
    been promulgated and reported before the judge decided  this  case  but
    was not put before him and indeed was not referred to in the grounds or
    the grounds of permission.  In my view it is entirely clear from Kareem
    that rather than being an alternative a fundamental point is the matter
    summarised at paragraph 17:

         "Where the  marital  relationship  is  disputed,  the  question  of
         whether there is a  marital  relationship  is  to  be  examined  in
         accordance with the laws of the Member State from which  the  Union
         citizen obtains nationality and from which therefore  that  citizen
         derives free movement rights."

    This was the first issue considered by the Tribunal in that  case.   As
    early as paragraph 5 it is noted that within the Secretary  of  State's
    reasoning there is an assumption that for the  purposes  of  EU  law  a
    Member State can use its own legal order to determine whether or not  a
    person is married to another.  The Tribunal went on to say at paragraph
    6 that it had found no legal basis in EU law for such an assumption and
    went on to note the legal basis for its view, summarised  at  paragraph
    11, that in EU law the question of whether a person  is  in  a  marital
    relationship is governed by the national laws  of  the  Member  States.
    The Tribunal went on at paragraph 13 to infer that usually  a  marriage
    certificate issued by a competent authority will be sufficient evidence
    that a marriage has been contracted, but the Tribunal went on  to  make
    clear later in that paragraph that  such  principles  do  not  help  to
    determine whether a person is  a  spouse  because  it  will  depend  on
    identifying the authority with legal power to create or confirm that  a
    marriage has been contracted. The reasoning for this is clear,  as  set
    out at paragraph 18.  There it is said:


         "Within EU law, it is essential that Member States  facilitate  the
         free movement and residence rights  of  Union  citizens  and  their
         spouses.  This would not be achieved if it  were  left  to  a  host
         Member State to decide whether a Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
         marriage.  Different Member States would be able to reach different
         conclusions about that Union citizen's marital status.  This  would
         leave Union citizens unclear as to whether their spouses could move
         freely with them; and might mean that the Union citizen could  move
         with greater freedom to one Member State (where the marriage  would
         be recognised) than to another  (where  it  might  not  be).   Such
         difficulties would be contrary to fundamental  EU  law  principles.
         Therefore, we perceive EU law as requiring  the  identification  of
         the legal  system  in  which  a  marriage  is  said  to  have  been
         contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the  Union  citizen's
         marital status is not at risk of being  differently  determined  by
         different  Member  States.   Given  the  intrinsic   link   between
         nationality of a Member State and free movement rights, we conclude
         that the legal system of the nationality of the Union citizen  must
         itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted."

26.  It is abundantly clear that that  was  not  the  case  in  the  instant
    appeal.  There is no indication as to what Belgian law has to say about
    a proxy  marriage,  and  accordingly  this  basic  requirement  of  the
    decision in Kareem has not been satisfied.  It is entirely unclear what
    Belgian law's response is to the question of whether there is a marital
    relationship in this case.

27.  As a consequence the appeal must be dismissed.

28.  As regards the other matters, insofar it is necessary to  address  them
    at this point, I agree broadly with the  submissions  of  Ms  Ong  that
    where the marriage as in this case has been registered,  and  accepting
    that there is no requirement to do so, and there are requirements to be
    complied with, issue can properly be taken with any difficulties in the
    evidence.  I consider that the judge was entitled to  be  concerned  by
    the matters set out at paragraph 9.  I do  not  consider  that  matters
    could have been resolved with regard to the bulk  of  his  concerns  in
    that paragraph by consideration of the original documents.   There  was
    no explanation or information as to why the births of the appellant and
    sponsor were registered so long after they took place, and I  note  the
    concerns that the judge noted also in the background evidence about the
    quality of such evidence where there has been such a gap.  That was the
    particular concern in that paragraph, but there is also  a  concern  in
    the marriage certificate stating  that  the  appellant  is  a  spinster
    rather than being divorced as she claimed she was at the  time  of  the
    marriage, and there are also the concerns noted at paragraph  10  about
    the letter submitted from  the  Ghanaian  High  Commission  in  London.
    These matters in my view justified the judge in concluding as he did.

29.  I also consider that he was entitled to  be  concerned  as  he  was  in
    respect  of  Regulation  8(5)  concerning  the  documentation  produced
    purporting to show that the couple were in a durable relationship.  The
    findings of the judge  in  that  regard  at  paragraph  13  are  sound.
    Accordingly  I  conclude  that  no  material  error  of  law   in   his
    determination has been identified, and chiefly  on  the  basis  of  the
    reasoning set out in Kareem but also on the basis of his own  reasoning
    quite apart from that, I conclude that the determination is  sound  and
    no error of law in it has been identified.  The appeal is dismissed.






Signed                                  Date 12.06.2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
