
[pic]
IAC-FH

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50335/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                            MR WASU ALANI OBAYOMI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Pipi, Counsel, instructed by Jeff-Leonard
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Wasiu Alani Obayomi is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  22  February
    1983.  In a decision dated 2 December 2014 the  respondent  refused  to
    issue the appellant with an EEA residence card  under  the  Immigration
    (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  EEA  Regulations),
    concluding that the marriage was one  of  convenience.   The  appellant
    appealed.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  N  M  Paul,  in  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 1 July 2015, dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  the
    grounds advanced:  that the Judge may have erred  in  paragraph  20  in
    failing to identify what evidence was vague and evasive; that the Judge
    may have erred in linking the appellant's vague and evasive evidence to
    his failure to call  witnesses;  that  the  judge  may  have  erred  at
    paragraph 22 in failing to say what weight he gave to the  majority  of
    answers that the couple got right at interview and failing to carry out
    a fair balancing exercise; that the Judge's conclusion in  relation  to
    the appellant receiving his salary through his wife's bank account  was
    unreasonable; that it was unlawful and discriminatory of the  Judge  to
    take into account the  age  gap;  that  the  judge  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof.

Grounds 1 and 2

 2. The Judge was entitled to find as he did that the  appellant's  answers
    in relation to his 'so-called family members in the UK to be vague and,
    indeed, evasive'.  Although it was argued that he  failed  to  identify
    what evidence was vague and evasive the Judge clearly stated  that  his
    evidence about his personal circumstances was  'hard  to  follow'.   In
    addition the Judge also found that  the  appellant  when  'pressed'  in
    cross-examination 'began to qualify the nature of  the  family  members
    who were in this country with whom he was directly related'.  Therefore
    the judge in addition to making a general finding,  that  was  open  to
    him, also set out more specific examples  of  that  vague  and  evasive
    evidence.

 3. Although Mr Pipi was of the view that the Judge erred in  linking  that
    vague and evasive evidence to his failure to  call  witnesses,  as  the
    witnesses would not have made the evidence any less vague  or  evasive,
    that was to miss the point made by the Judge; Judge Paul noted that the
    appellant failed to call any evidence from anyone who might  have  been
    in  a  position  to  give  evidence  as  to  the  genuineness  of   the
    relationship.   The  relevance  of  the  Judge's  findings  about   the
    appellant's vague and evasive evidence was that this  therefore  called
    into question the appellant's claims about these family members  (given
    that they were not present to give evidence).

 4. It is clear that the Judge made findings that were open to him and gave
    adequate reasons for those findings.  It is not  the  case  that  these
    were findings no rational decision maker could reach.

Ground 3

 5. Mr Pipi relied on the fact that the appellant and his wife  were  asked
    210  question  and  he  submitted  that  they  answered  most  of  them
    correctly.  It was his view that the Judge erred as the respondent  had
    erred in selecting the inconsistencies and  saying  nothing  about  the
    consistent evidence and what weight had been given to that evidence.

 6. It was a matter for Judge Paul what weight he gave  to  each  piece  of
    evidence before him and it was also a matter for him  whether  he  made
    specific findings on each issue; for example as indicated by Mr Duffy a
    large number of the questions at interview were in relation to  whether
    or not the couple lived together and the Judge had accepted,  at  [24],
    that 'they may be living together'.  The Judge was also  aware  of  how
    many questions were asked, setting this out  at  [4]  and  including  a
    summary of the types of questions asked and where discrepancies lay and
    the Judge later, at [22] indicated that the refusal letter  from  which
    he had quoted highlighted 'some very  significant  differences  between
    the appellant's accounts'.  The Judge also set out at [7] to  [15]  the
    explanations of the appellant and his wife in relation to their answers
    at interview.

 7. It was clear the Judge had in mind the  consistencies  in  the  account
    including in his finding that the couple may indeed be living  together
    and, at [22] where he was of the view that 'it would  be  possible  for
    people to rehearse their answers, and indeed if it was clearly too well
    rehearsed then there would be no discrepancies'.  When  viewed  in  its
    entirety the Judge's reasoning was adequate and he made a clear finding
    in conclusion (at [22]) that the 'basic details given  in  relation  to
    the marriage and the circumstances before and after the marriage  were,
    in my view, unsatisfactory'.  The appellant's argument is no more  than
    a disagreement with the Judge's findings.

Ground 4

 8. Again the argument that the Judge was  unreasonable  in  concluding  at
    [23] in relation to the appellant's salary  going  into  the  sponsor's
    bank account that this was not proof of the relationship given that the
    appellant is unable to hold a bank  account  due  to  his  own  illegal
    status, was without foundation.  The Judge gave clear reasons for  this
    finding which was one that was open to him.  Although Mr Pipi indicated
    that this was unreasonable as the sponsor's bank account would  be  the
    'last place' the appellant would use if the marriage was  not  genuine,
    that is again  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    findings.  In finding, at [24], that it was perfectly possible that the
    appellant had staged photographs for the  purposes  of  persuading  the
    respondent that the marriage  was  genuine,  the  Judge  was  making  a
    finding as to the lengths the  appellant  was  prepared  to  go  to  in
    relation to try to show that a marriage was genuine.  It  was  open  to
    him, particularly in this context, to find that the appellant's  salary
    being paid  into  the  sponsor's  bank  account  was  no  more  than  a
    convenience given the lack of his own account.  There  is  no  arguable
    error of law.

Ground 5

 9. Mr Pipi argued that it was discriminatory of the  Judge  to  take  into
    account the age gap between the appellant and the sponsor.  Mr Pipi did
    not however demonstrate, how noting as a matter of fact, in the Judge's
    findings in the round, that there was a 17 year  age  gap  between  the
    appellant and his wife, constituted discrimination.  It was open to the
    Judge to take all the factors  into  consideration  (including  in  the
    sponsor's favour that as  a  single  woman  she  'may  have  been  more
    inclined to find a partner') and then to reach the rational  conclusion
    that the appellant had not demonstrated that the  marriage  was  not  a
    marriage of convenience.



Ground 6

10. Again this ground has no merit; the Judge  did  not  misunderstand  the
    burden or standard of proof and correctly directed himself at [18] that
    the burden initially rests  with  the  respondent  to  show  there  are
    grounds for believing the marriage is one of convenience and then  that
    burden shifts to the appellant  (Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  marriage  of
    convenience) [2012] UKUT 38 as approved by the Court of Appeal in  Rosa
    v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  14
    applied).  His finding, at [24] that it was 'perfectly  possible'  that
    the wedding photographs were staged for the purposes of persuading  the
    respondent that  the  marriage  was  genuine,  does  not  disclose  any
    misapplication of the balance  of  probabilities  as  the  standard  of
    proof.

Notice of Decision

11.  The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did
    not any contain errors of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was sought or made.


Signed   Date: 8 February 2016

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hutchinson

