
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50175/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Field House               |Determination Promulgated |
|On:              17 July 2014          |On 1 August 2014          |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                JASPREET KAUR
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:             Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:            Mr V Makol, Maalik & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Prior in which he allowed  the  appeal  of
    Miss Kaur, a  citizen  of  India,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to vary leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant. I shall refer to Ms Kaur as  the  Applicant,  although
    she was the Appellant in the proceedings below.

 2. The application under appeal was made on 15 August 2013 and was refused
    by reference to paragraph 322(1)(A) of the Immigration Rules (HC395) on
    13 November 2013.  The Applicant exercised her right of appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came before Judge  Prior
    on 23 April 2014 and was allowed. The Secretary of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt on 5 June  2014
    in the following terms

       1. The Respondent applies in time to appeal against the determination
          of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  R  B  L  Prior  in  which  he
          allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  against  the
          decision of the Respondent to refuse leave to remain as a  Tier  4
          (General) Student Migrant under the points based system.


       2. The grounds argue that  the  judge's  consideration  of  allegedly
          false information in the form of an erroneous date of  birth  held
          in bank records was flawed.

       3. It is arguable that the judge should have shown that  he  followed
          the guidance set out in AA (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA  Civ  773  before
          concluding that the information held by the  bank  arose  from  an
          error as opposed to a falsity.



 3. At the hearing before me the Applicant was represented by Mr Mokal  and
    Ms Pal appeared to represent the Secretary of State.

 4. On behalf the Secretary of State Ms Pal relied on the grounds of appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal. She said that it did not appear from reading the
    First-tier Tribunal determination  that  the  Judge  had  properly  had
    regard to the appropriate standard of proof. The correct  standard,  Ms
    Pal referred to Re B (Children) [2008]  UKHL  35,  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities  not  a  higher  standard.  At  paragraph   15   of   the
    determination the finding that  the  Secretary  State  "fell  very  far
    short" in establishing deception is an indication that  a  much  higher
    standard of proof than the balance of probabilities  was  imposed.  The
    Applicant had ample time to obtain a document from Axis Bank that would
    confirm that it was a correct document. The  refusal  letter  made  the
    point at issue clear. The Secretary of State discharged the  burden  of
    proof upon her.  Finally the  Judge  was  wrong  to  suggest  that  the
    acceptance of the bank statement for assessment of maintenance purposes
    was of any assistance to the Applicant. The Secretary of State did  not
    consider maintenance as the application fell for mandatory refusal.

 5. For the Applicant Mr Mokal said that he had represented  the  Applicant
    at the First-tier Tribunal hearing and the submissions now made by  the
    Secretary of State only sought to repeat what had been said before  the
    First-tier Judge. The Judge was referred to and paid attention  to  the
    relevant case law. He applies the correct burden of proof which is  the
    balance of probabilities to the higher end. The Judge considered all of
    the evidence and the submissions made. Paragraph 16 shows that he  took
    account of the fact  that  the  Applicant  had  not  submitted  further
    evidence.

 6. I reserved my decision. Both representatives agreed  that  if  I  found
    that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a  material
    error of law there being no further evidence to be called it  would  be
    appropriate to proceed to remake the decision.


Error of law

 7. I have considered the papers before me and the oral submissions of both
    parties very carefully. The issue  to  be  decided  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was a very straightforward one. The Applicant had  applied  to
    vary leave to remain as a student. To succeed in  her  application  she
    needed to show that she had access to  sufficient  funds  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. To demonstrate  compliance  with
    this requirement she submitted what purported to be a bank statement of
    an account held by her mother Balwinder Kaur together with  a  copy  of
    her mother's passport. The Secretary of  State  checked  the  documents
    with the bank and found that the date of birth of the account holder as
    recorded by the bank differed from the date of birth of the Applicant's
    mother as shown on her passport. The Secretary of State concluded  that
    the Applicant's mother was not  the  account  holder  and  refused  the
    application by reference to paragraph 322 (1A) of the Immigration Rules
    on the basis that false representations had been made. In her Notice of
    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the Applicant said  simply  that  she
    did not supply any false document in relation to her application,  that
    the burden of proof is  upon  the  Secretary  of  State  and  that  the
    Secretary of State has not provided any evidence to meet  this  burden.
    Before  the  hearing  the  Secretary  of  State  submitted  a  Document
    Verification  Report  (DVR)  detailing   a   conversation   between   a
    representative of the Secretary of State and  the  bank  where  a  bank
    official confirmed that the date of birth of  the  account  holder  was
    different from that of the Applicant's mother.

 8. The determination of Judge Prior shows that he was alive to  the  issue
    before him  and  that  he  took  account  of  the  Applicant's  written
    statement and her oral evidence. It was suggested in  submissions  that
    it was plausible that the bank had  made  an  administrative  error  in
    relation to the date of birth of  the  Applicant's  mother.  The  Judge
    found the Applicant to be a credible witness who denied any  suggestion
    of dishonesty or deception. In dealing with the discrepancy  the  Judge
    found there was

        "a discrepancy in the bank's record for the year  of  the  mother's
        birth ... a near coincidence of the day of  birth  and  a  complete
        match of the month of birth"


    and that this


        "fell very far short of  establishing  the  Respondent's  case  for
        engagement of paragraph 322 (1A) of the rules".


    The Judge adds

        "Furthermore, and crucially in my judgement, that  discrepancy  was
        not sufficient for the Respondent to deny evidential weight to  the
        mother's statement of account with Axis Bank  for  the  purpose  of
        determining whether the Appellant met the  maintenance  requirement
        of the rules"

 9. In my judgement there are two  manifest  and  material  errors  of  law
    disclosed. In the first place and there is no  basis  for  the  finding
    that a discrepancy between dates of birth on 20 May  1963  and  16  May
    1968 fell far short of establishing the Secretary of State's  case  for
    engagement of paragraph 322 (1A) of the rules. These are  substantially
    different dates of birth and to conclude otherwise was in my  judgement
    irrational. Secondly the Judge has materially  misdirected  himself  in
    finding that the discrepancy was not sufficient for  the  secretary  of
    State to deny evidential weight to the bank statement for  the  purpose
    of determining whether the Applicant met the  maintenance  requirements
    of the rules. This is quite simply wrong. The Secretary of State having
    concluded that the application fell for mandatory refusal did not go on
    to consider whether the Applicant met the maintenance  requirements  of
    the rules. The fact that the Judge found this to be crucial  emphasises
    the materiality of his  error.  For  these  reasons  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Remaking the decision

10. In remaking the decision the starting point is the refusal letter. This
    clearly spells out the reason why the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    application.

        "The date of birth of the Balwinder Kaur who is the account  holder
        has a different date of birth from your mother".

    There is now no dispute in this respect it being accepted that the date
    of birth of  the  Applicant's  mother  as  shown  by  her  passport  is
    different from the date  of  birth  recorded  by  the  bank.  It  is  a
    substantial difference. Despite this not only do the grounds of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal not engage with  this  discrepancy  but  the
    statement of the  Applicant  dated  23  April  2014  and  the  skeleton
    argument submitted to the First-tier Tribunal do not engage  with  this
    discrepancy. The statement records


        "I have seen the verification report  and  I'm  not  sure  why  the
        details are what have been stated. I again confirm that  my  mother
        has account with Axis Bank".


    The skeleton argument refers to the allegation of deception and  quotes
    substantially from caselaw but does not  at  any  point  refer  to  the
    discrepancy in date of birth. It appears only to have  been  raised  on
    the Applicant's behalf in oral submissions that


        "it was entirely plausible that the bank had made an administrative
        error in relation to the date of the mother".

11. In my judgement it is not a question of the wrong burden or standard of
    proof having been applied. A clear and correct statement is made by the
    Secretary of State in the refusal letter dated 13 November  2013.  That
    statement is corroborated by the Document Verification  Report  but  in
    any event it is not in dispute that the statement is  correct  in  that
    the date of birth recorded by the bank for the holder of  the  relevant
    account is different from the date of birth of the Applicant's  mother.
    In my judgement this is quite sufficient  to  cause  the  Secretary  of
    State not to be satisfied that this was a statement of the  account  of
    the Applicant's mother. To the extent  that  it  is  necessary  in  the
    circumstances to recite the burden and standard I am entirely satisfied
    that the Secretary of State has satisfied the burden of proof  that  is
    upon her to show on the balance of probabilities that this statement of
    account is not that of the Applicant's mother.

12. The Applicant made no concerted attempt at rebuttal in the  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  the  witness  statement,  skeleton
    argument or indeed in oral evidence. Instead the  Applicant  sought  to
    suggest, wrongly in my judgement, that the Secretary of State  had  not
    come up to proof. If rebuttal were possible there is little doubt  that
    it would have been simple. A letter from the bank  pointing  out  their
    error may well have  been  sufficient  and  even  a  paragraph  in  the
    Applicant's statement explaining how the discrepancy  arose  may  along
    with the positive  credibility  finding  have  helped.  Speculation  in
    submissions to the First-tier Tribunal that the bank may have  made  an
    administrative error is insufficient.

13. In my judgement the Respondent was correct to refuse  this  application
    by reference to paragraph  322  (1A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    Applicant's appeal is dismissed.



  Summary

14. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law. I set aside that decision.

15. I remake the decision by dismissing the Applicant's appeal against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse her  application  to  vary
    leave to remain.


Signed:                                                  Date:





J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
