
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Ia/50357/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2014                               |On 4th Aug 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY

                                   Between

                               ALBERT ABDULLAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lams, Counsel for Kilby Jones Solicitors, London
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is citizen of Kosovo  born  on  13  September  1981.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 19 November  2013
    relating to a fresh application made by the appellant for asylum and/or
    human rights.  His asylum and human  rights  claims  had  already  been
    considered and refused by an Adjudicator on 8 February  2002.   Further
    submissions were made by him and refused on 20  February  2013.   There
    was no right of appeal but on 3 April 2013 the appellant challenged the
    Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  20  February  2013  and  made  an
    application for judicial review which was  refused.   On  23  September
    2013 it was agreed that the respondent would reconsider the decision of
    20 February 2013 in accordance with both paragraph 395c and 353b of the
    Immigration Rules and if the appellant's case still  fell  for  refusal
    any decision would attract a right  of  appeal.   The  application  was
    refused on 19 November  2013  and  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Handley heard an appeal of this decision which was  promulgated  on  23
    April 2014.  He allowed the appeal in respect of the Immigration  Rules
    and on human rights grounds.

 2. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Foudy  on  29  May  2014.   The  grounds  of
    application state that the judge failed to consider  the  claim  fully,
    gave undue weight to the extent of the appellant's ties to  Kosovo  and
    failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  there  were
    exceptional circumstances warranting consideration of the human  rights
    claim outside the rules.  The grounds  state  that  the  judge  made  a
    material misdirection in law by not properly dealing with the  guidance
    contained in Ogundimu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) and  he  failed
    to give reasons or adequate reasons for findings on a  material  matter
    as he did not consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the  Rules  with  reference  to  Nagre  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin).
    The permission states that it is arguable that the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's ties to Kosovo fell short of the guidance contained in  the
    said case of Ogundimu and that this amounts to an error of law.

The Hearing

 3. The Presenting Officer submitted that  the  Immigration  Rules  form  a
    complete code when dealing with public interest  in  a  proportionality
    assessment and if the Immigration Rules are met,  removal  would  be  a
    breach of an appellant's family and private  life.   He  first  of  all
    referred to paragraph 276ADE of the Rules and the  appellant's  private
    life.  He submitted that the judge allowed the appeal but if  I  accept
    that the Rules are a complete code, this decision must be wrong.

 4. He submitted that the judge found that the appellant  had  no  ties  to
    Kosovo where he comes from.  He referred me to the  cases  of  Ogundimu
    (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC) and Green [2013] UKUT 00254 (IAC).

 5. In Ogundimu the head note states "When considering whether a person has
    no ties to his country this must involve a rounded  assessment  of  all
    the relevant circumstances  and  should  not  be  limited  to  "social,
    cultural and family" circumstances."  The Presenting Officer  submitted
    that Judge Handley states that there is no evidence of the  appellant's
    family being killed in 1999 in Kosovo but refers to the original asylum
    refusal letter expressing sympathy in relation to this.   He  submitted
    that the passing of the appellant's nuclear  family  is  a  significant
    factor but this only relates to his family ties in  Kosovo.   Paragraph
    276ADE (vi) states that "no ties"  must  include  social,  cultural  or
    family ties with the country to which he would have to go, if  required
    to leave the UK.  He submitted that the judge  should  have  adopted  a
    more rounded approach.  He submitted that what the judge  has  done  is
    state that because his family members have been killed that is the  end
    of his connection to Kosovo but the judge has not  taken  into  account
    the fact that the appellant was in Kosovo until he was 18 years of  age
    and has knowledge of the social norms there.   He  submitted  that  the
    judge did not fully explore this matter and has had made too  narrow  a
    finding.

 6. He submitted that the appellant was 18 years old when he came to the UK
    and he has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  around  15  years.   He
    submitted that he accepts that existing ties erode because  of  absence
    but the judge has not considered whether the appellant's connection  to
    that country has  snapped  altogether.   He  submitted  that  paragraph
    276ADE (vi) does not mention any period of  time.   He  submitted  that
    paragraph 276ADE (iii) states that the  appellant  has  to  have  lived
    continuously in the United Kingdom for at least 20 years and the  terms
    of this sub-paragraph cannot be met.  He submitted that it  has  to  be
    considered that the appellant was just short of being an adult when  he
    left Kosovo and although his family connections have  diminished  since
    1999 his cultural connections still remain.

 7. The Presenting Officer then went on to deal with Ground 2  -  that  the
    judge has considered Article 8 in the alternative but has  not  made  a
    finding as to whether there are good and arguable grounds for  granting
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules.

 8. Counsel for the appellant submitted that in  the  permission  only  one
    ground is referred to and this particular issue is not mentioned.   The
    Presenting Officer referred to the  case  of  Ferrer  (2012)  UKUT00304
    (IAC), submitting that partial grant are undesirable and this was not a
    partial grant although the second ground was not  referred  to  in  the
    permission.  He submitted that the grant in this  claim  is  a  general
    grant of permission and all the grounds should be considered.  I  noted
    the objection by Counsel but agreed with the  Presenting  Officer  that
    all the grounds should be considered.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that on its  face  this  claim  cannot
    succeed under paragraph 276 or Appendix FM and that  the  Secretary  of
    State's intention in the new Rules is that they form a  complete  code.
    Private and family life is covered by these Rules and if the  terms  of
    the Rules cannot be met,  only  in  extreme  cases  can  the  claim  be
    considered outside the Rules, under Article 8 of  ECHR.   He  submitted
    that it is not clear what is meant by  "exceptional  circumstances"  or
    what justifies success under Article 8.

10. In 2013 a judicial review application  was  refused  relating  to  this
    appellant, with no right of appeal.  The determination makes  it  clear
    that Judge Handley  was  aware  of  this  and  the  Presenting  Officer
    submitted that even if the appellant's relationship  is  as  strong  as
    Judge Handley finds it is, the claim under Appendix FM cannot  succeed.
    He submitted that the judge has not explained why  he  is  entitled  to
    consider the claim under Article 8 of ECHR  and  that  the  appellant's
    ties to Kosovo have not been adequately addressed.  He  submitted  that
    there are no exceptional circumstances and  the  judge  has  not  given
    proper reasons for considering the claim outside the Rules.  This is an
    error of law.

11. Counsel for the appellant submitted that the case of Ogundimu  is  good
    law and this is what the Secretary  of  State  is  relying  on  in  her
    grounds.  He submitted that the judge dealt properly with the "no ties"
    test and there is no error of law. Only if the judge has  misunderstood
    the case can his dealings with the "no ties" situation be an  error  of
    law. What the Secretary of State is objecting  to  is  not  enough  for
    there to be an error of law.  All the Secretary of State  has  done  is
    take a different view from that of the judge.  I was  referred  to  the
    appellant's skeleton argument and was asked to give this weight.

12. Counsel then referred to paragraph 48 of the determination in which the
    judge refers to the case  of  Ogundimu.   The  judge  states  that  the
    appellant does not have any continuing connection to life in Kosovo, in
    any real sense.  Counsel submitted that at paragraph 123 of the case of
    Ogundimu this is  exactly  what  is  said.   "Ties"  mean  a  continued
    connection to life in that country, ie something that ties  a  claimant
    to his or her country of origin.  He submitted that the respondent  has
    not challenged the basis of the facts which the judge considered.   The
    judge accepts that the appellant's family was killed in 1999 and he has
    an absence of family in Kosovo.  The respondent states that  the  judge
    has not considered the other factors but she has not been able to point
    to any connection the appellant has with Kosovo. The appellant has lost
    contact with everyone there.  He left in 1999 because of  the  war  and
    has had no further connection to life in that country.

13. Counsel submitted that the judge is mindful of the correct test.  I was
    referred to the said case of Green at paragraph 31.  This  states  that
    where the Immigration Rules do not reflect the law, it is  the  law  as
    laid down in primary legislation that must be followed.  This paragraph
    refers to a failure to direct the attention of the  decision  maker  to
    the solidity of the ties, as  opposed  to  their  mere  existence.   He
    submitted that the Secretary of State's view appears to be based on the
    law pre-Ogundimu.  The only link the appellant has  to  Kosovo  is  the
    very remote link of having once lived there.

14.  I  was  referred  to  paragraph  125  of  Ogundimu  which  lists   the
    requirements for there to be ties and refers  to  the  quality  of  the
    relationships the person has with friends and family members in his own
    country.  He submitted that the appellant has no-one in Kosovo  and  so
    there are no relationships to consider.  He  submitted  that  when  the
    respondent states that the appellant has cultural  affinity  to  Kosovo
    and states that the judge has not analysed this  properly,  he  is  not
    pointing out an error of law, he is purely disagreeing with the judge's
    opinion.

15. With regard to Ground 2 Counsel pointed me to  paragraph  49  of  Judge
    Handley's determination.   This  states  "In  the  alternative  I  have
    considered Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  It has  been  held
    that the Immigration Rules are a complete code but if I am wrong in  my
    approach under the Rules in the  alternative  I  find  that  there  are
    exceptional factors in this case warranting consideration  outside  the
    Rules. I remind myself that exceptionality is not a legal test and that
    exceptional means  circumstances  in  which  refusal  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences upon the individual such that  refusal
    of the application would not be proportionate.  That is  likely  to  be
    the case only very rarely."   Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to deal with the claim in this way.  What the judge  has  done
    is allow the claim under the Rules finding that paragraph  276ADE  (vi)
    has been satisfied but he has then gone on to consider the case outside
    the Rules, under Article 8 of ECHR.  Counsel submitted that the judge's
    approach is impeccable.  He submitted that where the judge has  allowed
    the claim under Article 8 he must have found good  grounds  and  I  was
    asked to carefully consider paragraph 49 of his determination.

16. I was then referred to paragraph 50 of the determination and Step 5  of
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  judge  has  made
    sustainable findings and has correctly  identified  the  correct  legal
    test relating to both grounds.  He submitted that the judge  has  given
    weight to the Secretary of State's immigration policy,  has  considered
    the facts of the case and has made a judgment he was entitled to  make.



17. Counsel then referred to the long delay  by  the  Home  Office  on  the
    appellant's legacy application made in 2007.  The decision was not made
    until 2013.

18. I was asked to support the decision in Judge Handley's determination.

19. I asked the Presenting Officer if he wanted to comment on the delay  by
    the Home Office on the legacy application.  He accepted that there  was
    a delay of around 6 years.  He accepted that the appellant's life  with
    his girlfriend continued during that delay and his private  and  family
    life in the United Kingdom became stronger.  Ties were  formed  and  he
    accepted that the judge  acknowledges  this.   He  submitted  that  the
    relationship is relevant but submitted that this is not sufficient  for
    the appellant's claim to  succeed,  when  the  appellant's  immigration
    history is considered along with the facts of the case.   He  submitted
    that this matter does not alter the appellant's appeal  and  the  claim
    cannot succeed under paragraph 276ADE (vi).

Determination

20. The meaning of "no  ties"  relates  not  only  to  family  members  the
    appellant has in Kosovo but also to social  and  cultural  connections.
    The appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for 14 years.  The  judge
    accepted his evidence that he no longer has any connection to  life  in
    Kosovo. A rounded assessment has to be  made  of  all  the  appellant's
    circumstances.  I have to consider the solidity of the ties as  opposed
    to their mere existence (the said case of Green).  At paragraph  48  of
    Judge Handley's determination he refers to the case of Ogundimu  and  I
    find that he applied the test  set  out  therein.   Because  the  judge
    believed that the appellant's family had all been killed by  the  Serbs
    and based on the facts of the case,  the  judge  found  that  paragraph
    276ADE (vi) had been satisfied.  He  gave  adequate  reasons  for  this
    finding. There is no error of law in the determination relating to  the
    appellant's ties  to  Kosovo  and  the  judge's  finding  is  that  the
    appellant  has  no  connection  with  Kosovo  now.   I  find  that  the
    respondent is merely disagreeing with the judge's decision.

21. With regard to whether the  judge  should  have  considered  Article  8
    outside the Rules, he did not need to consider this as  he  found  that
    the terms of the Rules had been satisfied, but in  the  alternative  he
    has assessed proportionality and argued the case  under  Article  8  of
    ECHR, finding in favour of the appellant.  This is explained by him  at
    paragraph 49.  Based on the case  of  MM  (Lebanon)  (2013)  EWHC  1900
    (Admin) the judge has to find that there are exceptional  circumstances
    for there to be a claim  outside  the  Rules.   I  accept  the  judge's
    reasoning as to why there are exceptional circumstances  based  on  the
    facts of the case and again find that  the  respondent's  objection  is
    based on a disagreement and not an error of law.

22. Based on what was before the judge I find that he was entitled to  come
    to the conclusion that he did and that he  was  correct  to  allow  the
    appellant's application under the Immigration Rules and on human rights
    grounds.

                                  DECISION

23. There is no material error of law in the judge's determination.

24. The determination allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and
    on human rights issues therefore stands.

25. No anonymity direction has been made.




Signed                                  Date



Designated Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



