
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50572/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                         Mr Isuru Sampath Weerakoon
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson, Counsel instructed by VMD Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Obhi who refused  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision to refuse  to  grant  a  Residence  Card  to  the
    Appellant under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 on the basis of his civil partnership with an EEA national.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted on two  grounds,  first  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge had failed to make findings  on  and/or  accord
    weight to material evidence,  namely  bank  accounts  showing  activity
    consistent with joint finances, and secondly that it was arguable  that
    the finding that the Appellant's partner was unemployed was a  material
    error.

 3. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives  following
    which I announced my decision that the decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.  My reasons are set out below.

 4. In relation to the first ground, in paragraph [34] the judge deals with
    the financial arrangements of the Appellant and his partner.  There  is
    an assessment of the oral evidence of the Appellant  and  his  partner.
    There is no reference in paragraph [34] to the evidence  of  the  joint
    Halifax Bank account of the Appellant and his partner (page 59  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).  Neither is there any reference to  the  transfers
    between  their  accounts.   I  was  referred  to  statements   of   the
    Appellant's partner's Lloyds Bank  account  (pages  60  to  72  of  the
    Appellant's bundle), and to the Appellant's bank statements (pages  129
    to 225).  In assessing their  financial  arrangements,  notwithstanding
    the finding that there was some vagueness in  the  oral  evidence,  the
    judge has not considered the documentary evidence before  her  at  all.
    Paragraph [34] addresses the question of rent, and  contributions  made
    by the Appellant and his  partner,  without  reference  to  their  bank
    accounts.  I find that her failure both  to  consider  the  documentary
    evidence before her, and her failure to give reasons for why  she  does
    not accord this evidence any weight, is an error of law.

 5. In relation to the second ground, having found that there  are  aspects
    of the relationship which suggest that it is  genuine,  and  which  she
    sets out in paragraph [38], it is clear  that  the  main  aspect  which
    concerns her, and about which she is not satisfied, is  the  fact  that
    the Appellant and his partner do not live  together  [39].   She  finds
    that there is "no real reason"  why  they  live  separately  [39].   In
    giving her reasons for this, her first reason is "One has  a  job,  the
    other does not".  However this is not correct.  Both the Appellant  and
    his partner have jobs, and there was evidence of this before her.   The
    Respondent did not refuse the Appellant's application  on  the  grounds
    that his partner was not exercising Treaty Rights.

 6. Secondly, the judge goes on to find  that  the  reason  given  for  the
    partner living separately from  the  Appellant  "is  not  one  that  is
    sustainable.  There is no evidence to support his claim that he has  to
    live near his father."  In  paragraph  [35],  when  considering  living
    arrangements, the  judge  states  "Although  his  father  requires  his
    assistance, his father is not living alone and has  a  girlfriend,  who
    would presumably be available to take him to hospital appointments, but
    if not could arrange  for  the  appellant's  partner  to  attend."   In
    paragraph  [28]  the  judge  sets  out  briefly  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's partner, but there is no reference to him being asked about
    his father's circumstances.  Nor  is  there  any  indication  that  the
    Appellant's partner was asked about his father's girlfriend and whether
    or not  she  was  in  a  position  to  assist  him  with  his  hospital
    appointments.

 7. The main reason the judge gives for her finding that their relationship
    is not genuine is the fact  that  they  did  not  live  together.   Her
    finding "One has a  job,  the  other  does  not"  was  incorrect.   Her
    findings relating to the  Appellant's  partner,  his  father,  and  his
    father's girlfriend are not reasoned, and do not appear to be based  on
    the evidence which was before her.

Notice of Decision

The decision involved the making of an error on a point of law  and  is  set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 12 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
