

                                                                [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/50024/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated      |
|On 25 February 2016                        |On 16 May 2016                 |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                RAJA WAJAHAT
                         (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Skinner, Counsel instructed by ATM Law Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Pakistan born 20th March 1993.  On  the
    27th August 2015 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Oakley)  allowed  his
    appeal against a decision to refuse to vary his leave to remain and  to
    remove him from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of  the  Immigration
    Asylum and Nationality Act 2006[1]. The  Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision[2].


 2. The matter in issue in the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    whether the Secretary of State had acted fairly, or in accordance  with
    published policy in respect of Tier 4 (General)  Student  Migrants  who
    failed to qualify under  the  Rules  for  further  leave  because,  for
    instance, their Tier 4 Sponsor colleges had had their licences revoked.
     The Respondent asserted that the particular circumstances of his  case
    were such that his position was analogous to that of  the  students  in
    Patel (revocation of sponsor licence  -  fairness)  India  [2011]  UKUT
    00211 (IAC) and that he should therefore be given '60  days  grace'  in
    order to obtain a valid CAS.

 3. Before the First-tier Tribunal the Respondent  set  out  the  following
    chronology. He was a Tier 4 Migrant at the Kent College of Business and
    Computing when in September 2014 he was informed that the Secretary  of
    State had withdrawn the licence of this college. He was given  60  days
    to obtain a new CAS from a  new  college.    The  Respondent,  and  the
    Secretary of State, were informed  by  Kent  College  of  Business  and
    Computing that the students affected  by  the  revocation  were  to  be
    transferred en masse to a new Tier 4 Sponsor, known as Vernon Community
    College. The Respondent was happy with this arrangement.  He  paid  his
    fees to Vernon Community College and duly waited  for  his  CAS  to  be
    issued. Shortly before he leave was due to expire he was informed  that
    the licence of Vernon Community College  had  also  been  revoked.  The
    Respondent contacted the Home Office and requested a further 60 days in
    order to get a new CAS from a third college.


 4. Of these circumstances the determination says the following:

         "..it was clear from the Grounds of Appeal that the Appellant  had,
         on the 15th November 2014, made an application within  the  60  day
         period that had been allowed to him  (the  varied  application)  by
         completing an application form sent to  the  Respondent  within  60
         days and paying another application fee and covering  letter  which
         stated to  the  Respondent  that  Kent  College  for  Business  and
         Computing had arranged for existing students to be  transferred  to
         another college namely the Vernon Community.


         The Appellant had paid a further fee to Vernon Community  but  that
         college also had its licence revoked by the Respondent.


         Notwithstanding that position, the Respondent  had  not  given  the
         Appellant any further 60 day period to find a  Sponsor  who  had  a
         valid licence.


         I indicated to the Respondent's representative that it would appear
         clear  that  the  Appellant  was  entitled  to  a  further  60  day
         period..."


    It was on this basis that the appeal was allowed.

 5. The Secretary of State  now  complains  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    misunderstood the position. This was  not  a  'Patel  case'  where  the
    applicant had been unfairly prejudiced by a college having its  licence
    withdrawn after the application and CAS had been  submitted.  Here  the
    application  had  not  been  supported  by  a  CAS  at  all.  In  those
    circumstances the Respondent was not entitled to a further 60 day grace
    period under the Secretary of State's published policy.


    My Findings


 6. Having heard the submissions of both parties, and having had regard  to
    the material before the First-tier Tribunal I  am  satisfied  that  the
    determination contains no material error  of  law.   The  Secretary  of
    State is correct to say that this was not on all fours with  Patel.  It
    is however apparent from the papers before me that the  Respondent  did
    not assert that to  be  the  case.  He  did  not  rely  on  the  policy
    specifically pertaining to persons whose Tier 4  Sponsors  are  removed
    from the register after issuance of a valid CAS. His situation was more
    nuanced, but analogous.  His  predicament  arose  from  the  successive
    revocation of not one but two college licenses. It was  his  case  that
    notwithstanding the absence of a CAS from Vernon Community  College  he
    had been treated unfairly since he had not been given an opportunity to
    remedy an  application  rendered  ineffective  by  matters  beyond  his
    control.


 7. I am satisfied that this was the  case  understood  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and that the appeal was allowed on that basis. The  Secretary
    of State did not seek to persuade me that  this  was  an  impermissible
    extension of the Patel principle, nor that this  approach  contradicted
    the dicta of McCloskey J in that case: see also Thakur (PBS decision  -
    common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC). The First-tier
    Tribunal understood the Respondent to have been prejudiced  by  matters
    beyond his control and allowed the appeal to the  limited  extent  that
    the decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law,  for  which  read
    principles of common law fairness. I find no arguable error of  law  in
    that decision.


    Decisions

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
    is upheld.

 9. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and on the facts  I  see
    no reason to do so.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                 29th
                                February 2016
                           -----------------------
[1] Decision dated the 27th August 2015
[2] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on the 19th
January 2016

