
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50377/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th June 2014                               |On 1st July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  ziqi bai
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Lemer of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal J Pacey, promulgated on 20th March 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a Chinese citizen born  5th  March  1992  who  on  30th
    September 2013 applied for  further  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant  under  the  Points-Based
    System.

 4. The application was refused on 8th November 2013 because  the  Claimant
    was not awarded the 30 points claimed for Attributes under  Appendix  A
    in relation to his Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS).   This
    was because the Claimant had failed to provide with his application his
    Studentship Certificate and his  Transcript  of  Academic  Record  from
    Guangdong University of Foreign Studies.  The application was therefore
    refused under paragraph 245ZX(c) with reference to  paragraph  120SD(a)
    of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The Claimant appealed and requested that his appeal  be  determined  on
    the papers.  Judge Pacey (the Judge) recorded in  paragraph  8  of  her
    determination "that the  relevant  documents  were  provided  with  the
    application to the university."  Therefore the  judge  found  that  the
    Claimant had discharged the burden of  proof  and  allowed  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules.

 6. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal contending that
    the judge was wrong to allow the appeal on the basis that the documents
    had been provided with the  application  to  the  university.   It  was
    contended that the documents had to be supplied  to  the  Secretary  of
    State with the application.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davies in the following terms;

         "1.  The Respondent seeks permission to appeal against the decision
             of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Pacey)   who,   in   a
             determination promulgated  on  20th  March  2014  allowed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse him leave to
             remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  under  the  Points-Based
             System.

         2.   The judge has not addressed in any way the  issue  central  to
             the appeal.

         3.   On finding that the relevant  documents  as  required  by  the
             Immigration Rules had not been served on  the  Respondent,  as
             required,  she  was  clearly  in  error  in  concluding   that
             submission  of  the  documents  to  the  university  met   the
             provisions of the Immigration Rules.

         4.   The grounds and the  determination  do  disclose  an  arguable
             error of law."

 8. Following the grant of permission the Tribunal issued  directions  that
    there should be a hearing before the Upper Tribunal to  decide  whether
    the First-tier Tribunal determination should be set aside.





The Secretary of State's Submissions

 9. Miss Everett indicated that she had had the opportunity to consider  Mr
    Lemer's skeleton argument,  and  accepted  that  it  was  open  to  the
    Tribunal to consider that the judge had made a typographical  error  in
    paragraph 8 of her determination for the reasons given in the  skeleton
    argument.

10. Miss Everett indicated that it was open to me to make such a finding in
    which case the error made by the judge would not be  material  and  the
    decision would stand.

11. If I decided that there was a material error and he  decision  was  set
    aside and re-made, Miss Everett accepted that  there  was  evidence  to
    prove that the required documents  had  been  sent  on  the  Claimant's
    behalf with the application to the Respondent and therefore his  appeal
    should be allowed.

The Claimant's Submissions

12. Mr Lemer relied upon his skeleton argument.  The first  submission  was
    that if the determination was read in a whole, it was  clear  that  the
    judge had considered what evidence was sent with the application to the
    Home Office.  Mr Lemer therefore suggested paragraph 8 should  be  read
    in context, and that it contained a typographical error, and it  should
    read with the application from the university,  or  alternatively  with
    the application to the Home Office.

13. However in  the  alternative,  if  I  considered  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred by considering what documents had  been  sent  to  the
    university rather than to the Home Office, and if the decision was  set
    aside, Mr Lemer submitted that the Claimant's appeal should be  allowed
    as there was substantial evidence that the required  documents  had  in
    fact  been  sent  to  the  Home  Office.   The  evidence  included  the
    Claimant's application form confirming the documents were enclosed, and
    his witness statement, together with a letter from the UKBA  Compliance
    Officer of Northampton University.

My Conclusions and Reasons

14. The judge erred in paragraph 8 of her  determination.   The  documents,
    need to have been sent to the Home Office with the application.  It was
    therefore incorrect to record that the relevant documents were provided
    with the application to the university.

15. However I do not find the error to  be  material.   I  agree  with  the
    submissions made by Mr Lemer, and have taken  into  account  that  Miss
    Everett accepted  that  paragraph  8  of  the  determination  could  be
    interpreted as being a typographical error.

16. Having read the determination as a whole, and in particular taking into
    account paragraph 7, in which  the  judge  records  that  the  Claimant
    stated that he supplied the documents, and that there is an  email  and
    letter of support from the University of Northampton,  confirming  that
    those documents were submitted to the Home Office, I do  not  find  the
    error to be material.

17. The judge was, in my view, satisfied that the documents  were  sent  to
    the Home Office by the University  of  Northampton,  who  prepared  the
    application on behalf of the Claimant.  The judge took into account the
    evidence that indicated this to be the case.  I am therefore  satisfied
    that paragraph 8 of the determination contains a  typographical  error,
    and that the judge meant to record  the  relevant  documentations  were
    provided with the application by or from the university, as it was  the
    university that submitted the application.

18. Therefore the  error  made  by  the  judge  is  not  material  and  the
    determination stands.

Decision

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law such that it must be  set  aside.   The
appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.  The decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal stands.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no  request  for  anonymity  and  the  Upper  Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
direction.




Signed                              Date 20th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal stands.





Signed                              Date 20th June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

