





Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
IA/50771/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |                    Decisions and Reasons|
|On: 23 December 2014              |Promulgated                              |
|                                  |On: 7 January 2015                       |
|                                  |                                         |
|                                  |                                         |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Mr John Mwangi Kibaara
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. For the sake of convenience I shall refer to  the  appellant  as  "the
      secretary of state" and the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a citizen of  Kenya,  born  on  10  October  1972.  He
      appealed against the decision of  the  secretary  of  state  dated  13
      November 2013 refusing his application for leave to remain in  the  UK
      as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant. His application was refused  on
      the basis that he had failed to provide access to the Pearson  website
      so that the UKBA could view his English test scores. Accordingly,  the
      secretary of  state  was  not  satisfied  that  he  had  provided  the
      specified documents required pursuant to Appendix A and Appendix O  of
      the Immigration Rules.


   3. His appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Wellesley-Cole on 10 July 2014.  In her determination  dated  22
      July 2014 she noted that the rules  are  mandatory.  She  allowed  the
      appeal "in relation to the CAS, that he has 30 points  for  that,  and
      also 10 points for maintenance." However, with regard to the remaining
      issue relating to the score report card she found that the  rules  are
      mandatory.  She explained to the claimant "that it might be  difficult
      to allow the appeal on all the grounds." She went on to allow  it  "to
      the limited extent" in relation to the CAS. She did not however  allow
      it "in relation to the score report card [8]."


   4. On 14 November 2014, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Simpson  granted  the
      Secretary of State  permission  to  appeal.  It  was  clear  that  the
      claimant had not, and indeed could  not  provide  the  UKBA  with  the
      Pearson website access to verify his English test scores, as  required
      under the  rules.  In  those  circumstances,  the  appeal  had  to  be
      dismissed. The grounds thus identified an arguable material  error  of
      law.


   5. At the hearing on  the  23  December  2014  Ms  Kenny  submitted  that
      although the claimant provided an English  test  certificate  from  an
      approved English language test  provider,  he  had  not  provided  the
      Pearson website access to the  UKBA,  which  he  was  required  to  do
      online. The Judge erroneously found that the appeal was to be  allowed
      to a limited extent, but dismissed it in relation to the score  report
      card. Either the requirements of the rules are met in their  totality,
      or the appeal should have been dismissed. There was no basis to  allow
      the appeal "to a limited extent."


   6. Mr Kibaara attended the hearing. I  confirmed  that  he  was  able  to
      understand the reasons for the refusal. He referred to his application
      form. Mr Kibaara accepted that he had not sent the Pearson  scores  to
      the Home Office online.


   7. At page 11 of the form it is stated  that  he  must  provide  all  the
      documents  'listed  below'.  Those  included  evidence  of   identity,
      passport or travel documents, as well as  biometric  residence  permit
      documents.  Those  are  mandatory.  He  submitted  that  there  is  no
      reference that the remaining documents required, including evidence of
      online scores of the English language test awarded by Pearson, had  to
      be submitted.


   8. However, the mandatory documents relating to evidence of identity  had
      to be required in order to render the  application  itself  valid.  If
      they are not provided, the application will be  rejected  as  invalid.
      It does not follow that the remaining documents did  not  have  to  be
      produced.


   9. I have had regard to Appendix O to the Immigration Rules, in force  at
      the date of the application  and  the  decision.  At  page  8,  it  is
      stipulated that a printout of the online score report is required. The
      scores relating to the Pearson test of academic English must  also  be
      sent to the Home Office online. It is stated  that  Pearson  does  not
      issue paper certificates.


  10. Appendix O sets out a list of English language tests  that  have  been
      approved by the Home Office  for  English  language  requirements  for
      limited leave to remain under the Immigration Rules.  It  is  provided
      that the specified evidence submitted by the applicant must show  that
      he achieved the required scores in all the relevant components  during
      a single sitting of that examination unless exempted.


  11. It is not contended that  the  claimant  is  exempted.  The  documents
      required with the application are set out, including the Pearson  test
      of academic English. There is provision for a printout of  the  online
      score report to be sent. Furthermore, scores may also be sent  to  the
      Home Office online. Pearson does  not  issue  paper  certificates  and
      accordingly must be sent online.


  12. The claimant  was  expressly  informed  in  the  application  form  he
      submitted that he had to provide all the documents 'listed below'.  He
      had not provided the Pearson website access to the UKBA to verify  his
      English test scores.


  13. As the First-tier Tribunal Judge found, the appellant had not met  the
      relevant requirements under the rules. She stated however that she was
      allowing the appeal to the limited extent in relation to the CAS  that
      he had 30 points for that. However,  that  was  simply  a  finding  in
      respect of the CAS.  The appellant however failed to meet  a  relevant
      requirement under the Immigration Rules.  In  the  circumstances,  the
      Judge should have dismissed his appeal under the Immigration Rules.


  14. I accordingly find that there has been a  material  error  of  law.  I
      accordingly set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  re-
      make it, dismissing the claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.




         Notice of Decision


         The claimant's appeal is dismissed under the immigration rules


         No anonymity direction is made.





         Signed                     Date:  6/1/2015


         Deputy upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

