
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50046/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 July 2014                                  |On 1 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              Zulfiqar Ali Shah
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shah, Maz Shah Legal, Bradford


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Zulfiqar Ali Shah, was born on 7 January 1956 and is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondent as  the
    appellant and to the appellant (the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department) as the respondent (as they  were  respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal).  The appellant had  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the respondent dated 30 November 2013 to
    remove him from the United Kingdom.  The appeal was brought on  Article
    8 ECHR grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  N  P  Dickson)  in  a
    determination promulgated on 25 April 2014, allowed  the  appeal.   The
    respondent now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2.  At  the  outset  of  the  hearing,  Mr  Diwnycz,  for  the  respondent
    acknowledged that the grant of permission appeared to have  been  based
    upon a misapprehension by Judge Page who had written [3]:

         There is an arguable error of law in the  determination  where  the
         judge found that the appellant's application should not  have  been
         dealt with under  Appendix  FM.   The  refusal  decision  dated  30
         November 2013  refused  an  application  made  by  the  appellant's
         solicitors on 5 November 2012.  Appendix FM did apply as this  came
         before us on 9 July 2012.

 3. In his determination, at [40], Judge Dickson had written:

         It is clear on any reading  of  this  correspondence  [between  the
         appellant and the Secretary of State] that there is an  outstanding
         application or even applications since  2004.   The  matter  should
         have been dealt with under the Rules in force  at  that  time.   It
         should not have been dealt with under Appendix FM  that  came  into
         effect on applications on or after 9 July 2012.

 4. Notwithstanding the judge's finding at [40] he went on [41] to consider
    the matter on the basis that Appendix FM "is relevant."  Thereafter, he
    went on to apply the principles of Gulshan (Article 8-new rules-correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).   He found that there were  compelling
    circumstances which required him to  consider  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules.

 5. It is clear that Judge Dickson has carried out a thorough analysis  but
    that his primary finding is that  Appendix  FM  did  not  apply  to  an
    application which appears to have been made as long ago as 2004.  I  do
    not find that he has erred in law in that respect.  Even if that is not
    correct, the judge has prudently considered the appeal  under  the  new
    Appendix FM in force since July 2012 and has  given  good  reasons  for
    finding that, whilst the appellant may not  qualify  under  the  Rules,
    there were compelling reasons to consider Article 8 outside the  Rules.
    I find, therefore, that the judge's approach  to  the  appeal  was  not
    flawed by legal error for the reasons asserted in the grounds of appeal
    or at all.

 6. Paragraphs [2-3] of the  grounds  refer  respectively  to  the  judge's
    treatment of the appellant's partner's medical conditions (noting there
    was sufficient medical treatment in Pakistan) and  to  the  possibility
    that  the  appellant's  partner  could  return  to  Pakistan  with  the
    appellant whilst the appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance.   Judge
    Dickson has dealt in detail with the partner's medical  conditions  but
    also [42] with  the  possibility  of  the  partner  and  the  appellant
    returning to Pakistan together.  I  find  his  conclusion  that  it  is
    "unrealistic for the respondent to suggest that a British who has never
    lived outside England and with  her  medical  conditions  should...  be
    uprooted to Pakistan" was available to him on the evidence.

 7. Significantly, the judge gave weight in the  Article  8  assessment  to
    what he describes as "the unconscionable delay" by the Home  Office  in
    dealing with an application  made  in  2004.   It  is  clear  from  the
    determination [44] that the delay in this instance weighed  heavily  in
    favour of the appellant in the proportionality assessment.   Given  the
    length of the delay, I  find  the  judge's  analysis  to  be  fair  and
    reasonable.

 8. The judge has reached a  conclusion  which  was  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence in this particular case.  It was open to the judge  to  attach
    weight to the various factors (including delay) which weighed in favour
    of the appellant.  I can find no reason in law to  interfere  with  his
    conclusion.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



