
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50974/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2016                             |On 16 March 2016              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                            MR AROMEO ROHAN WELCH
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Simpson, Direct Access, Amethyst Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Moore promulgated on  1  September  2015.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on 26 January 2016.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason  for  one
    now

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom with leave to  enter  as  a
    visitor in January 2002.  He extended his leave further, with his  last
    period of leave expiring on 31 January 2006. At the time of  the  leave
    expiring, the appellant was in custody, having been arrested for supply
    of Class 'A' drugs in December 2005. He was transferred to  immigration
    detention and given temporary admission in May 2006.   The  prosecution
    was not proceeded with. Thereafter the appellant became an  overstayer.
    The appellant sought leave to remain on human rights grounds, based  on
    his ties to his three children, a stepchild and his partner.

 4. The Secretary of State refused the application  on  27  November  2014,
    concluding, essentially, that the appellant's partner did  not  qualify
    because she had only limited leave to remain until 20  March  2016  and
    that  her  leave  was  granted  on  the  basis  that   she   had   sole
    responsibility  for  her  child.  With  regard  to  the  children,  the
    appellant did not have sole responsibility for any  of  his  biological
    children and had failed to provide evidence to  show  that  he  had  an
    active role in the upbringing of any of the children referred to in his
    application.

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6. The appellant and his  partner  gave  evidence.   The  mothers  of  the
    appellant's children from previous relationships did not attend, albeit
    one provided a witness statement. The FTTJ noted that  the  appellant's
    eldest two children were British citizens who lived with their  mothers
    and it would not be reasonable to expect  either  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom. However, he dismissed the appeal on the basis that  the
    appellant did not have genuine and subsisting  relationships  with  the
    children and that he could remain in contact with them from Jamaica.

The grounds of appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal did not clearly identify errors of  law  in  that
    they consisted of 17  paragraphs  without  headings  and  with  minimal
    reference to the decision in question.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the  FTTJ  erred  in  finding  there  was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the appellant and the children and that  he  erred
    in his approach to the best interests of those children. There was also
    said to be an absence of reasoning in  many  respects  and  a  lack  of
    proper consideration of the best interests of the  children  where  the
    appellant's presence was concerned.



 9. The Secretary of State's response of 2 February 2016 indicated that the
    appeal was opposed. It was argued that the appellant made  no  material
    contribution to the children's lives and that their best  interest  had
    been considered at [35] of the decision.

The error of law hearing

10. Ms Simpson advised me that the  appellant's  current  partner  had  not
    attended the hearing owing to a  medical  appointment  involving  their
    child. The appellant's previous  partner,  Ms  Raymond,  had  attended.
    Otherwise, she repeated points made in her  grounds,  emphasising  that
    the FTTJ had not considered the effect of the  appellant's  removal  on
    his children or in relation to their best interests. In addition, there
    was a consent order in relation to  the  appellant's  child  'K'  which
    arranged regular periods of contact and this had not  been  taken  into
    consideration. Nor had there been any consideration of the  appellant's
    stepchild 'D' accompanying him to Jamaica. The FTTJ had made  an  error
    of fact as to the  appellant's  immigration  status  at  the  time  his
    children were born. Ms  Simpson  accepted  that  the  FTTJ's  error  in
    relation to the appellant's nationality was  a  small  point.  Finally,
    EX.1 of Appendix FM and section 117B(6) were not properly considered.

11. Mr Parkinson relied on the Rule 24 reply. He argued that the  FTTJ  had
    made a very careful, detailed,  analysis  of  the  appellant's  complex
    relationships. He asked me to note that  two  of  the  parents  of  the
    appellant's children did not attend the hearing and that there was very
    limited evidence before the judge. He argued that the FTTJ  noted  that
    the removal of the appellant would limit face-to-face contact and  that
    there was no reason why the child could not visit the child in  Jamaica
    if the mother agrees.  At [29] the FTTJ expressed clear concerns as  to
    the nature of  relationship  between  the  appellant  and  his  current
    partner as well as his relationship with  her  child  from  a  previous
    relationship. The FTTJ had, however, accepted the couple lived together
    on and off for 4 years. The FTTJ had considered section 55 and that the
    appellant took his youngest child to and  from  nursery.  Mr  Parkinson
    accepted that the FTTJ did not fully deal with EX.1, but that this  was
    immaterial.

Decision on error of law

  12. I announced that the FTTJ made material errors of law and set aside
      his decision in its entirety. My reasons are as follows.

  13. At [32] of the decision, the FTTJ mentions, in brief, the exceptions
      contained within Appendix FM but only addresses EX.1 (b). Thereafter,
      the FTTJ goes onto assess whether there were any significant obstacles
      to the appellant's integration in Jamaica.

  14. While the FTTJ has, in the last sentence of the decision at [38]
      stated that he is not satisfied that the appellant has genuine and
      subsisting relationship (in relation to his consideration of section
      117B(6) of the 2002 Act) he fails to provide any reasons for this
      conclusion.

  15. I have taken into consideration that the FTTJ's comments on the
      appellant's domestic arrangements in relation to his current partner,
      her child and his three biological children, but I do not accept that
      it can be inferred that it was these matters which lead him to
      conclude that the appellant's relationships with his children were not
      genuine and subsisting.

  16. On one matter, the FTTJ was mistaken. At [37] he stated that the
      appellant entered on a visitor and overstayed and "continued to father
      children." However, the appellant had leave to remain in the United
      Kingdom at the time that his two eldest children were born. I am of
      the view that the FTTJ's misunderstanding of the appellant's
      immigration status contributed to his overall findings.

  17. The FTTJ found that it was in the best interests for the various
      children to remain with their mothers in the United Kingdom. However,
      he made no reference to whether it was in their best interests for the
      appellant to remain in the United Kingdom. In view of the consent
      order and evidence of actual contact between the appellant and K, if
      the FTTJ found that it was not in K's best interests that the
      appellant continue to enjoy family life in the United Kingdom, he
      needed to have provided reasons.

  18. There was no findings with regard to the appellant's stepchild, D, who
      has lived in the United Kingdom continuously since his birth
      approximately 12 years ago and in respect of whom there were no
      findings as to whether it was reasonable to expect him to leave the
      United Kingdom.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, in its entirety.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Trribunal, de novo, to be heard  at
Taylor House with a time estimate of 2 hours (not before FTTJ Moore).




Signed                                       Date: 12 March 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

