
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50589/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 October 2014                            |On 14 November 2014          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between
                           MORIAM YETUNDE ADELOWO
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:         Mr Davison, Counsel, instructed by Perera & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Claim History


1. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Nigeria, applied for leave to  remain
   in the UK on the basis of her private and family life. She is married to
   a British citizen, Mr Aura Musa Alidu, the Sponsor, and  they  have  two
   children: Idera who was born on 2 March 2013 and Muyideen, who was  born
   on 7 July 2014, both of whom are British citizens. Her  application  was
   refused and her appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-tier
   Tribunal Judge J C Hamilton, who heard the appeal on 25 March  2014  and
   his determination was promulgated on 13 August 2014.


2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal against the decision of  Judge
   Hamilton. The Appellant was unrepresented and no particular error of law
   was asserted in her grounds of application.  On granting  permission  to
   appeal, Judge N J Osborne states:

        "...having read the  application  in  detail  and  having  read  the
        determination in equal detail, it is  at  least  arguable  that  the
        Judge erred in law in failing to  consider  the  Appellant's  appeal
        under Article 8 ECHR outside the Immigration Rules. The evidence  of
        the Appellant is that her husband works whilst she looks  after  the
        two children of the relationship. The Judge  considers  that  if  he
        considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 he would be guilty
        of the sort of  "freewheeling"  approach  deprecated  by  the  Upper
        Tribunal in Gulshan. I disagree. At [25] the Judge  identified  that
        "exceptional"  does  not  mean   unusual   or   unique   but   means
        circumstances in which refusal of the application  would  result  in
        unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant and their  family
        such  that  refusal  would  be  considered  in  relation   to   each
        constituent member of the family as a whole. These  two  baby  girls
        are presently cared for by their mother. It is arguably an error  of
        law for the Judge to have found that so far as  those  two  children
        are concerned it is not disproportionate to remove their mother from
        this country. It is  further  arguable  that  the  Judge  failed  to
        consider adequately the best interests of the children."


3. Permission was granted on all grounds.


The Hearing


4. At the hearing, Mr Davison, relying on the skeleton argument,  submitted
   that:


        a. The Judge appeared to  accept  that  the  only  reason  why  the
           Appellant could not succeed under the partner route was  because
           they had not been living together  in  a  relationship  akin  to
           marriage  for  two  years.  However,  it  is  recorded  in   the
           determination at [14] that they had been living  together  since
           June 2011. This evidence was not addressed anywhere  within  the
           determination and the Judge therefore  gave  inadequate  reasons
           for finding that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed  under  the
           partner route. When  asked  if  he  was  saying  that  the  only
           provision under the partner route which the Appellant fell  foul
           of was the living together provision, he said that that was  the
           only provision that was highlighted by the Respondent,  although
           often if a person did  not  meet  one  of  the  provisions,  the
           Respondent did not go on to consider any other provision.


        b. The determination was difficult to follow. The Judge set out the
           findings at [27] and seemed to  say  that  the  Appellant  could
           return to Nigeria with the children at [35] but then  he  refers
           to the jurisprudence and concludes at [43] that there is  likely
           to be a prolonged separation if the  Appellant  is  required  to
           leave  because  her  Sponsor  will  not  be  able  to  meet  the
           maintenance requirements.  This is contrasted with the  position
           in MK (Best interests of child)  India  UKUT  00475  and  Azimi-
           Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
           [2013]  which  is  set  out  at  [24  -  25],  in  which  it  is
           established, as provided in MK, that during the early period  of
           a child's life he is focussed on his parents and, as provided in
           Azimi-Moayed, that the starting point is that it is in the  best
           interests of children to be with both parents. This  contradicts
           the position at [43]  where  the  Judge  states  that  there  is
           nothing  unreasonable  about  the  Appellant  and  the  children
           returning to Nigeria and the  Judge's  acceptance  that  if  the
           Appellant had not failed to meet the  eligibility  requirements,
           she would have been entitled to succeed under  EX  (ii)  on  the
           basis of her relationship with her children. Mr  Davison  stated
           that he accepted that the Appellant could  make  an  application
           for her children to be citizens of Nigeria as well, he believed,
           without losing their British citizenship, but it was not certain
           that they would be granted citizenship. He submitted  that  when
           considering the best interests of the children, the loss of  the
           benefits attributed to citizenship had  to  be  weighed  in  the
           balance.


        c. Whilst the Judge did refer to Chikwamba v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40
           and Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11, he made a  finding  that  there
           was family life between the  Appellant,  her  children  and  the
           Sponsor.  Mr  Davison  argued  that  there  is  a   tension   or
           irrationality in the Immigration Rules because the only  way  in
           which the Appellant could remain within the UK were if  she  had
           sole responsibility and did not live  with  the  father  of  the
           children or she is separated from the children's  other  father,
           who  must  have  sole  responsibility  (SA  at  para  11).   The
           Immigration Rules  discriminated  against  married  couples  and
           those who are in a relationship. The  Judge  expressly  accepted
           that the Appellant would have been able to meet  the  provisions
           of EX.1(ii) if she had not been excluded from relying on  it  by
           her failure to meet the eligibility requirements [34].

5. Mr Tarlow submitted that the letter from the Appellant's representatives
   dated  11  April  2013  confirmed  that  the  relationship  between  the
   Appellant and the Sponsor did not become serious until May 2012 and they
   did not start living together until June 2012 and this  must  have  been
   written  after  taking  instructions  from  the  Appellant.  There   was
   therefore evidence before the Judge that the couple did not start living
   together until June 2012.


6.  He  submitted  that  basically  the  Appellant's  case  was  that   the
   determination was 'all over the place', and moving  in  two  directions.
   However, the determination is  balanced.  The  Judge  set  out  the  law
   extensively, considered both sides  of  the  case  and  then  reached  a
   decision he was entitled to reach and a material error of  law  had  not
   been established. As to the submission that there  was  'discrimination'
   or unfairness between the treatment of couples and single  parents,  the
   Immigration Rules were government policy and should be read as such.


7. In response, Mr Davison submitted that he accepted that it was stated in
   the letter sent by the Appellant's representatives  that  the  Appellant
   and her Sponsor had lived together since June 2012  but  submitted  that
   there was evidence before him that they had lived  together  since  June
   2011. There may have been a period of cohabiting at each  other's  homes
   and this aspect of the case should have been considered.  He  reiterated
   that the Rules were 'unfair' because if the couple  were  to  split  up,
   they would meet the Rules. The fact that  they  are  in  a  relationship
   disqualified them.


8. On conclusion of submissions, I reserved my decision which I give  below
   together with my reasons.

Analysis and reasons

9. Before the First-tier Tribunal, it was submitted that the provisions  of
   the Immigration Rules in relation to the parent  route  were  irrational
   because single parents could benefit from the provisions  of  the  Rules
   but a married couple could not, and because  the  Appellant  would  have
   benefitted  from  the  provisions  of  EX.1  but  for  the   eligibility
   requirements, the Immigration Rules were unlawful or  irrational.  I  do
   not have  jurisdiction  to  declare  particular  provisions  within  the
   Immigration Rule unlawful or irrational. Moreover, the Immigration Rules
   are the Secretary of State's attempt to incorporate into the  Rules  the
   principles which are applied in Article 8 claims. In most circumstances,
   the Immigration Rules are a complete code for Article 8 purposes (see  R
   (on the application of Nagre) v SSHD [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  and  MF
   (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192). However,  where  there  are  particular
   circumstances  which  cannot  be   adequately   considered   under   the
   Immigration Rules, a  Judge  can  apply  the  provisions  of  Article  8
   directly. There is scope within the Rules to apply EX.1 of  Appendix  FM
   in certain circumstances. It appears that  the  Judge  correctly  stated
   that the provisions of paragraph  E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4  (which  includes  the
   need to establish sole responsibility) must be complied with before  the
   provisions of EX.1 were available to the Appellant (see Sabir  (Appendix
   FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014] UKUT 00063 (IAC). Having the  Judge,
   having  correctly  identified  the   provisions,   and   realising   the
   possibility that the particular circumstances of  the  Appellant's  case
   may not be sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules, he  went
   on to consider proportionality. This ground therefore cannot succeed.

10. The findings of the Judge were that the Appellant was not  honest  about
   her circumstances in Nigeria; she had not been trafficked into  the  UK,
   and had failed to establish that she was at risk  on  return.  He  found
   that she has a daughter there, that it is likely that she is touch  with
   her mother there and that in view of her failure to be honest about  her
   situation in Nigeria, he was not prepared to accept that she was not  in
   contact with her daughter in Nigeria [28]. The Sponsor has  a  child  in
   Nigeria also and although he claimed not to be in touch  with  her,  the
   Judge found that he had visited Nigeria a number of times since 2011 and
   that it was likely that he was in touch with her [29]. Again,  he  found
   that the Sponsor was not honest about his circumstances and contacts  in
   Nigeria. This  was  the  backdrop  to  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
   Appellant's claim.

11. With regard to the Judge's treatment of the  evidence  relating  to  how
   long the couple and her Sponsor had been living together,  it  is  clear
   that the date that the Respondent used was that which was stated in  the
   letter from the Appellant's representatives. The Judge  noted  that  the
   Appellant claimed to have met the Sponsor in Mid 2011  [12  (i)];  there
   was inconsistency in the evidence of the Appellant as to when they  were
   in a committed relationship [30]; and there was no evidence as to  where
   she was living [14]. Given the credibility  findings  made  against  the
   Appellant, it was open to the Judge to rely on the information  provided
   by her representatives regarding the date on which she and  the  Sponsor
   started living together. I find that this ground lacks merit.

12.  As to the assessment under the Rules, Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -
   correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) provided that  a  freestanding
   assessment outside the rules under Article 8 directly applied would only
   be necessary if it was not possible to assess all the circumstance of an
   Appellant's claim within the Rules, that is, that  there  were  arguably
   good grounds for an assessment outside the Rules. A decision  to  refuse
   an application would only be disproportionate  if  the  outcome  of  the
   decision was unjustifiably harsh. The  Judge  was  well  aware  of  this
   guidance [36]. He was also aware that if it was possible to consider all
   circumstances within the ambit of the Rules, then it was not possible to
   circumvent the Rules by the assessment of  proportionality  by  applying
   Article 8 directly [39 - 42, 45]. Further, the Judge was  aware  of  the
   need to take into account the best interests of the children [23  -  25,
   47].


13. He then went through the provisions of the Rules and his findings  under
   the Rules do not reveal any arguable material errors of law. Rather than
   'getting lost in the Article 8 case law' I find that the Judge has  been
   through the jurisprudence carefully and examined the  Immigration  Rules
   to establish  whether  the  Appellant's  circumstances  were  adequately
   considered under the Rules, with a view to establishing whether he would
   need to undertake a free standing Article 8 assessment [19 -  25,  37  -
   38]. He cannot be faulted for saying that the principle  of  Sanade  and
   others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012]  UKUT  00048  (IAC)
   appears to  be  incorporated  into  the  Rules  in  EX.1  [45].  British
   nationality is not a trump card as stated in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4
   and applied in AA v Upper  Tribunal  (Asylum  and  Immigration  Chamber)
   [2013] CSIH 88. He has made findings of fact which were open to  him  on
   the evidence before him, considered the case law and applied the law  to
   the facts.

14. The further stumbling block to the success of this application  is  that
   whilst the Judge has navigated his way through  the  provisions  of  the
   Rules, he has also considered the  case  in  the  alternative  at  [47].
   Having reminded himself of the guidance on Article 8 at [20 and  22]  he
   has dealt with the assessment of proportionality at [47 -  53].  He  has
   weighed in the balance the loss of  the  benefits  attached  to  British
   citizenship [49] and the position of the Sponsor at [50]. Nationality is
   not a trump card (see ZH (Tanzania) UKSC  4, paragraph 30) He was  fully
   aware of the consequences of a decision to remove the Appellant  if  the
   Sponsor chose to remain in the United  Kingdom,  particularly  where  an
   application for entry clearance may not be successful; and decisions  of
   this nature are always difficult to make. Whilst the  Judge  should  not
   have factored into the assessment of proportionality the likely  outcome
   of a future application for entry clearance (see SB (Bangladesh) v  SSHD
   [2007] EWCA Civ 28 and HC (Jamaica) v SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  371)  I  am
   satisfied that this did  not  materially  affect  his  assessment  under
   Article 8 ECHR. Judge Osborne, in granting permission, stated that it is
   arguably disproportionate to remove the Appellant from her  baby  girls,
   the reality, which the Judge faced, was that they have a  choice  as  to
   whether or not they remained together. The  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor
   chose not to be truthful about  their  circumstances  in  Nigeria,  they
   commenced their relationship when the Appellant had no right  to  remain
   in the UK, and they can have  had  no  expectation  that  she  would  be
   granted leave to remain. He considered the provisions of  s  55  of  the
   Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 [47]. Read as a whole, the
   determination discloses no material errors of law.

Decision


15. The determination of Judge Hamilton contains no material errors of  law
    and his decision therefore must stand.


16. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


17. There was no application for an anonymity order before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before me. In the circumstances of  this  case,  I  see  no
    reason to direct anonymity.


Signed                                  Date 14 November 2014

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee  award
under  Rule  9(1)(a)(costs)  of  the   Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005 and section 12(4) (a) of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As  the  Appellant's  appeal  has  been
dismissed, I confirm the fee award of Judge Hamilton.


Signed   Dated 14 November 2014

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


