

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50828/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 08 June 2016                               |On 08 July 2016              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                              LUKASZ ROSZKOWSKI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M. Sirikanda, on behalf of Ahmed Rahman Carr
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant's  immigration  history  is  summarised  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal decision promulgated on 15 April 2016  [annexed].  The  appeal
    was listed for a resumed hearing in order to remake the  decision.  The
    appellant appeals against the respondent's decision dated  09  December
    2014 to 'deport' him from the UK. As an EEA national the relevant legal
    framework is contained in  The  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006").

2.    The respondent may  take  a  'relevant  decision'  to  remove  an  EEA
    national on the grounds of public policy,  public  security  or  public
    health (regulation 21(1)) as long as the decision  also  complies  with
    the principles outlined in regulation 21(5)-(6).  However,  a  relevant
    decision may not be taken in respect of the  person  with  a  permanent
    right of residence under regulation 15 except  on  serious  grounds  of
    public policy or public  security  (regulation  21(3)).  Regulation  15
    states that a person shall acquire a permanent right of residence if he
    has resided in the United Kingdom in accordance  with  the  regulations
    for a continuous period of five years.

3.    An EEA national may reside 'in accordance  with  the  regulations'  by
    way of several different provisions. Regulation 6 sets out a number  of
    ways in  which  an  EEA  national  can  exercise  treaty  rights  as  a
    "qualified person" including as a jobseeker, a worker, a  self-employed
    person, a self-sufficient person or as a  student.  Others  may  derive
    rights  of  residence  through  familial  relationships.  Regulation  7
    provides for family members of qualified persons to reside in  the  UK.
    Family members include direct descendants of an EEA  national  who  are
    under 21 or who are dependent.

Threshold for removal

4.    The first issue I must determine is what  the  relevant  threshold  is
    for removal. It is not disputed that the appellant entered the UK  with
    his mother and sister in June 2007. Nor does it appear to  be  disputed
    that he remained in the UK (without any significant periods  away  from
    the country) throughout the period up until  his  removal  in  February
    2015.

5.    Both the respondent's decision and the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    concentrated on whether the appellant had acquired a permanent right of
    residence  with  sole  reference  to  whether  he  produced  sufficient
    evidence to show that he had been a qualified person for  a  continuous
    period of five years prior to his imprisonment. However,  it  is  clear
    from the wording of regulation 15 that the  appellant  need  only  show
    that he was residing in the UK "in accordance with these  regulations".
    Although a qualified person would be residing in  accordance  with  the
    regulations, a person who was residing in the UK  as  a  family  member
    might also be residing in accordance with the regulations.

6.    I have had the opportunity of hearing evidence  from  the  appellant's
    mother and sister. His mother  has  produced  a  number  of  pieces  of
    evidence relating to her employment, which  shows  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that she has been working in the UK since her arrival  in
    2007. The evidence includes a number of P60 certificates  covering  the
    period from 2007 to 2015. In light of this evidence I am satisfied that
    the appellant's mother has been a qualified person throughout  her  own
    period of residence in the UK.

7.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge  accepted  his  mother's  evidence.  She
    gave her evidence before me  in  an  open  and  unhesitating  way.  Her
    evidence was broadly consistent with the documentary evidence.  I  also
    found her to be a credible witness. She  told  me  that  the  appellant
    lived in her household throughout  his  time  in  the  UK.  There  were
    periods when he was able to find work but she accepted  that  his  work
    history was patchy. Although he had struggled to find regular work,  in
    part,  because  he  failed  to  develop  his  English  language  skills
    sufficiently, she said that he contributed to  the  household  finances
    when he could. However, it  became  clear  that  his  contribution  was
    fairly minimal. His mother was clearly  the  main  breadwinner  in  the
    household. When the appellant was unemployed she  was  responsible  for
    supporting him. At no point did the appellant live  independently  from
    his mother's household.

8.    While there is evidence to show that the appellant was issued  with  a
    residence card in his own right when  he  first  came  to  the  UK  the
    evidence of his work history is patchy  and  would  not  in  itself  be
    sufficient to show that he had acquired a permanent right of  residence
    in the UK as a qualified person. When he arrived in the UK he was  only
    18 years old. Up until his 21st  birthday  on  8  November  2009  I  am
    satisfied that he was residing "in accordance with  these  regulations"
    under regulation 7(1)(b)(i) as the family member of his mother who  was
    exercising treaty rights in the UK. Thereafter, I am satisfied that  he
    continued to reside in accordance with regulation  7(1)(b)(ii)  as  his
    mother's dependent albeit that there were also some periods when he was
    in work and was therefore residing as a qualified  person  in  his  own
    right.

9.     I  am  satisfied  that  the  evidence  shows  on   the   balance   of
    probabilities that by June 2012 the appellant had been residing in  the
    United Kingdom in accordance with  the  regulations  for  a  continuous
    period of five years. As such, he had acquired  a  permanent  right  of
    residence prior to his conviction on 25 January 2013  for  robbery  and
    wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm. For these reasons I
    conclude that a 'relevant decision' could only be taken to  remove  him
    from the UK with reference to the higher threshold of  serious  grounds
    of public policy or public security.

Other considerations

10.   It is only if the personal conduct of the person  concerned  is  found
    to  represent  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat
    affecting one of  the  fundamental  interests  of  society  (regulation
    21(5)(c)) that it becomes relevant to consider whether the decision  is
    proportionate taking into account all the considerations identified  in
    regulation 21(5)-(6): see SSHD v Straszewski [2015] EWCA Civ  1245  and
    MC (Essa principles recast) [2015] UKUT 520.

11.   The appellant has a history of offending. The sentencing  judge  noted
    that he had a conviction for an offence of violence in Poland but  very
    little evidence has been produced regarding the circumstances  of  that
    offence. In evidence at the hearing the appellant's mother was able  to
    provide a little more detail. She told me  that  the  appellant,  along
    with an older friend, assaulted another boy and stole his mobile phone.
    She said that he was around 17 years old at the time. He was  taken  to
    court and sentenced to probation.

12.   On 8 September 2012 the appellant was cautioned for possession  of  an
    offensive weapon in a public place. Neither  the  PNC  record  nor  the
    reasons for deportation letter give details of the offence. While it is
    of concern that the appellant was cautioned for an offence of that kind
    there is insufficient evidence to assess whether this forms  a  pattern
    of behaviour  that  might  indicate  a  propensity  to  commit  violent
    offences.

13.   On 22 November 2012 the appellant was convicted  of  several  offences
    in the UK including damage to  property,  possession  of  cannabis  and
    failing to surrender to custody. These matters were dealt with  by  way
    of fines and forfeiture. The level  of  sentencing  suggests  that  the
    offences were of a relatively minor nature and were of a different kind
    to the offences that prompted the removal decision.

14.   On 30 April 2013 the appellant was sentenced to 4  years  imprisonment
    in relation to two serious offences involving violence. The  sentencing
    judge summarised the nature of the crimes as follows:

           "...I have to sentence you for two extremely serious offences, a
           robbery in which you approached a  man  in  the  street  in  the
           evening, struck him in the face and  then  punched  him  several
           times and when he was  knocked  to  the  floor  he  was  further
           assaulted, either by being punched or kicked. It matters not for
           these purposes. You then ran off, taking his wallet with  [you].
           He was physically hurt particularly  a  wound  to  his  eye  and
           unsurprisingly his confidence has been affected by what you  did
           to him that night.
           About an hour and a half later you got into an argument  with  a
           man over a taxi and ended up committing a very  serious  assault
           on him, Mr Lennard stop he was attacked after he told  you  both
           to fuck off, no doubt because of a question of who was going  to
           use the taxi. He was assaulted. He managed to break free and try
           and run off but you both pursued him. One of you knocked him  to
           the floor and then he was repeatedly  kicked  by  both  of  you,
           kicked to the point where he was unconscious  and  he  ended  up
           with extensive bruising all over his body. He was still in  pain
           three weeks later and unable  to  go  back  to  work.  The  only
           explanation that you two can offer for this appalling  behaviour
           is that you had both been drinking.
           ....
           You; Mr Roszkowski, are 23 years old. You have been  in  trouble
           before including for an offence of violence in Poland  but  your
           record is not what I would regard as a  really  serious  one....
           Both of you it is right to say have never been to prison before.
           You have  both  pleaded  guilty  though  it  is  clear  that  Mr
           Roszkowski is deserving of  considerably  more  credit  for  his
           early guilty pleas than is Mr Ropelewski.
           I have had to  balance  very  carefully  the  gravity  of  these
           offences, the guidelines, as against in both  your  young  ages,
           your  relative  lack  of  criminal  experience  in  your   case,
           Roszkowski.... I regard both of you is equally culpable for  the
           offences but I think in view of your older age and the fact that
           you have some previous convictions, I think  it  is  appropriate
           distinguish between you in terms of  the  sentences  that  would
           been passed in principle.  However,  I  think  that  factor  was
           balanced out by the additional credit that Roszkowski  gets  for
           pleading guilty. So in the end you both end  up  with  the  same
           sentence.
           Roszkowski, in your case, had you pleaded not  guilty  to  these
           offences, I would have passed a sentence of three years for  the
           robbery, three years for the section 18, making a total  of  six
           years because they have to be consecutive but  giving  you  full
           credit for your pleas of guilty, I reduce that  sentenced  to  4
           years."

15.   This was the first  time  he  had  been  imprisoned.  In  his  witness
    statement the appellant says that he is not proud of  the  offences  he
    committed. He expresses remorse for his actions. He explains  that,  at
    the time, he was in a tumultuous relationship with his girlfriend. They
    broke  up  and  got  back  to  together  several  times.  In  2012  the
    relationship was not going well. He said that he felt upset  and  angry
    and started to drink heavily. He now realises that this contributed  to
    his increasingly erratic behaviour and led him to make  bad  decisions.
    During his time in prison he realised how  serious  the  mistakes  were
    that he made. He became depressed, attempted suicide and self-harmed on
    several occasions.

16.   The appellant has produced  evidence  to  show  that  he  completed  a
    number of courses during his time in prison including  behavioural  and
    awareness courses relating to alcohol and relapse prevention.  He  also
    undertook  a  course  to  improve  his  English  language  skills.  The
    appellant says that he has now given up alcohol because he realises the
    effect that it had on his life. If he is able to return to  the  UK  he
    says that he would seek employment as a warehouse operative  and  begin
    saving money to undertake an IT  course,  which  has  always  been  his
    ambition. He hopes that such training would give him a better chance of
    obtaining better employment.

17.   There is no current risk assessment  before  the  tribunal.  The  most
    recent OASys assessment is dated 27 November 2014.  Unfortunately,  the
    report does not contain a great deal of detail.  However,  the  overall
    risk assessment concluded that he presented a medium  risk  of  serious
    harm to the public and known adults. The assessment states  that  where
    an individual is assessed as being medium, high or very  high  risk  of
    serious harm, this must be followed  through  with  a  risk  management
    plan. Section R11.12 of the report stated that the risk of  reoffending
    could be controlled through the probation service who would monitor his
    licence conditions and refer him to appropriate programs on release. It
    was  noted  that  his  family  would  be  able  to  offer  support  and
    encouragement.

18.   In a letter dated 27 February 2014 the RESOLVE  treatment  manager  at
    the National Offender Management Service wrote to the appellant in  the
    following terms:

            "As you will be aware, you have been referred for RESOLVE as per
           your sentence plan. The RESOLVE team have viewed  your  referral
           and you have been assessed as unsuitable for  RESOLVE.  This  is
           because your OVP score indicates  that  you  do  not  require  a
           moderate intensity intervention such as RESOLVE to address  your
           violence. Your offender supervisor will be informed of  this  so
           that they can consider alternative ways for you to address  your
           risks."

19.   A pre-discharge report dated 28 October 2014 records a  visit  to  his
    mother's  home,  which  was  the  proposed  address  for  release.  The
    supervising officer observed that his mother  was  very  supportive  of
    him. The supervising officer was satisfied that his  mother,  with  the
    additional support of his sister and cousin, would be able  to  provide
    the support needed. The address was deemed  suitable  for  release.  No
    additional licence conditions appeared to be required.

20.   The appellant has also produced a copy of a bail decision made by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on  16  January  2015.  In  assessing  whether  the
    appellant was suitable for release from immigration detention the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  substantial
    grounds to believe that the appellant was likely to reoffend. While  it
    seems clear that the  judge  may  not  have  had  sight  of  the  OASys
    assessment he took into account the fact that the previous  convictions
    prior to the index offence were not serious and  were  of  a  different
    character. The index offence, although serious, was apparently  fuelled
    by drink. The judge noted that the  appellant  had  completed  approved
    rehabilitation courses in drink and drugs. The judge was also satisfied
    that the fact he would  be  released  on  licence  was  a  preventative
    factor. He  noted  that  the  probation  service  had  not  sought  any
    additional conditions on the licence, which he considered "helps me  to
    put into context the risk he poses." The judge was satisfied that there
    was no likelihood that the  appellant  would  abscond  or  reoffend  if
    released on bail.

21.   It is difficult to assess the sincerity of  the  appellant's  evidence
    when I have been unable to hear from him. However, I was able  to  hear
    from his mother and sister. While I take into  account  the  fact  that
    they are his relatives and would have every interest in the outcome  of
    this appeal I found them both to be credible witnesses who were able to
    explain in some detail why,  in  their  opinion,  they  felt  that  the
    appellant had changed his outlook and developed some maturity since  he
    went to prison.

22.   When asked what  she  thought  the  underlying  causes  of  her  son's
    violent behaviour were, his mother told me that she had been through  a
    bitter divorce with the appellant's father. He  was  an  alcoholic  and
    domestic violence was involved. She observed  that  the  appellant  had
    become rebellious after the divorce.  She  thought  that  it  may  have
    contributed towards his behaviour. In relation to the index offence  in
    the UK she also thought that the difficult relationship he had with his
    girlfriend may have contributed to the offence. He was drinking  a  lot
    at the time. She also recognised that his inability to find stable work
    had, in part, been as a result of the  fact  that  he  had  not  learnt
    English as well as she thought he would. As a result the appellant  had
    taken steps to improve his English while he was in prison.

23.   The appellant's sister told me that her brother was not  very  mature.
    She  has  noticed  a  marked  change  in  him.  She  said  that   their
    relationship is much closer and he feels able to talk to them about his
    problems. As a family they have  become  closer.  The  overall  picture
    drawn by the evidence of his family members is that, as a result of his
    imprisonment, the appellant has had cause to take stock of his life. He
    has had time to reflect on his actions  and  has  developed  a  greater
    level of understanding and maturity. He has found it difficult to  find
    work in Poland save for intermittent casual  labour.  He  is  currently
    living with his grandparents.

24.   The appellant's criminal  history  prior  to  the  index  offence  was
    described by the sentencing judge as one that  he  did  not  regard  as
    really serious. While it is  of  some  concern  that  he  committed  an
    assault in Poland before he came to the UK, I  take  into  account  his
    young age at the time and the fact that the sentence of probation would
    appear to indicate that the offence was  relatively  minor.  The  other
    earlier offences in the UK would also appear to be relatively minor.

25.   The serious nature of the index offences committed  by  the  appellant
    at the end of 2012 cannot be denied.  The  sentencing  judge's  remarks
    outline the apparently random and repeated violent offending  over  the
    course of one evening. The risk factors  leading  up  to  this  offence
    appeared to be the appellant's use of alcohol and a  certain  level  of
    anger and emotional instability as a result of  the  breakup  with  his
    girlfriend. While none of this provides an  excuse  for  his  appalling
    behaviour there is evidence to show that he has sought to address  some
    of the issues that may have contributed to those offences.

26.   Although the OASys report assessed the risk of serious  harm  that  he
    posed in November 2014 as "medium" it seems clear from  other  evidence
    that the probation service did not consider  the  risk  of  reoffending
    sufficiently serious  to  impose  additional  licence  conditions.  The
    probation service was satisfied  that  his  family  would  be  able  to
    provide him with  support.  As  a  result  of  his  sentence  plan  the
    appellant was referred to RESOLVE (a group  work  programme  to  reduce
    violent behaviour) but it seems clear that the risk he  posed  was  not
    sufficiently serious to require "moderate intensity  intervention".  If
    he returned to the UK he would remain  under  the  supervision  of  the
    probation service until the end of his sentence. There is  no  evidence
    to suggest that he has committed any  further  offences  since  he  was
    released from prison. The appellant has produced evidence to show  that
    he has taken steps  to  address  some  of  the  issues  that  may  have
    contributed to the offence. He has completed rehabilitation courses  in
    prison and has sought to improve his English language skills. While  it
    has not been possible to assess the appellant's resolve to continue  on
    this path by way of oral evidence I am satisfied that  his  mother  and
    sister are committed to supporting him in any way that they can.  Their
    evidence  suggests  that  the  appellant  has  reflected  on  his  past
    behaviour and has matured.

27.   While the index  offences  undoubtedly  were  serious  they  were  not
    dissimilar to the circumstances considered by the Court of Appeal in Mr
    Straszewski's case (see paragraph 10 above). In that case the appellant
    had initially been assessed as presenting a high risk of  serious  harm
    but this was later assessed to be a medium  risk.  Mr  Straszewski  had
    committed offences of  robbery  and  unlawful  wounding  leading  to  a
    sentence of imprisonment totalling four years and nine months.  Despite
    the serious nature of the offences the court concluded that it was open
    to the tribunal to conclude  that  he  did  not  represent  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious  threat  to  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society to justify deportation.  Lord  Justice  Moore-Bick
    concluded that: "although the offences committed by Mr Straszewski were
    serious, they were not so serious, and the risk  that  he  would  cause
    serious harm to members of the public through reoffending  was  not  so
    great, that they justified his deportation."

28.   After having weighed all the circumstances in this case I  find  that,
    despite the serious  nature  of  the  offence,  there  is  insufficient
    evidence to show that there are serious grounds  of  public  policy  or
    public security to justify the appellant's removal. The  evidence  does
    not show that the appellant  currently  poses  a  genuine,  present  or
    sufficiently serious threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests
    of society. There is evidence to show  that  the  appellant  has  taken
    steps to rehabilitate to the extent that few conditions were imposed on
    his licence. It is likely that he has  matured  and  has  had  time  to
    reflect on his behaviour while in prison. If he returns to  the  UK  he
    would still be under supervision and would benefit from the support  of
    his  family  members.  Although  he  didn't  make  the  most   of   the
    opportunities that living in the UK presented him before he was removed
    to Poland he now expresses a desire to gain further  qualifications  in
    order to  increase  his  employment  prospects.  He  has  close  family
    connections in the UK where he lived  for  a  period  of  eight  years.
    Although he continues to have some connections to  Poland  through  his
    grandparents it seems clear that his closest connections are now in the
    UK. For these reasons I conclude that the 'relevant decision'  was  not
    justified on serious grounds of public policy or  public  security  and
    did not satisfy the principles of proportionality.

29.   I conclude that the decision  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  EEA
    regulations 2006.


DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal


Signed   [pic]   Date 07 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan



























                                                                       ANNEX
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 13 April 2016                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


                              LUKASZ ROSZKOWSKI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M. Sirikanda, on behalf of Imran Khan & Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    The appellant is a Polish citizen who came to the UK with  his  mother
    and sister in June 2007 when he was 18 years old. In a  decision  dated
    09 December 2014 the respondent decided  to  remove  him  from  the  UK
    following his conviction for robbery and wounding with intent to  cause
    grievous bodily harm. He was sentenced to four years imprisonment.  The
    EEA removal  decision  was  certified  under  regulation  24AA  of  The
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  ("the   EEA
    Regulations 2006"). The effect of certification was that the respondent
    was able to remove the appellant while his appeal was pending.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 14 August 2015. The judge heard and noted the
    evidence given by the appellant's mother. She told him that she  was  a
    single mother who came to the UK in 2007 with  her  two  children.  She
    works as a warehouse operative [10]. She told the judge  that  her  son
    had worked in 2008 and 2009 as well as other years during his  time  in
    the UK. They moved house several times so some of  the  documents  were
    lost or had been thrown out. He had worked  through  several  different
    agencies [16].  The  judge  noted  that  during  cross-examination  the
    appellant's mother said that she  supports  her  son  when  he  is  not
    working [17].

3.    The first legal issue that the judge  was  required  to  consider  was
    whether the appellant had  acquired  a  right  of  permanent  residence
    before he was sentenced to  a  period  of  imprisonment  in  2013.  The
    judge's findings on this issue were as follows:

           "21. Although it is accepted that  the  appellant  came  to  the
           United Kingdom in 2007 and that he had  resided  here  for  over
           five years before his prison sentence in 2013, I find that I  am
           not satisfied that  it  has  been  shown  that  he  resided  "in
           accordance with" the 2006 Regulations throughout that period, as
           required by regulation  15(1)(a).  There  is  evidence  that  he
           worked in 2007, 2010, 2011 and 2012 but there are  no  documents
           to show that he did so in 2008 or 2009. His  mother's  assertion
           to that effect  is  insufficient  for  this  purpose.  Even  the
           evidence relating to the other years does not show that  he  was
           working  continuously,  merely  that  there  were  episodes   of
           employment in those years.

           22. I find, therefore, that the appellant has not established  a
           permanent right of residence in the United Kingdom."

4.     Amongst  other  evidence  the  judge  considered  the  "medium"  risk
    assessment contained  in  the  OASys  report  and  concluded  that  the
    appellant presented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious  threat
    to public safety to justify his removal on grounds of public policy  or
    public security [25]. In considering the proportionality of removal the
    judge took into account the fact that the appellant was 26  years  old.
    He lived with his mother and sister until  his  removal  to  Poland  in
    early 2015. The judge took into account the fact that  there  was  some
    evidence to show he had worked in the UK. He came to  the  UK  aged  18
    years old and had spent a period of approximately 7 � years in  the  UK
    during which time there had  been  a  degree  of  social  and  cultural
    integration  [28].  He  concluded  that  the  appellant's  removal  was
    justified and proportionate.

5.    The appellant seeks to appeal the First-tier Tribunal decision on  the
    grounds that (i) the First-tier Tribunal erred in concluding  that  the
    appellant had not acquired a right of permanent residence on the  facts
    and evidence before the tribunal; and (ii) the judge failed  to  attach
    weight to material evidence in his assessment  of  rehabilitation.  The
    appellant's  representatives  accept  that   there   were   alternative
    arguments that could and should have been put forward  at  the  hearing
    relating to permanent residence but offer  no  explanation  as  to  why
    their representative did not do so. Nevertheless they  argue  that  the
    judge should have considered obvious points of law.

Decision and reasons

6.    After having considered the grounds of appeal  and  oral  arguments  I
    satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
    an error on a point of law.

7.    The judge proceeded to determine the issue of permanent  residence  on
    the basis on which it was put i.e. that the appellant was  a  qualified
    person in his own right. However, even if the judge proceeded  on  that
    basis his findings were inadequate. The  judge  noted  that  there  was
    evidence to show that the appellant worked periodically. Even if  there
    was insufficient evidence to show continuous work the judge  failed  to
    make any findings in relation to matters that were material to a proper
    assessment of whether the appellant was a "qualified  person"  for  the
    purpose of regulation 6 for a continuous period of five years.  If  the
    appellant was not working the judge needed to consider whether he was a
    "jobseeker" in the interim periods and therefore continued to reside in
    accordance with the regulations. Although the appeal  was  inadequately
    prepared in this respect  it  was  still  incumbent  on  the  judge  to
    consider whether there was sufficient  evidence  in  respect  of  other
    aspects of the regulations before concluding that the appellant  failed
    to show that he had acquired a right of permanent residence.

8.    Most of the  submissions  put  forward  by  Ms  Sirikanda  related  to
    substantive arguments as to  why  the  appellant  was  likely  to  have
    acquired a right of permanent residence prior to imprisonment. It seems
    quite clear that the arguments relating to whether the appellant was  a
    family member for the purpose of regulation 7(1) of the EAA Regulations
    2006 during his initial five year period of residence in  the  UK  were
    not put to the judge at the hearing, nor was  the  case  prepared  with
    those arguments in mind. Nevertheless, the factual circumstances as set
    out by the judge indicated that the appellant  lived  with  his  mother
    throughout his time in the UK. Prior to November 2009 he was  under  21
    years old. It seems that his mother also indicated  that  she  provided
    the appellant with financial support when he was not working.

9.    Although I heard argument on whether the regulation 7 issues  were  so
    obvious that the judge erred in failing to consider them  (despite  the
    fact that they were not argued) I find that it is  sufficient  for  the
    purpose of this decision to conclude that  the  judge  failed  to  make
    adequate findings on issues that were material to a  proper  assessment
    of the question  that  he  did  seek  to  determine  i.e.  whether  the
    appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence  as  a  qualified
    person in his own right.

10.   Mr Wilding argued that, even if the judge  erred  in  his  assessment,
    any error was not material because the nature  of  the  crimes  was  so
    serious that removal  was  justified  even  on  the  higher  threshold.
    Without doubt the appellant committed  particularly  serious  assaults.
    This was reflected in the length of  his  sentence.  Nevertheless,  the
    thresholds of "grounds of public policy" and "serious grounds of public
    policy" are sufficiently different to require a full assessment of  the
    circumstances of the case. It cannot be said that the judge  was  bound
    to come to the same conclusion even if he had found that the  appellant
    had acquired a right of permanent residence. For this reason I conclude
    that the error identified above was material.

11.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of an error on a point of law. The First-tier Tribunal decision is  set
    aside.

12.   I have taken into account the submissions made by both parties  as  to
    the appropriate venue if a further hearing was required. I bear in mind
    that the normal approach will be for the Upper Tribunal to  remake  the
    decision. In this case the nature and extent of judicial  fact  finding
    is not such that it would be appropriate to  remit  the  appeal  for  a
    fresh hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  nature  of  the  fact
    finding exercise is such that it could be remade in the Upper Tribunal.



DIRECTIONS

13.   The following directions are made in relation to this appeal:

      (i)   The appeal will be listed for a resumed  hearing  in  the  Upper
           Tribunal before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan.

      (ii)  The appellant's representatives are to notify  the  tribunal  no
           later than 05 May 2016 whether witnesses will be called, and  if
           so, whether an interpreter is required.

      (iii) Any further evidence relied  upon  by  either  party  is  to  be
           served at least 10 days before the next hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and direct that the case be listed  for  a  resumed
hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date 14 April 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


