
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers:    IA/50498/2013
                                                               IA/50499/2013
                                                               IA/50500/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 23rd July 2014                     |On: 6th August 2014       |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                              Kehinde Akinwunmi
                    Master Abdulkhalid Ayomide Akinwunmi
                      Master Basit Olafimihan Akinwunmi
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents

For the Appellant:     Mrs Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Saini, Counsel instructed by Greenland Lawyers
                            LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondents are all nationals of Nigeria. They are  respectively  a
mother and her two minor children. On the 28th April  2014  the  First-
tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Foulkes-Jones)  allowed  their  linked  appeals
against decisions to remove them from the United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.  The Respondent  now
has permission to appeal against that decision.

The case before the First-tier Tribunal was, in essence, that  although
the First Respondent had been an overstayer for many years, had  worked
illegally and had in fact been convicted of offences  relating  to  the
use of false documents, the family should nevertheless be permitted  to
stay on the grounds that their  removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
interference with their private  lives  in  the  UK.  Central  to  that
submission was the fact that the two minor Respondents  had  been  born
here and had lived here all their lives. At  the  date  of  the  appeal
before Judge Foulkes-Jones the children were aged 8 (weeks from his 9th
birthday) and 7.

The First-tier Tribunal noted that the applications had been refused in
November 2013 with reference to the new immigration rules brought  into
force in July 2012.   The determination recited the  reasons  that  the
applicants could not meet the requirements of those Rules. Having  made
a detailed note of  the  evidence,  including  the  First  Respondent's
convictions and immigration offending, Judge Foulkes-Jones goes  on  to
address Article 8 outwith the Rules, following the  framework  approved
by Lord Bingham in Razgar[1].  In doing so she pays  particular  regard
to the best interests of the children.    She finds that the removal of
the family would be a disproportionate interference with their  private
lives. She allows the appeal under the Rules.

The Secretary of  State  now  appeals  against  that  decision  on  the
following grounds:

   a) The appeal was allowed under the Rules erroneously;


   b) The Judge did not consider the  guidance  in  Gulshan[2],  namely
      that (only) "if there are  arguably  good  grounds  for  granting
      leave outside the Immigration Rules is it necessary for Article 8
      purposes to go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
      circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules;


   c) Nor does the Judge make any findings in this  regard  before  she
      goes on to conduct a "free-standing" Article 8 assessment


   d) "It is submitted, without making findings  as  to  arguably  good
      grounds and compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
      under the Rules, an immigration judge  cannot  undertake  a  free
      standing Article 8 assessment"


In response Mr Saini pointed out that in fact these  applications  were
made prior to the rule change in July 2012 and that the new  Rules  had
no application in light of the decision in  Edgehill[3].  He  submitted
that even if Edgehill was decided wrongly the Judge clearly had the new
Rules in mind - they are  set  out  in  the  determination  -  and  had
attached appropriate weight to the public interest.    The  failure  to
mention Gulshan cannot be said to be material.


      Error of Law

I find the grounds are without merit.  The applications  which  led  to
these appeals were made as long ago as June 2010.  Although there  were
subsequent representations the last of these was in January  2012.  All
of  that  significantly  predates  the  statement  of  changes  in  the
Immigration Rules that introduced formal  codification  of  Article  8.
It follows that this was simply an old-style Razgar assessment.

The  Respondent's  only  criticism  of  the  proportionality  balancing
exercise in this determination is that it is 'free-standing'. That  was
all it could have been, following Edgehill.  I note from paragraph  5.2
of the determination that the presenting officer on the day appeared to
accept that this was the case.

Even if that were not so, and the claims had been made post   9th  July
2012, I do not find that this determination  contains  any  error  such
that it should be set aside. That is because the Judge has undertaken a
careful proportionality balancing exercise,  having clear regard to the
factors militating against giving this family leave.   For instance the
determination  makes  repeated  reference  to  Mrs   Akinwunmi's   poor
immigration history and criminal  offending:  see  2.6,  2.9,  4.5,   5
(xviii), 5 (xxii), 5 (xxiv) and at 5 (iv) where the Judge considers the
decision to be taken  in  pursuit  of  the  'prevention  of  crime  and
disorder' as well as the protection of  the  economy.   The  Judge  was
entitled, indeed obliged, to give weight to the best interests  of  the
children, and that is quite properly a focus in her assessment. She was
also entitled to take into account her own findings of fact about  what
awaited the family if  returned  to  Nigeria.  The  Judge  accepted  Ms
Akinwunmi's evidence about the social difficulties she faced in Nigeria
as a child and young woman, and did so in  the  full  knowledge  of  Ms
Akinwunmi's dishonesty in respect of her criminal  conviction.    There
is nothing wrong with this assessment of proportionality.

It follows from this that the Judge considered there to  be  compelling
reasons to go on and look at Article 8.  The  fact  that  she  did  not
specifically cite Gulshan or Nagre is therefore rather irrelevant.   As
Aikins LJ finds in MM:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate, save for the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside the  rule,
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside  the  rules.  I  cannot  see  much
         utility in  imposing  this  further,  intermediary,  test.  If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim. That will have to be  determined  by
         the relevant decision-maker".



Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law and it
is upheld.

I make no direction as to anonymity. None was in place before the First-
tier Tribunal and I was not asked to make one in the Upper Tribunal.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             23rd  July 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27
[2] Gulshan v SSHD [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC)
[3] Edgehill and Anr [2014] EWCA Civ 402

