
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: ia/50932/2014
                                                               IA/50927/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 October 2015                   |On 20 November 2015                  |
|Oral decision given                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR JAGAN NATH
                              MRS NARGIS VOHRA
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr M Blundell, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the respondent's appeal.  I shall refer to the parties  as  the
    Secretary of State who is the appellant  in  this  matter  and  to  the
    claimants who were the appellants  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    claimants are husband and wife.  The main claimant made an  application
    for leave to remain under the Tier 2 points-based scheme with his  wife
    as a dependant.

2.   In a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 9 April  2015  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Mozolowski) allowed the appeal on immigration  grounds.
    The issue under appeal was the validity of the English  language  test.
    The Secretary of State alleged that the  test  was  taken  by  a  proxy
    tester and thereby the claimant had used deception.  The  Secretary  of
    State relied on generic evidence in concluding that the test  taken  by
    the claimant was invalid. There was also an issue of  credibility  that
    arose at the hearing.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal (FtT) took into account expert evidence in  the
    form of a report from Dr Harrison.  Dr Harrison was unable to reach any
    conclusion because there was insufficient  information.   In  addition,
    the claimant adduced evidence of an English language test,  his  skills
    and abilities taken before the date of decision.   The  FtT  found  the
    burden of proof on the claimant had been discharged and that he had met
    the requirements of the Rules.

4.   The Secretary of State argues in grounds that the FtT  gave  inadequate
    reasons for its conclusion that the refusal decision was not justified.
    The Secretary of State produced sufficient evidence to  show  that  the
    test had been done by proxy and found to be invalid.  The FtT failed to
    give adequate reasons for concluding that the claimant did not rely  on
    a fraudulent certificate.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Eshun  on  14
    August 2015.  The matter has come before me this  morning  to  consider
    whether or not there was a material error of law.  I  have  taken  into
    account the guidance in R (on the application of Gazi) v SSHD  (ETS.JR)
    [2015] UKUT 00327 in which it was concluded that a simple rejection  of
    the generic evidence produced by the Secretary of State would amount to
    an error of law  but  there  would  be  no  error  where  the  Tribunal
    concluded that overall the evidence was insufficient to show  deception
    has been practised and was also  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    claimant's ability to speak English.

6.   I am satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  disclosed  an
    error of law to the extent that it  concluded  that  the  claimant  had
    discharged the burden of proof that he meets the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.  I find that this was not a  material  error  however.   I  have
    taken into account the  oral  submissions  made  in  the  detailed  and
    helpful Rule 24 response prepared by Mr Blundell. As  was  pointed  out
    this morning the burden of proof is in fact on the respondent  to  show
    that there was  deception  practised  by  the  claimant.   However,  in
    reaching a decision I am satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal  found
    and concluded on the evidence overall that the Secretary of  State  had
    not discharged that burden to show  that  the  claimant  had  practised
    deception by using a proxy tester.  The FtT relied on the expert report
    of Dr Harrison who was unable to reach any conclusion on the  available
    information and on the claimant's own evidence of his English  language
    abilities.  That evidence was capable of showing  and  indeed  the  FtT
    found  that  the  generic  evidence  was  insufficient   to   establish
    deception.

7.   Whilst accepting that the FtT did not carry  through  the  analysis  of
    the evidence as regards deception and make a final conclusion  in  that
    regard, I am satisfied that it is nevertheless clear from the  decision
    as a whole that  the  FtT  concluded  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    evidence was inadequate and insufficient to discharge the burden appeal
    in this case.  Therefore I conclude that whilst there was an  error  in
    the approach of the FtT, it was not material  to  the  outcome  of  the
    decision.  The Secretary of State's [appeal] is dismissed and  the  FtT
    Decision and Reasons shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision and reasons shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 18.11.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 18.11.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
