
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
IA/50109/2014

                                                 IA/50121/2014

                                                 IA/50127/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 May 2017                        |        On 19 June 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                          Mr r b - first appellant
                         Mrs s k - second appellant
                        master a b - third appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Tabori of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellants in these three linked appeals are husband and wife,  the
    first and second appellants and a minor  child,  the  third  appellant.
    All three appellants are nationals of  India.   The  first  appellant's
    date of birth is 15 April 1977, the second appellant 10  December  1979
    and the third appellant 25 January 2007.

 3. The first appellant entered the UK unlawfully in 2001. He has  remained
    in the UK unlawfully. The second appellant entered the UK on 14 January
    2006 and 22 April  2006  on  a  visit  visa  and  remained  in  the  UK
    unlawfully after that visa expired. The third appellant was born in the
    UK.

 4. The appellants applied for leave to remain in the UK on  the  basis  of
    private and family life in 2010. Their applications were  refused  with
    no right of appeal. After  a  reconsideration  on  2  August  2011  the
    respondent's decision was maintained. The appellants  appealed  against
    that decision to the First-tier Tribunal. Their appeals were  dismissed
    in September 2011. On 6 October 2014 forms IS.75 and IS.76 were sent to
    the appellant's representative. On 31 October 2014 the completed  IS.76
    was received by the  respondent.  Representations  were  made  for  the
    appellants' cases to be considered under  the  European  Convention  on
    Human rights ('ECHR'). The applications were refused by the  respondent
    on 20 November 2014. The appellants appealed against  the  respondent's
    decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. In a decision promulgated on 6 January 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge C
    M Phillips dismissed the appellants' appeals.  The  judge  found  that,
    despite the length of time that the third appellant had  spent  in  the
    United Kingdom, it would be reasonable to expect the third appellant to
    leave the UK with his parents to go to India.  The judge did not accept
    that the appellants could not return to India  and  reintegrate  fully.
    The judge therefore found that the requirements of Appendix FM were not
    met.  The judge also considered  private  life  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and found that none of the appellants met the requirements of the
    private life route in paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.   The
    judge considered Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules  finding  that
    any interference with the private life of the appellants was justified.

Permission to appeal

 6. The appellants applied for permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision. On 2 June 2016, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Fisher
    refused the appellants permission to appeal.   The  appellants  renewed
    their applications for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  On
    27  June  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb  refused  the  appellants
    permission to appeal.  On 29 November 2016 the appellants  submitted  a
    claim for judicial review of the Upper Tribunal's decision to refuse to
    grant permission to appeal.  On  20  January  2017  the  Honourable  Mr
    Justice Fraser granted permission to  apply  for  judicial  review.  Mr
    Justice Fraser considered that although permission will only rarely  be
    granted in 'so called CART cases' that this was one of those cases.  He
    set out in the Order that if no request for  a  hearing  was  made  the
    court would make a final  order  quashing  the  refusal  of  permission
    decision without a further hearing.  On 20 February 2017 Master  Gidden
    ordered that, permission having been  granted  to  apply  for  judicial
    review and there being  no  request  for  a  substantive  hearing,  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal  to  refuse  permission  to  appeal  was
    quashed.  The parties were notified.  Thus the appeal came before me.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

Submissions

 7. The grounds of appeal set out  three  grounds.   The  first  ground  of
    appeal asserts that the third appellant qualified under Section EX.1 of
    the Immigration Rules. It is  asserted  that  the  judge  misunderstood
    Section EX.1 and wrongly decided that it would be  reasonable  for  the
    third appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  The grounds  assert  that
    it cannot reasonably be expected that the third appellant can leave the
    United Kingdom or for the first and  second  appellants  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom when  the  third  appellant  is  currently  set  in  his
    standard way of living in the UK and it is all he knows.   It  is  also
    asserted that  the  third  appellant,  a  child,  should  not  be  held
    accountable or punished for his parents'  wrong  doings.   During  oral
    submissions Mr Tabori clarified that the appellant did not assert  that
    it can never be reasonably expected for an appellant who has  lived  in
    the United Kingdom continuously for seven years or more  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

 8. The second ground of appeal asserts that the judge failed adequately to
    take the best  interests  of  the  appellants'  child  as  the  primary
    consideration in assessing proportionality under Article 8.   The  case
    law of Azimi-Moayed and Others (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
    appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) is relied on.  It is asserted  that  the
    third appellant was born in the United Kingdom and has been living here
    for all of his life.  It should be accepted that his lengthy  residence
    can lead to the development of social, cultural  and  educational  ties
    that it would be inappropriate to disrupt in the absence of  compelling
    reasons to the contrary.  It was submitted that there are no compelling
    reasons that justify the disruption that will be caused  to  the  third
    appellant.

 9. The third ground of appeal asserts that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    failed to have regard to the decision in ZH (Tanzania)  v  SSHD  [2011]
    UKSC 4 in which it was held that the best interests of the  child  must
    be of primary consideration and that children were not to be blamed for
    the errors of their parents.  It is asserted that it would  be  in  the
    best interest of the third appellant to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
    He is in full-time education and has established his way of life  here.



10. Mr Tabori submitted a skeleton argument  at  the  commencement  of  the
    hearing and amplified the arguments in  oral  submissions.   Mr  Tabori
    relied on  the  decision  of  Kaur  (children's  best  interests/public
    interest interface) [2017] UKUT  00014.   He  referred  extensively  to
    paragraphs from that decision.  It was submitted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in paragraph 55 of the decision by focusing or  considering  that
    children are focused on their parents rather than their peers  and  are
    adaptable.  His reading of this paragraph (i.e. 55) was that the  judge
    appeared to be saying that over a period of seven years a  child  would
    be focused on its parents.  He submitted that  this  was  an  erroneous
    approach which failed to reflect the fact, as set out in  a  number  of
    cases, that a child will acquire a private life over a period  of  time
    not just at the end of seven years.  He submitted that  the  judge  has
    erred by failing to recognise that  somewhere  along  the  continuum  a
    child increasingly ceases to be focused on its parents.  The judge  has
    failed to consider in any detail the third appellant's private life and
    this flows from the erroneous approach in paragraph 55.   He  submitted
    that the general public law principles set out in the guidance to  EX.1
    ought to have been taken into consideration by the judge.  He  referred
    specifically to paragraph 14  of  the  respondent's  guidance  and  the
    following factors:

      a) whether the child or parents have existing family  or  social  ties
         with the country - the person who has extended family  or  networks
         of friends should be able to rely  on  them  for  support  to  help
         reintegrate on return;

      b) whether the child has attended school in that country;

      c) whether the parents and/or child have lived or visited the  country
         before for periods of more than a few weeks - the question here  is
         whether having visited or lived in  the  country  before  that  the
         child would be able to adapt and/or that the parents would be  able
         to support the child in adapting to life in that country.

11. It was submitted that the first and second appellants have  no  network
    of extended family or friends whom they might rely on  upon  return  to
    India.  They have no social ties with India.  The third  appellant  has
    no ties with India himself. He has never attended school in  India  and
    has never lived in or visited India and he only speaks  broken  Punjabi
    the mandatory language in Punjab.  It  was  submitted  that  the  judge
    erred in assuming that the  third  appellant's  best  interests  solely
    concerned his living with his parents and that this assumption led to a
    failure to consider the extent of the third appellant's private life in
    the UK and the difficulty he would face on integration.   It  was  also
    submitted that the third appellant was 9 years of age at  the  date  of
    the hearing which significantly extends  the  seven-year  threshold  at
    which the public interest does not require removal.   It  was  asserted
    that the third appellant was closer to the threshold for being able  to
    register as a British citizen than to the seven-year threshold but this
    was not  weighed  in  the  reasonableness  balance  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

12. It was asserted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  correctly
    apply the  reasonableness  test.  The  judge,  when  finding  that  the
    appellant will be able to enter the education system and that there  is
    nothing in the school reports or evidence that countervails  against  a
    finding that he is  normally  adaptable  and  his  wellbeing  will  not
    suffer, omitted to consider that the child has been here for over seven
    years and that that must be given significant weight when carrying  out
    the proportionality exercise. It was submitted that  there  must  be  a
    very strong expectation that the third appellant's best interests would
    be to remain in the United Kingdom with his  parents  as  part  of  the
    family unit and that must  rank  as  a  primary  consideration  in  the
    proportionality assessment.  Reliance was placed on paragraph 46 of  MA
    (Pakistan)  &  Ors,  R  (on  the  application  of)  v  Upper   Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum  Chamber)  &  Anor  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  (MA
    (Pakistan)).  It was asserted that the judge had paid no regard to  the
    friendships that the third appellant had formed, the activities that he
    undertook, his success in school and his  membership  at  sports  clubs
    etc.  The judge had not sufficiently enquired  into  the  circumstances
    when determining the best interests of the third appellant.  He had not
    been called to give evidence and no questions had been put to him.  The
    judge has not considered the extent to which the  third  appellant  has
    become a distinct person with his  own  private  life  and  has  simply
    assumed that as a he can return as part of a family unit.  Reliance was
    placed on the decision at paragraph 2 in Kaur.  The judge  clearly  has
    not undertaken a proper assessment in this case.  He submitted that  it
    is simply inadequate to say that there are no health or related issues.
     There are no adequate reasons to support  the  judge's  assessment  of
    reasonableness.  At paragraph 70 the judge relied on the finding of the
    previous Immigration Judge without any acknowledgement that four  years
    had passed since the previous decision and that  infected  the  judge's
    approach  to  consideration  of  Article  8  proportionality.   It  was
    submitted  that  the  judge  also  discounted  the  relevance  in   the
    proportionality limb of the Razgar test that the  third  appellant  was
    approaching the eligibility for registration as a British citizen.   It
    was submitted that in stating only that it was not compelling or  there
    were no compassionate circumstances is not a proportionality  balancing
    exercise.  It was submitted that compelling circumstances  refers  only
    to Section 117C deportation cases not 117B.

13. Mr Clarke in  response  submitted  that  there  was  no  error  of  law
    identified in the grounds of appeal.  He asserted that it was too  late
    to introduce the policy guidance. It was not clear that this  had  been
    put before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, it was not relied on  in  the
    grounds of appeal and that therefore that issue  should  not  be  taken
    into consideration.  With regard to the seven years and paragraph 55 he
    submitted that when considering the wording in the case of Azimi-Moayed
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge appears  to  be  paraphrasing  from  that
    decision and has simply made a slip by not referring to 'from  the  age
    of 4 years'.  With regard to the submissions that the judge had a  duty
    under Section 55 to enquire into the factors around the best  interests
    of the child of his own volition he submitted that it is not  the  role
    of the judge to act as an advocate and to conduct cross-examination  on
    issues that have not been addressed or brought to the judge's attention
    by the parties. The appellant was legally represented.   He  relied  on
    the case of MK (Section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT
    00223 (IAC) at head note 1 where it sets out that the onus rests on the
    appellant.  He submitted that the judge has directed himself  correctly
    and the judge cites the relevant case law.  The  judge  identified  the
    relevant case law and set out at paragraph 49 that the best interest of
    the third appellant are a primary consideration. The judge referred  to
    the guidance set out in Azimi Moayed, considered a number of factors in
    paragraphs 50-60 and clearly took all the evidence  into  consideration
    when arriving at a conclusion as to the best  interests  of  the  third
    appellant.  The judge clearly  considered  the  reasonableness  of  the
    third appellant returning to India.  He submitted that  the  judge  was
    correct to consider how the third  appellant's  parents  will  fare  in
    India because this will have a bearing on the  third  appellant's  best
    interests.  At paragraph 55 the judge was clearly aware and  took  into
    consideration the appellant's age.  He submitted that the judge  looked
    at the difficulties that the appellants had suggested they  would  face
    on return.  With regard to the appellants' reliance on paragraph 46  of
    MA (Pakistan) he submitted it is a fact sensitive analysis.  The  judge
    made that fact sensitive analysis and made a finding, in light  of  all
    the evidence and looking at the detail, that the best interests of  the
    third appellant would be to be with his parents.  The  judge  correctly
    followed the relevant case law.  He submitted that it is clear from  MA
    (Pakistan) that the test with regard  to  private  life  under  Section
    117B, EX.1 or 276ADE are all the same.

14. In reply Mr Tabori accepted that he could not say whether  or  not  the
    policy guidance had been put to the judge but his point was  that  this
    is part of the argument that relevant  considerations  were  not  taken
    into account.  With  regard  to  the  seven  years  issue  set  out  in
    paragraph 55 he submitted  that  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer
    accepted or suggested the judge had made a  slip  which  supported  his
    argument. The judge has not considered  the  factors  set  out  in  the
    witness statements of the appellants in paragraphs 8 to 11 and the case
    that was put with regard to the difficulties and the integration of the
    third appellant.  He submitted that  the  judge  is  required  to  make
    findings of fact and that there has been no  analysis  of  whether  the
    factors identified make it unreasonable for the appellant to leave  the
    United Kingdom.

15. I reserved my decision.  Both parties agreed that if I were to find  an
    error of law I could remake the decision on the papers  before  me  and
    the further evidence that had been filed with the Tribunal.

Discussion

16. The judge set out in paragraphs 30 to 43 the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof and applicable  law.  There  is  no  suggestion  that  the  judge
    incorrectly identified the burden or standard  of  proof  or  that  the
    judge applied any incorrect case law.

17. Dealing firstly with the submission (set out in the  skeleton  argument
    that  the  judge   simply   followed   the   previous   assessment   of
    proportionality made by Judge Ross and failed to take into account that
    4 years had passed since that decision was made.  The  judge  correctly
    set out:

         "44. The starting point for my decision  is  the  determination  of
             Immigration Judge Ross promulgated on 23 September 2011.  ...

18. The judge then set out some key findings.

         45.  The findings at paragraph 8 are as follows:

                  'I have given careful  consideration  to  the  appellants'
                  position which I accept is that the  first  appellant  has
                  been present in the UK since 2001 and the second appellant
                  since  2006.   However,  the  first  appellant  came  here
                  illegally.  He was not a refugee in  need  of  protection,
                  but clearly an economic migrant.  He relies  on  the  fact
                  that he has worked in the UK: however, I find that none of
                  that work can have been legal since he has never  had  any
                  status here.  The second appellant obviously obtained  her
                  family visit visa by giving inaccurate information,  since
                  she did not stay with her brother but came  to  stay  with
                  the first appellant.  Further, I found  that  she  had  no
                  intention to return to India at the end of the six  months
                  and therefore must have made a false declaration that  she
                  was a genuine family visitor.  The third appellant is only
                  4 years old.  Whilst I accept he may have  started  school
                  in the UK, there are schools in India which he could  join
                  immediately.'

         46.  The findings in paragraph 10 are as follows:

                  'In relation to Article 8(1), the appellants' family  life
                  is entirely between the appellants themselves.  There  are
                  no other family members in the UK from whom they would  be
                  separated if returned  to  India.   Family  life  for  the
                  appellants  will  continue  uninterrupted  in  India.   In
                  relation to the appellants' private lives, I  accept  that
                  over their years in the United Kingdom some  private  life
                  will have developed.'

         47.  The Immigration Judge went through the Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27
             questions and found that any interference with private life to
             be in accordance with the law and necessary.  The  Immigration
             Judge  went  on  to  consider  proportionality  and  the  best
             interests of the third appellant.  Taking into account all the
             facts, the Immigration Judge concluded that on balance  it  is
             proportionate for the appellants to be removed to India.   The
             appellants were appeal rights exhausted on  8  November  2011.
             The appellant states in  his  witness  statement  that  on  24
             December 2011 he made representations under paragraph 395C  of
             the Immigration Rules and these were refused  on  20  November
             2014 with a right of appeal.

         48.  No argument was  taken  before  me  with  the  proportionality
             assessment in the previous determination.  I was urged to find
             that  the  third  appellant  meets  the  requirements  of  the
             Immigration Rules and to take account of the fact  that  there
             are no family ties with India, the third appellant cannot read
             or write Punjabi, has never been to India, is in education  in
             the United Kingdom and in a little over a year will qualify to
             apply for naturalisation."

19. It was asserted that the First-tier Tribunal (at paragraph  70)  simply
    followed the proportionality outcome from the First-tier Tribunal.  For
    reasons, I give below, I do not consider that that is what  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did. However, even if that were  the  case,  if  no
    issue was taken with  the  proportionality  assessment  that  had  been
    undertaken by the previous judge then as that earlier decision  is  her
    starting point no issue can be taken that that it was an error  of  law
    to follow that proportionality assessment.

20. At paragraph 70 the judge set out:

         "70. I  find  as  did  the  previous  Immigration  Judge  that  any
             interference with the private life of these appellants will be
             in accordance with the law.  However, despite the findings set
             out above, for the sake of completeness and in case I am wrong
             in finding that Article 8, private life is not engaged because
             the second Razgar test is  not  met,  I  have  had  regard  to
             Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules and  Section  117B  of
             the 2002 Act."

21. It is clear from this paragraph that  the  judge  was  making  her  own
    finding that the interference with the private life of  the  appellants
    would  be  in  accordance  with  the  law.   This  does   not   concern
    proportionality. At this juncture the judge is  considering  the  third
    limb of the Razgar test which is whether or not the interference is  in
    accordance with the  law  not  whether  or  not  such  interference  is
    proportionate.

22. All three grounds of appeal overlap and Mr Tabori, in oral submissions,
    tended to merge all three grounds. I will  deal  with  the  second  and
    third grounds of appeal together as they overlap considerably.

The best interests of the third appellant.

23. Essentially the arguments are that the judge failed to treat  the  best
    interest of the  third  appellant  as  a  primary  consideration,  that
    children were not to be blamed for the errors of their parents and that
    the judge failed to take the best interests into account as  a  primary
    consideration when assessing proportionality under Article 8.

24. The judge correctly set out  that  the  best  interests  of  the  third
    appellant are a primary consideration (at  paragraph  49).   The  judge
    considered these as such and in line with Section 55 of  the  2009  Act
    and ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

25. It is clear that  the  judge  has  taken  into  consideration  all  the
    evidence provided.  The judge sets out at paragraphs 50 and 51:

         "50. The appellants have provided evidence that the third appellant
             was born in the United Kingdom on  25  January  2007  and  has
             Indian  nationality.   There  is  a  letter  from  the   third
             appellant stating that he has never been to India and does not
             know anyone there.  He loves School and does not want to  lose
             his friends there.  There are copies  of  his  school  reports
             from reception to year 3 (2015) and his own  reflections.   It
             can be seen from his reports that he is generally making  good
             progress and attaining the expected  levels  for  his  age  or
             above.   There  are  certificates  showing  that   the   third
             appellant completed courses of instruction  in  key  areas  of
             football.

         51.  Using the guidance set out in the case law including  E-A  and
             Azimi-Moayed I find that it is in the best  interests  of  the
             third appellant to live with and be brought up by his parents.
              Whilst it is generally in the interests of children  to  have
             both stability, (which  these  appellants  have  not  provided
             evidence of in the United Kingdom) and  continuity  of  social
             and education provision, which the third appellant has had  to
             date in the United Kingdom, it is generally in  the  interests
             of children to have the benefit of growing up in the  cultural
             norms of the society to which they belong, which in the  third
             appellant's case is India."


26. Whilst the judge has not set out every individual piece of evidence  he
    has given a flavour of the third  appellant's  own  expression  of  his
    private life with his friends, his attendance at school and his  social
    activities. The judge has noted the third appellant's wish to remain in
    the UK with his friends. The conclusion reached by the judge, that  the
    third appellant's best  interests  lie  in  being  brought  up  by  his
    parents, is clearly the only conclusion that the judge has come  to  at
    this stage. This is hardly a surprising conclusion as this is  a  young
    child (aged 8 at the date of the hearing).   Although  a  child's  best
    interests are a primary consideration, they are not a 'trump card'.  In
    ZH (Tanzania) the court held:


             26 "This did not mean (as it would do in other contexts)  that
             identifying their best interests would lead  inexorably  to  a
             decision in conformity with those interests. Provided that the
             Tribunal did not treat any other consideration  as  inherently
             more significant than the best interests of the  children,  it
             could conclude that the strength of the  other  considerations
             outweighed them..."

27. A judge must consider a child's best interests  in  light  of  all  the
    circumstances. The  judge  in  this  case  proceeded  to  consider  the
    question of  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the  third
    appellant to leave the UK to accompany the parents to  the  country  of
    origin.  There is no error of law in that approach.

28. Mr Tabori argued forcefully that the judge erred  in  paragraph  55  by
    saying that over a period of seven years a child would  be  focused  on
    its parents. This failed to reflect the fact that a child will  acquire
    a private life over a period of time - a child increasingly  ceases  to
    be focused on its parents.  At paragraph 55 the judge set out:

         55.  At the age of 8 (almost 9) at  the  date  of  the  hearing  no
             reason has been shown why it  should  not  benefit  the  third
             appellant to acquire the ability to read and write in  Punjabi
             and add these skills to the ability that he has to speak, read
             and write English.  He has spent the first years of  his  life
             in the United Kingdom, the first seven years being  likely  to
             be less significant than the later years  because  very  young
             children are focused on their parents rather than their  peers
             and are adaptable.

29. This paragraph must be considered in context. The judge was considering
    whether or not it would be reasonable for the third appellant to  leave
    the UK. The judge took into account that the third appellant was nearly
    9 years of age. In Azimi Moayed the Upper Tribunal considered:

         iv)  Apart from the terms of  published  policies  and  rules,  the
         Tribunal notes that seven years from age four is likely to be  more
         significant to a child than the first seven years  of  life.   Very
         young children are focussed on  their  parents  rather  than  their
         peers and are adaptable.

30. The judge in this case has considered the guidance - there  is  nothing
    incorrect in stating that the first seven years is likely  to  be  less
    significant than later years or that very young children are focused on
    their parents rather than their peers. This accords with what was noted
    in Azimi Moayed. There is nothing to suggest that the judge  considered
    that it was only after the first seven years that a child  would  start
    to focus on peers or that the judge failed to  consider  that  a  child
    will begin to acquire a private life during this period.

31. The judge commenced his  proportionality  exercise  from  paragraph  72
    onwards setting out:

         "72. It is common ground  that  none  of  these  appellants  has  a
             criminal record or has engaged in any activities or  developed
             any associations that are not conducive to  the  public  good.
             It is accepted that the suitability test  in  the  Immigration
             Rules is met.

         73.  The length of residence and the  circumstances  in  which  the
             appellants came to the United Kingdom have been accepted.  The
             appellant has been reporting regularly since July  2012.   The
             appellant has not claimed that he should benefit  from  having
             remained in the United Kingdom for reasons beyond his control.
              The fact that the third appellant is a  little  over  a  year
             away from having remained in the United Kingdom for ten  years
             has been relied upon.  None of these factors are compelling or
             compassionate so that I find  that  there  are  no  additional
             factors not covered by the  Immigration  Rules  or  compelling
             circumstances   not   sufficiently   recognised   under    the
             Immigration Rules.  The perceived desirability of education in
             England for the third appellant does not itself  outweigh  the
             public interest considerations set out in Section 117B of  the
             2002 Act (as amended) (see EV (Philippines))."

32. I do not accept the submission that the  judge  has  only  taken  these
    factors into consideration in  the  proportionality  exercise  and  has
    failed to consider the third appellant's best interests  as  a  primary
    consideration. As the judge set out at paragraph 71 he was  considering
    factors which were not fully covered by the Immigration Rules  -  those
    factors having been set out earlier in the decision when the judge  was
    considering  whether  the  appellants  met  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge's approach was correct.  At paragraph  74
    the judge weighed in the balance  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.  Then at paragraph 75 he
    set out that the public interest does not require the  removal  of  the
    appellants if it would not be reasonable to expect the third  appellant
    to leave the United Kingdom. The judge stated "As  set  out  above  and
    against the background of the findings set out above, and after careful
    consideration, I have found that it is reasonable to expect  the  child
    (third appellant) to leave the United Kingdom. There is no need for  me
    to re state the reasons for this finding" It is clear, therefore,  that
    the judge, in the proportionality  balancing  exercise,  took  all  the
    factors  in  paragraphs  50-60  and  63  (consideration  of  the  third
    appellant's best interests and reasonableness of expecting him to leave
    the UK) into consideration.

33. No  specific  paragraphs  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  were
    referred to by the appellant to support the assertion  that  the  judge
    has 'blamed' the third appellant for the errors of  his  parents.   The
    judge has set out the immigration history of  the  first  appellant  in
    paragraph 3. I cannot see any adverse reference to the first and second
    appellants' unlawful status when the judge was  considering  the  third
    appellant's best interests or when considering  the  reasonableness  of
    his leaving the UK. Any adverse factors arising from a parent's conduct
    cannot be taken into account when considering a child's best  interests
    but when considering the issue of reasonableness wider public  interest
    factors may be weighed in the balance. The judge  does  not  appear  to
    have  taken  the  adverse  immigration  history   into   account   when
    considering reasonableness under the immigration rules or under Article
    8 and applying section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. In  MA  (Pakistan)  the
    court of appeal considered the correct approach to determining the best
    interests of a child and whether it is reasonable to expect a child  to
    leave the UK. The court was considering section  117B(6)  of  the  2002
    Act. The test is essentially the same as under EX.1(b). The court  held
    that when considering the issue of reasonableness wider public interest
    factors may be weighed in the balance. In Kaur the Upper Tribunal  held
    that where the evaluation of  parental  immigration  contributes  to  a
    conclusion which will involve the family unit departing the UK does not
    amount to blaming the children (paragraph 28). Although the  first  and
    second appellants appalling immigration history could have been weighed
    adversely in the balance when considering  the  reasonableness  of  the
    third appellant leaving the UK, in fact the judge did not do so.

34. The judge then went on to state that it was:

         "Not strongly suggested that any of  the  factors  apart  from  the
         third appellant's  length  of  residence  countervail  against  the
         public interest and I have found that the claimed  difficulties  of
         return and lack of family in India have been exaggerated so that  I
         find that the public interest prevails."

35. There was no error of law consideration of the third  appellant's  best
    interests,  the  reasonableness  of  him  leaving  the  UK  or  in  the
    proportionality exercise undertaken by the judge.

The 'reasonableness' test

36. It is asserted that the judge misunderstood Section  EX.1  and  wrongly
    decided that it would be reasonable for the third  appellant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

37. Having reached the conclusion that the third appellant's best interests
    lay in being with his parents the judge proceeded to  consider  whether
    or not it would be reasonable to expect him to leave the UK. The  judge
    set out in paragraph 52:

         "52. It is settled law that the removal of the third appellant with
             his parents does not involve any separation  of  family  life.
             There is nothing independent to show that the third  appellant
             would have difficulty in adapting to life in India.  He speaks
             Punjabi and on return will have the assistance of his  parents
             both of whom were born, grew up, were  educated,  married  and
             established  themselves  in  India.   The  appellant   has   a
             grandmother and some other relatives in India and I  find  the
             claimed estrangement from all relatives in India to have  been
             exaggerated by the appellant for the purposes  of  the  claim.
             The evidence was not volunteered in a full and  frank  way  or
             consistently  with  the  evidence  provided  at  the  previous
             hearing.  As can be seen from the evidence,  the  attempts  by
             the appellants' representative to have  the  appellants  adopt
             their witness statements were  so  mired  in  difficulty  that
             little weight that can be attached  to  the  contents  of  the
             statements.

         53.  When considering the best interests of the third  appellant  I
             find the evidence that the first and  second  appellants  have
             established a strong private life in the United Kingdom to  be
             weak amounting to assertions by them, supported by two letters
             from  members  of  the  Sikh   community.    They   have   not
             demonstrated any English language attainment  as  evidence  of
             integration in the United Kingdom.

         54.  I have considered the ties with India.  There are no  language
             difficulties in India where the first  and  second  appellants
             have strong social and cultural ties and had long  periods  of
             residence.  The appellant has a skill as a skimming  plasterer
             and has been a farmer in India  so  he  should  be  employable
             there.  He has not made any attempt to  find  work  in  India.
             The second appellant is said to have worked in a household  or
             households in the United Kingdom and there is nothing to  show
             that this type of work is not available in India.   There  are
             family members in India and I find that the family  will  find
             it easy to re-integrate into society in India..

              ...

         56.  I find that the difficulties on return to India put forward by
             the  first  and  second  appellants  at   the   hearing   were
             exaggerated.  The testimonial letters  do  not  show  how  the
             family is being supported or confirm that it is  their  church
             that is providing the support claimed by the appellant in  his
             oral evidence.  The first appellant has  never  had  leave  to
             remain and  the  second  appellant  must  have  made  a  false
             declaration that she was a genuine family visitor so that they
             have never been in a position to give the third appellant  any
             sense of security in  the  UK  or  reasonable  expectation  of
             indefinite leave to remain.  Any attempt  to  pretend  to  the
             third appellant otherwise has  not  been  shown  to  be  well-
             founded and cannot bind the Tribunal.

         57.  It was held in Azimi-Moayed that short periods  of  residence,
             particularly ones without leave or the reasonable  expectation
             of leave, are unlikely to give rise to private life  deserving
             of  respect   in   the   absence   of   exceptional   factors.
             Exceptionality is not a test under Article  8  and  the  third
             appellant is not to be punished for the  shortcomings  of  his
             parents.  It was held in Azimi-Moayed that protection  of  the
             economic wellbeing of the society amply justified removal.

         58.  On removal to India the third appellant will be able to  enter
             the education system there albeit that this will be  a  little
             later than he would have  entered  if  the  first  and  second
             appellants had  returned  to  India  after  their  appeal  was
             dismissed on 23 September 2011 and they became  appeal  rights
             exhausted.  During the additional period in the United Kingdom
             the third appellant has progressed in the education system  in
             England and gained additional skills but there is  nothing  in
             the school reports or evidence  that  countervails  against  a
             finding that he is normally  adaptable  and  his  welfare  and
             wellbeing will  not  suffer  on  removal  to  India  with  his
             parents.

         59.  I note in the round the submission that  the  third  appellant
             was said to be eligible to naturalise when he is aged 10, that
             is in January 2017.

         60.  It was submitted for the appellants that  the  respondent  had
             not dealt fully or properly with the Section 55 issues but  by
             reference to SS (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 550 I note  that  in
             the vast majority  of  cases  the  Tribunal  will  expect  the
             relevant interests of the child to be drawn to  the  attention
             of the respondent/Tribunal.  The appellants have  submitted  a
             letter from the child  and  school  reports  and  it  was  not
             submitted to me that there  was  scope  for  the  Tribunal  to
             indulge in further enquiries."

38. The judge then considered  family  life  under  the  Immigration  Rules
    finding that the requirements of Appendix FM were not met.  With regard
    to EX.1 the judge at paragraph 63 found that:

             "I find, despite the length of time that he has spent  in  the
             United Kingdom, that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             third appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  It has not  been
             shown that his removal with his parents to India, his  country
             of nationality is not in his best interests  or  unreasonable,
             or, that his welfare or wellbeing will be  adversely  affected
             by his removal as part of a family unit with his  healthy  and
             capable parents."

39. It is clear that the judge had taken into consideration all the factors
    set out in the paragraphs I have  cited  above  when  arriving  at  the
    conclusion, in paragraph 63, that it would be reasonable to expect  the
    appellant to leave the United Kingdom.  This was  a  finding  that  was
    open to the judge.  The judge took into consideration all the  relevant
    factors  specifically  rejected  the  claimed  estrangement  from   all
    relatives in India finding it to have been exaggerated by the appellant
    for the purposes of the claim.

40. The judge then moved to consider private  life  under  the  Immigration
    Rules. It was accepted, in relation to the third  appellant,  that  the
    test is the same i.e. that it must be reasonable to expect the child to
    leave the United Kingdom.  Mr  Tabori  submitted  that  the  judge,  in
    paragraph 66, elided the position of all three appellants  rather  than
    considering the third  appellant's  private  life  and  on  that  basis
    whether it would be reasonable to expect the third appellant  to  leave
    the United Kingdom.  The judge's  findings  in  respect  of  the  third
    appellant's private life must be considered in  the  context  with  the
    findings under family life.  The  judge  had  set  out  in  detail  the
    factors that he had  taken  into  account  with  regard  to  the  third
    appellant's current life in the United Kingdom and  therefore  did  not
    need to set them out again when considering private  life.   The  judge
    considered whether or not the  first  and  second  appellants  met  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE and correctly took those factors  into
    consideration  as  they  would  have  a  bearing  potentially  on   the
    reasonableness of the expectation of the third  appellant  leaving  the
    United Kingdom.



41. I do not accept the submission that the judge, on  the  facts  of  this
    case, was under any duty to make any further enquiries  either  of  the
    child himself or to ask for  any  other  evidence  that  had  not  been
    submitted at the hearing. The appellants were legally  represented  and
    had submitted evidence form the third  appellant  with  regard  to  his
    wishes. The judge took that into account. As set out in  paragraph  60,
    the judge noted that the relevant interests  of  the  child  should  be
    drawn to the attention of the Tribunal and "it was not submitted to  me
    that there was scope for the Tribunal to indulge in further enquiries".

42. There was no error in the judge's assessment of the  reasonableness  of
    the third appellant being expected to leave the UK.

43. The decision of the First tier Tribunal did not  contain  any  material
    errors of law.



Notice of decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal. The decision of the Secretary of State stands.



Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 9 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw


