
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/50129/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th August 2014                             |On 22nd August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                          Mohamed Hassan Shihabdeen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Kirk of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant Mohamed Hassan Shihabdeen is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born
    2nd July 1975.   He  entered  the  United  Kingdom  initially  on  26th
    November 1999 with entry as a student.  His entry visa was subsequently
    extended to a date in 2007.

 2. The Appellant did not leave the UK but overstayed and in  October  2011
    made an application for  asylum.   That  application  was  subsequently
    withdrawn by him.  Various further applications  for  leave  to  remain
    were made on his behalf, but by 11th November 2013 the Respondent  made
    a decision to remove him from the United Kingdom.

 3. The Appellant appealed that decision, claiming that removal would be  a
    breach of his Article 8 ECHR family/private  life  rights.  His  appeal
    hearing came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross at Richmond  on  4th
    March 2014.

 4. At the outset of the hearing before FTTJ Ross application was  made  by
    the Appellant's representative, to adjourn the proceedings so that  the
    Appellant could  obtain  medico-legal  report.   The  purpose  of  that
    report, I understand, is to show that the Appellant had scarring on his
    body and that the presence of the scarring lent credence to  his  claim
    of being at risk on return to Sri Lanka.

 5. For the purposes of this determination it is sufficient to say at  this
    stage, that the FtT judge refused the adjournment; proceeded  with  the
    appeal and in a short determination dismissed the Appellant's Article 8
    claim.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on two grounds:

       . The determination of FTTJ Ross was unsafe because  he  had  refused
         the Appellant's application to  adjourn.   Despite  saying  at  the
         hearing, he would set out full reasons  for  his  refusal  of  that
         request, he failed to do so.

       . Following on from that the judge's proportionality assessment is an
         inadequate one because material evidence is missing as a result  of
         refusing the adjournment request.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused by  FtTJ  Simpson,  but  was
    granted on a renewed application before UTJ Goldstein.

 8. The relevant parts of the grant read as follows:

      i) The renewed grounds continue to  rely  upon  the  original  grounds
         submitted in support of the first  application  for  permission  to
         appeal.

     ii) It is apparent from the Record of Proceedings that  the  First-tier
         Judge recorded  without  more,  "application  for  adjournment"  as
         contended in the renewed grounds, no explanation for refusing  that
         request is recorded within the determination.

    iii) Whilst this would appear to have been an  appeal,  insofar  as  the
         judge was concerned, confined to Article 8 ECHR issues, the purpose
         behind the adjournment request relating to the Appellant's scarring
         clearly contemplated wider issues.

     iv) I am  therefore  persuaded  that  the  grounds  raise  an  arguable
         challenge  to  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision  to  refuse   the
         Appellant's  adjournment  request  and  as  to   whether   in   the
         circumstances it deprived the Appellant of  the  opportunity  of  a
         fair hearing.

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide whether the determination  of
    FTTJ Ross discloses an error of law such that the decision requires  to
    be set aside and remade.

Hearing Before Me

 9. Mr Kirk on behalf of the Appellant  expanded  on  the  grounds  seeking
    permission.  He submitted that the determination of the  FTT  discloses
    two material errors:

      . Firstly the judge undertook to give full reasons for  refusing  the
        adjournment but none are mentioned.

      .  Secondly  the  judge  acted  unfairly  in  that  his   Article   8
        consideration fails to properly  analyse  the  evidence  which  was
        before him.  The failure to  grant  the  adjournment  deprived  the
        Appellant from obtaining medical evidence which would show that  he
        suffers from significant mental health problems.  The FTTJ  at  the
        hearing have said that all  matters  would  be  factored  into  the
        proportionality exercise but these are matters which were  referred
        to in the hearing and feature nowhere in the judge's determination.

10. Mr Deller, who had been set to defend the determination, agreed that at
    first blush the determination  although  terse  could  be  said  to  be
    adequate.  However he accepted, fairly, that the  submissions  made  on
    behalf  of  the  Appellant  had  somewhat  widened  the  scope  of  the
    objections to the judge's determination.  He submitted that if  it  was
    correct that reference was made to the Appellant's mental health issues
    during the course of the hearing, then  nowhere  in  the  determination
    could it be said that the  judge  had  taken  this  into  account,   in
    considering  whether  to   an  adjourn  nor  in   the   proportionality
    assessment.

11. He accepted that  such  an  omission  would  render  the  determination
    defective and amount to legal error.  Stepping back,  whilst  he  would
    have defended the judge's omission in not setting  down  fully  why  he
    refused the adjournment, if it was correct  that  the  application  for
    adjournment contained material that was not even  referred  to  in  the
    body of the determination, then that  would  be  wrong  and  that  must
    amount to legal error.

Consideration

12. I agree with the representations made on behalf of the Appellant.   The
    determination of FtTJ Ross is flawed in that there is no record  in  it
    of the reasons why the judge refused the application  for  adjournment,
    nor it seems, has the judge fully evaluated the evidence placed  before
    him.  Cumulatively those matters amount to legal error  such  that  the
    decision is rendered unsafe and must be set aside.

13. Both representatives were of the view that nothing could  be  preserved
    from FtTJ Ross's determination.  Both representatives agreed  that  the
    appropriate course in this matter, is to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a full rehearing before a judge other than FtTJ Ross.



14. Further it is directed  that  the  Appellant  obtain  the  medico-legal
    report sought and  that  this  report  be  available  for  the  renewed
    hearing.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is hereby set aside  for  legal
error.  The matter is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
rehearing before a Judge other than FtTJ Ross.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
