
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/50139/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 7 August 2014                         |On 8 August 2014          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                          Mr JAN RUDOLF DULLA URSUA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Watson, McKenzie friend
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  Designated
           First-tier Tribunal Judge Garrett on 13 June  2014  against  the
           determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Munro  who   had
           dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a determination  promulgated
           on 8 May 2014.


      2.    The Appellant is a national  of  the  Philippines,  born  on  11
           January 1985.  He had sought  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom on the basis of his relationship with his  male  partner
           and his fear of returning to the Philippines.   The  Appellant's
           orientation was not in dispute.   Judge  Monro  found  that  the
           Appellant had failed to show that he  met  the  requirements  of
           Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules: the relationship on  which
           the application had been founded had ended in March  2013.   The
           judge  further  found,  following  examination  of  the  country
           background and objective evidence, that such  discrimination  as
           existed in the Philippines towards gay men  did  not  reach  the
           level of persecution: see [19] of the determination.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted it was considered that  it  was
           arguable that the judge had not applied HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31
           correctly,   nor   considered    exceptional    or    compelling
           circumstances despite quoting Gulshan (Article 8 - new  rules  -
           correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).


      4.    The Respondent filed notice under rule 24 opposing  the  appeal.
           Standard directions were made by the tribunal,  indicating  that
           the appeal would be reheard immediately if a material  error  of
           law were found.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Watson (the Appellant's McKenzie friend) had filed a skeleton
           argument, on which the Appellant relied.  It was submitted  that
           the judge had not applied HJ (Iran) (above) correctly by failing
           to take account of the restrictions the Appellant would face  in
           his private and family life if returned.   The  judge  had  paid
           insufficient attention to the country information.


      6.    The tribunal did not need to call on Mr Avery.


      7.    The tribunal indicated that it found no material  error  of  law
           and reserved its determination which now follows.










      No material error of law finding


      8.    The grant of permission to appeal by the First-tier Tribunal was
           in the tribunal's view very generous indeed and has  regrettably
           raised the Appellant's hopes  unnecessarily.   As  the  tribunal
           explained at the hearing, as the Appellant  was  ineligible  for
           leave to remain under the Immigration Rules, the only basis  for
           remaining in the United Kingdom was a  viable  protection  claim
           (i.e., asylum, humanitarian protection or Article 3 ECHR) or  an
           Article 8 ECHR claim.  The Appellant  had  not  even  claimed  a
           United Kingdom based family life.  His private life was based on
           less than 6 years' residence on a  temporary  basis,  which  had
           formally ended in 2012 and only been extended by  the  decision-
           making  and  appeals  process.   The  judge  had  examined   the
           objective evidence which showed discrimination not  persecution.
           It is impossible to see how the judge  could  have  reached  any
           conclusion other than that she set out in her full  and  careful
           determination.


      9.    The Appellant's grounds of onwards appeal while  doubtless  well
           intended were misconceived and fallacious.   They  are  no  more
           than an expression of  disagreement  with  a  properly  reasoned
           determination.   The  experienced  judge  proceeded  exactly  in
           accordance with HJ (Iran) (above), the  headnote  to  which  she
           helpfully cited at [16] of her determination.  As already noted,
           it was accepted by the Secretary of State that the Appellant was
           gay and would be treated as gay.  The judge therefore  correctly
           moved to the next stage, the consideration of how the  Appellant
           would be treated in  his  country  of  nationality.   The  judge
           examined the evidence produced, and concluded, as she was  bound
           to do, that there was a real risk  of  discrimination  but  such
           discrimination  fell  short  of  persecution.   That  was   self
           evidently the case: the  latest  material  which  the  Appellant
           brought to the tribunal in the event of  a  full  rehearing  was
           variously headed "Philippines is getting Better  for  Gays,  But
           Discrimination Persists:  UN  Study"  and  "Filipino  gays  more
           concerned  about  discrimination".   The  situation  is  one  of
           discrimination, but as the judge also  found,  correctly,  there
           are various NGOs actively working for improved conditions.   The
           judge's  finding  that  the  Appellant  might  suffer   strained
           relations with his family but  would  not  suffer  serious  harm
           disposed of the protection claim.


      10.   Those correct findings were applicable to the judge's Article  8
           ECHR analysis, set out at [20] to  [22]  of  the  determination.
           There  were  self  evidently  no  compelling  circumstances  and
           nothing unduly harsh in requiring the Appellant who had come  to
           the United Kingdom to study to return home as he  had  indicated
           he would do when he applied for leave to enter.


      11.   The tribunal finds that there was no material error  of  law  in
           the determination and there is no basis for interfering with the
           judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








