

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                Appeal Number: IA/50624/2014
                                                               IA/50510/2014
                                                               IA/50511/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29 January 2016                       |On 14 April 2016                  |


                                   Before

                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant

                                   and

                          MISS MAUREEN ADJIN-TETTEY

                                      J

                                      I

                                                                  Respondent
For the Appellant:         Mr S Staunton, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    N Klear of Counsel instructed by Ansah, Solicitors.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This appeal has been brought by the Secretary of State (referred to  as
  the appellant in this determination) against the decision  of  the  First
  Tier Tribunal Judge Henderson who following a hearing of  the  appeal  at
  Taylor House on 2 July 2015  allowed  the  appeals  of  the  respondents,
  nationals of Ghana against the appellant's decision of  1  December  2014
  refusing them leave to remain on human rights ground and requiring  their
  removal under Section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2.    It is worthy of note that the Secretary of State was  not  represented
  before the First Tier Tribunal. The same Counsel who appeared  before  me
  represented the respondents before Judge Henderson. Judge Henderson heard
  oral evidence from the respondent and two  witnesses  who  supported  the
  appeals. Judge Henderson said in Paragraph 23 of his  determination  that
  he "found the  first  appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness  generally,
  although I did find some parts of her evidence to lack plausibility.

3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge V P  McDade,  a  Judge  of  the
  First Tier Tribunal.

  4. In his decision dated 19 November 2015 Judge McDade stated "The grounds
     of application for permission to appeal asserts that the  judge  failed
     to take account of the  fact  that  the  Appellant  had  conceded  that
     paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules could not  be  satisfied  and
     accepted that there  were  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  main
     Appellant returning to Ghana,

  5. Secondly it is asserted that the Judge failed to have proper regard  to
     Section 117B of the Nationality Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  by
     failing to take account of all the relevant factors,  for  example  the
     little weight that should be given to an Appellant who has been in  the
     United Kingdom illegally for a  considerable  period  of  time.  It  is
     arguable that the judge fell into error in  respect  of  these  points.
     There is an arguable error of law."

  6. On behalf of the respondents  a  response  under  Rule  24  was  filed,
     contending for reasons advanced that the grounds  for  permission  were
     misconceived.

  7. At the hearing before me I raised with Mr Staunton whether it  was  his
     view that the decision purporting  to  grant  permission  was  a  valid
     decision as the Judge granting  permission  had  failed  to  apply  the
     correct legal criteria for grant of permission ie that in his view  the
     grounds raised an arguable error of  law  which  was  material  to  the
     decision. Arguable error of law in  itself  was  not  enough  to  grant
     permission. Mr Staunton said that he wished to make no  submissions  on
     this point. He asked  me  to  look  at  paragraphs  9  and  29  of  the
     determination and argued that as the Judge had clearly found  that  the
     respondents did not meet  the  Rules,  he  should  have  dismissed  the
     appeals. By allowing the appeals despite his clear findings  the  Judge
     had made a material error in law.

  8. Mr Klear drew my attention to his Rule 24 response and  said  that  the
     Secretary of State having failed to appear before the  First  Tier  was
     now attempting to argue her decision to refuse. He described the appeal
     to the Upper Tribunal as an "opportunistic appeal". He  contended  that
     Judge Henderson had made the correct decision on evidence presented and
     had  made  the  decision  which  accords  with  well  settled  relevant
     jurisprudence. He relied on the Court of Appeal  in  Singh  and  Khalid
     [2015] EWCA Civ 74 (12 February 2015). The decision in  that  case  had
     given guidance suggesting the proper way of applying  Article  8  to  a
     case which did not meet the requirements under the  Immigration  Rules.
     He asked that the appeal be dismissed drawing my  particular  attention
     to paragraphs 37 and 38 of the determination of Judge Henderson.

  9. Mr Staunton made no further submissions. I reserved my decision which I
     now give with reasons.

 10. I find no merit in this appeal  brought  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
     Indeed, I find it most surprising that permission to appeal was granted
     on the grounds which came no where near identifying a material error of
     law in the decision of Judge Henderson. The  determination  is  crystal
     clear in the approach the Judge took in appraisal  of  evidence  before
     him and on the law that the Judge applied. The fact that the respondent
     children, all born and brought up here in  the  UK  did  not  meet  the
     requirements under the Immigration Rules for leave to  remain  did  not
     mean, as Judge Henderson correctly concluded that  their  rights  under
     Article 8 were engaged and in the balancing exercise that  was  carried
     out, weighing all the factors that went  against  them  as  opposed  to
     those that were in their favour, the Judge acted properly in concluding
     for very good reasons that "the removal of the respondents from the  UK
     would not be a proportionate means of maintaining effective immigration
     control." He took account of the public interest matters arising out of
     unlawful stay of the respondents  but  he  also  took  due  and  proper
     account of the best interest of the respondents as children.


 11. This appeal against the decision of Judge Henderson is dismissed.






 K Drabu CBE
 Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
 13 February 2016

