
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/50470/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On August 24, 2015                   |On August 26, 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS NISACHON TURNEY
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Ms Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Mr Wilford, Counsel, instructed by Premier Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant is a national of Thailand.  The background to  this  case
    is that the appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a spouse. On October 1, 2014 she applied to vary her leave
    but this application was refused by the respondent on November 26, 2014
    and at the same time a decision was taken  to  remove  her  by  way  of
    directions under section 47 of the immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006. The respondent refused the application because the  appellant
    had not met the required English language level.

 3. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The matter came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Bell  on  March
    27, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on April 11, 2015  the  Tribunal
    allowed her appeal.

 5. The respondent applied for permission  to  appeal  on  April  20,  2015
    submitting the Tribunal had erred. Permission to appeal was granted  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on June 10, 2015.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUE

 7. I raised with Ms Brocklesby-Weller  whether  the  requirements  of  the
    English test had to have been met when the  application  was  submitted
    and she confirmed that the relevant date would be the date of hearing.

 8. I referred Ms Brocklesby-Weller  to  paragraph  [14]  of  the  Tribunal
    decision of Akhtar (CEFR; UKBA Guidance  and  IELTS)  [2013]  UKUT  306
    (IAC) in which the Tribunal made clear that an  appellant  making  this
    type of application merely had to demonstrate the required pass rate on
    "speaking" and listening".

 9. Ms Brocklesby-Weller accepted the appellant's second test score  result
    showed she obtained level 4 in listening and level 5.5 in speaking. She
    accepted in those circumstances that the appellant met  the  Rules  and
    there was no merit in this appeal. In the circumstances I  found  there
    was no error in law and dismissed the appeal.

    COSTS ISSUE

10.  Mr  Wilford  applied  for  costs  arguing  the  respondent  had  acted
    unreasonably  in  appealing  as  demonstrated   by   the   respondent's
    acceptance today that there was no merit to the appeal.

11. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted the grounds of appeal were based on  the
    Tribunal's decision. The Tribunal had allowed the appeal on  the  basis
    the overall band score met the required level  and  this  approach  was
    incorrect. There was also an issue over the actual level being  applied
    by the Tribunal because at paragraph [19] of its decision the  Tribunal
    referred to level 3.5 whereas the case of Akhtar made clear that  IELTS
    scores had to reach level 4.

12. Permission to appeal had been granted on the  basis  the  Tribunal  had
    approached the appeal incorrectly. Whilst I have found no merit to this
    appeal I am  satisfied  that  based  on  the  Tribunal's  approach  the
    respondent did not act unreasonably in appealing. Permission  had  been
    granted as Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne felt the point  was
    arguable.

13. I therefore make no costs order against the respondent.  I  do  however
    uphold the original fee award made in this appeal.

    DECISION

14. There was no material  error.   I  uphold  the  original  decision  and
    dismiss the appeal


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I uphold the original fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
