
[pic]
IAC-fH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50574/2014
                                                               IA/50575/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 28 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Santha Natarajan
                              Balaji Natarajan
                         (anonymity orders not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Briddock of Counsel instructed by Bar Pro Bono
Unit


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   These are linked appeals against the decisions of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Whalan promulgated on 23 July 2015, brought with  the  permission
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Frankish granted on 5 November 2015.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and Mrs Natarajan and Mr Natarajan are  the  respondents,
    for the sake  of  consistency  with  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to Mrs Natarajan and Mr  Natarajan  as
    the Appellants and the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  as
    the Respondent.

3.   Both Appellants are citizens of India.  The First  Appellant  was  born
    on 15 March 1946 and is the mother of the  Second  Appellant,  who  was
    born on  19  June  1972.   The  Second  Appellant  is  married  to  Mrs
    Deivanayaguy Periassamy ('the sponsor'), a French national  born  on  7
    December 1971.  Both the Appellants entered the United Kingdom  on  the
    basis of permits granted to them as family members of an EEA  national.
    The Second Appellant entered in November 2003: his mother later  joined
    him in the United Kingdom where she has lived with the Second Appellant
    and his wife since October 2004.

4.   As noted, both Appellants have previously had the benefit of  residence
    permits under the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.  In September 2014 they both applied for permanent  residence  on
    the basis of having completed  five  years'  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom under the Regulations.  Their  applications  were  refused  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  dated  3
    December 2014, and Notices of Immigration Decisions were issued on  the
    same date.

5.   The Appellants appealed to the IAC.  Their appeals were allowed by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge for reasons set out in his decision.

6.   The Secretary of State now seeks to challenge the  conclusions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

Consideration

7.   The key issue before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was whether  or  not
    the sponsor was a qualified person within the meaning of  regulation  6
    of the 2006 Regulations.

8.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  heard  evidence  from  each  of  the
    Appellants  and  also  from  the  sponsor.  The  Judge  summarised  the
    evidential materials, the oral testimonies, and issues  before  him  in
    his decision. Then, from paragraph 25, he  set  out  his  findings  and
    reasons.  In  this  regard  the  Judge  identified  the  key  issue  at
    paragraph 27, and further reduced that issue to  its  core  element  at
    paragraph 28.  The determinative reasoning and findings  of  the  Judge
    are set out at paragraph 28, which is in these terms:

         "The Appellants' submissions are set out in  a  detailed  and  very
         helpful  skeleton  argument  filed  by  Ms  Jaquiss  [who  appeared
         instructed  by  the  Bar  Pro  Bono  Unit  before  the   First-tier
         Tribunal].  My findings of fact are that Mrs  Balaji  has  been  'a
         worker' since March 2012, a period  of  just  over  3  years.   The
         issue, therefore, is whether she was a jobseeker (6(1)(a)) for  two
         years or  so  before  that  time.   It  is  not  necessary  for  an
         individual to claim  Job  Seeker's  Allowance  (or  the  equivalent
         benefit) in order to be classified as a jobseeker: TG v SS for Work
         and Pensions [2015] UKUT 0050 (AAC).  It is stated often that after
         6 months a jobseeker loses that status but in AG and others (EEA  -
         jobseeker - self-sufficient person - proof)  Germany  [2007]  UKAIT
         00075,  the  Tribunal  concluded  that  'there  is  no   sufficient
         timeframe'.  This status can endure for a 'reasonable  period'  and
         what is  reasonable  will  depend  'ultimately  on  the  particular
         circumstances of  the  person  concerned'.   I  have  accepted  the
         evidence of Mrs Balaji, corroborated by the Second  Appellant,  her
         husband, that she was actively looking for work over  this  period,
         but that she was unsuccessful.  She has produced (at pp 70 and  71)
         letters of refusal dated 14th December 2009  from  Rana  Mobiles  &
         Games and 20th August 2010 from  Strategex  Accounts  &  Management
         Consults, showing that she was engaged in  an  active  job  search.
         The Appellants bear the burden  of  proof  in  this  case  and  the
         validity  of  this  documentation  was  not   challenged   by   the
         Respondent.  The Strategex letter is  significant  particularly  as
         this has been Mrs Balaji's employer  since  March  2015.   Clearly,
         therefore, Mrs Balaji has exhibited  an  active  interest  in  this
         company for many years."

9.   The Judge went on in the following paragraph to conclude  that  on  the
    balance of probabilities  the  Appellants  had  demonstrated  that  the
    sponsor was a 'qualified person' under regulation 6 for  at  least  the
    last five years prior to both the date of the applications in September
    2014 and the date of hearing in June 2015.  The appeals were allowed on
    that basis, the Judge concluding that both Appellants were entitled  to
    permanent residence cards.

10.  The Respondent contends that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  erred  in
    respect of the application of regulation 6(6) of the EEA Regulations.

11.  Regulation 6(4) provides:

         "For the purpose of paragraph (1)(a), a 'jobseeker' is a person who
         satisfies conditions A and B and where relevant C."

    Ms Fijiwala  acknowledged  that  condition  C  was  not  relevant,  and
    conceded that condition A  was  made  out.   What  was  in  issue,  she
    contended, was condition B.  Condition B is defined in Regulation  6(6)
    in the following terms:

         "Condition B is that the person can provide  evidence  that  he  is
         seeking employment and has a genuine chance of being engaged."

    In this context the focus necessarily was on the period of  time  prior
    to the sponsor resuming employment in March  2012,  and  in  particular
    that she would need to demonstrate a period of being a  jobseeker  from
    July 2010.

12.  The Secretary of State argues: firstly,  that  there  was  no  adequate
    evidential basis for the Judge to conclude that the sponsor was  indeed
    seeking a job; and secondly, that the Judge had not  engaged  with  the
    second limb of Regulation 6(6), that of  "a  genuine  chance  of  being
    engaged".

13.  In respect of the first of these submissions  the  Secretary  of  State
    places particular emphasis on the fact  that  only  two  job  rejection
    letters had been  produced  -  it  was  argued  that  this  was  not  a
    sufficiently  strong  evidential  basis  to  support  a  conclusion  of
    actively seeking employment throughout the relevant period.

14.  It is to be noted, however, that the conclusion of the  Judge  was  not
    based solely on the existence of the two rejection letters.  The  Judge
    says in terms that he accepted the evidence of the sponsor corroborated
    by the evidence  of  the  Second  Appellant:  necessarily  that  was  a
    reference to the testimonies of the witnesses  both  by  way  of  their
    witness statements - which refer to the fact of seeking employment  (in
    the case of  the  Second  Appellant  at  paragraph  7  of  his  witness
    statement, and in the case of the sponsor at paragraph 8 of her witness
    statement) - and their oral evidence (see in particular  paragraphs  11
    and 19 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge).

15.  As Mr Briddock points out, there was no Presenting Officer  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and so there was no express challenge to  the  oral
    testimony and the written testimony of the  witnesses.   It  is  to  be
    noted that the Judge found all  of  the  witnesses  before  him  to  be
    credible, and in those circumstances in my judgment it was clearly open
    to the Judge to conclude that the two rejection letters were part of  a
    body of evidence that provided an adequate foundation for  the  finding
    that the sponsor had been actively seeking work throughout this  period
    - and in that regard it is  safe  to  say  that  that  period  must  be
    considered to have commenced at the latest by 14 December  2009,  which
    is the date of the first of those two letters.

16.  In my judgment the finding of the Judge in this  regard  was  based  on
    the totality of the evidence before, was supported by that unchallenged
    evidence, and was adequately reasoned in the decision. I find no  error
    of law in this regard and reject this aspect of the  challenge  of  the
    Respondent.

17.  It is to be acknowledged that  the  issue  in  respect  of  "a  genuine
    chance of  being  engaged"  is  less  clear-cut.   There  is  no  overt
    reference to this second limb of regulation 6(6) in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

18.  Mr Briddock highlights that it was nonetheless clearly an issue  before
    the Judge and clearly  addressed  in  the  course  of  the  Appellant's
    submissions.  In this regard in particular my attention is directed  to
    the Skeleton Argument that was before the First-tier Tribunal,  settled
    by Ms Jaquiss, and in particular paragraph 31, which is in these terms:

         "Nevertheless, Mrs Balaji  did  have  a  genuine  chance  of  being
         engaged  during  the  relevant  time.   She  had  held   two   jobs
         previously.  It is testament to the fact she  was  both  a  genuine
         jobseeker and had a genuine chance of being  engaged  that  she  in
         fact did find work in the UK on three occasions."

19.  As is indicated in the citation already made above  from  paragraph  28
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the Judge clearly  had  in  mind  the
    contents of the Skeleton Argument.   He  says  in  terms  that  it  was
    "detailed and very helpful".

20.  I have invited  both  representatives  to  offer  any  assistance  from
    relevant case law as to what might be meant by  a  'genuine  chance  of
    being engaged'.  Neither was able to direct my  attention  to  anything
    specific that addressed that particular phrase.

21.  Be that as it may, it seems to me that 'a genuine  chance'  means  that
    the prospects of employment  must  be  more  than  merely  fanciful  or
    theoretical, but must in some way be reasonable or realistic.

22.  Further to this, some contextual assistance is, in my judgement  to  be
    gleaned from the case of AG and others cited by the Judge at  paragraph
    28 - albeit cited in respect of the 'reasonable  period'  of  time  for
    which somebody could retain the status of a 'jobseeker'.  The  complete
    passage in AG to which the Judge made brief reference is as follows:

         "We are aware  that  some  commentators  have  seen  the  court  in
         Antonissen as having settled  definitively  that  there  is  a  six
         months' time limit after which a jobseeker ceases to be  a  worker.
         We think that goes too far: there is no  specific  timeframe.   The
         court in Antonissen only settled that a member state is entitled to
         treat such a time limit as a  being  generally  a  reasonable  one.
         Furthermore, it is clear that the court considers that  what  is  a
         reasonable  period  will  depend  ultimately  on   the   particular
         circumstances of the person concerned."

23.  In my judgement the evaluation of a 'reasonable period  of  time'  will
    generally necessitate inclusion  of  consideration  of  the  particular
    circumstance of the concerned person's prospect of being engaged. There
    is an interrelationship between the concept of having a genuine  chance
    of finding employment and the reasonableness of the period of time  for
    which an individual is looking.

24.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge in this  case  clearly  considered  that,
    notwithstanding the length of time between the commencement of  looking
    for  employment  and  finding  employment,  the  sponsor  was  still  a
    jobseeker within the meaning of  the  Regulations.   Inherent  in  that
    finding is that the  Judge  did  not  consider  that  the  sponsor  had
    exceeded a reasonable period in her search for work. In  my  judgement,
    yet further inherent  in  the  conclusion  in  respect  of  'reasonable
    period' is the notion that the sponsor  continued  to  have  a  genuine
    chance of being engaged. If the circumstances were such that there  was
    no realistic prospect of finding employment, then the Judge would  have
    been driven to conclude that a reasonable period  had  been  surpassed.
    Conversely, the fact that the  Judge  considered  that  the  reasonable
    period extended throughout the period of searching is, in my  judgment,
    an indication that had the Judge expressly  turned  his  mind  to  this
    issue he would have been satisfied that the sponsor was indeed a person
    with a genuine chance of employment.

25.  I note that both representatives when invited to comment  on  how  this
    case might be dealt with in the event of a  finding  of  error  of  law
    suggested that I should invited me in effect make a fresh  decision  on
    the available materials.  Had that been necessary I would  very  likely
    have reached the conclusion without more that the sponsor was indeed  a
    person with  a  genuine  prospect  of  finding  employment  during  the
    relevant period, essentially for the reasons set out  in  the  Skeleton
    Argument before the First-tier Tribunal  (quoted  above).  I  recognise
    what has been said about the length of time that it took to  find  work
    and the explanation for the delay offered in  the  testimonies  of  the
    sponsor and the second Appellant to the effect that this was  a  period
    of recession: nonetheless, even in a period  of  recession  individuals
    can retain a genuine chance of being  engaged  in  employment,  and  on
    balance I am satisfied that that was the circumstance here.

26.  Be that as it may, I do not find in all of the  circumstances  that  it
    is necessary for me to remake this decision.  I am prepared to conclude
    that the absence of any overt reference to a genuine  chance  of  being
    engaged did not amount to a material error of law, because the  Judge's
    finding that the sponsor did not exceed a reasonable period in  seeking
    employment  encompassed  in  substance  a  finding  that  there  was  a
    realistic chance of finding such employment during that search.

Notice of Decision

27.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and stands.

28.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

29.  No anonymity orders are sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:       Date: 27 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

