
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50979/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2016                 |On 31 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              DIANA VARATHARAJA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Solomon, instructed by Jein Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent Miss Varatharaja, to whom I  shall  refer  hereafter  as
    the appellant, as she was before the First-tier Judge, appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's  decision  of  2  December
    2014 refusing her application for  a  residence  card  as  an  extended
    family member of an EEA national.  The judge allowed the appeal on  the
    basis that the appellant complied with the requirements  of  Regulation
    8(2) of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006.   The  Secretary  of
    State, to whom I shall refer hereafter as the respondent,  as  she  was
    before the judge, sought and was granted permission to  appeal  on  the
    basis that as she had not exercised her discretion in this  case  under
    Regulation 17(4) of the EEA Regulations, the appeal  should  have  been
    remitted to her for consideration  under  that  Regulation  instead  of
    allowing the appeal outright.

2.   In the interim, a panel of the Upper Tribunal consisting  of  the  Vice
    President and Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb had  decided  in  Sala  [2016]
    UKUT 411 (IAC) that a person who was refused a  residence  card  as  an
    extended family member under the Regulations has no right of appeal.

3.   Mr Solomon argued that the facts of Sala could  be  distinguished  from
    those in the instant case as this involved Regulation 8(2) rather  than
    involving a durable relationship under Regulation 8(5) as had been  the
    case in Sala.  He argued that the refusal did not go on to consider the
    discretion under Regulation 17(4).  In Sala, the case concerned whether
    or not the relationship was a durable one, and the Secretary  of  State
    had gone on to consider the exercise of her discretion and  refused  to
    do so.  Sala told of the situation where there had been an exercise  of
    discretion by the  Secretary  of  State  which  had  not  been  in  the
    appellant's favour.  It was a slightly different situation where  there
    was no exercise of discretion but the  matter  arose  under  Regulation
    8(2) only and the decision was in favour  of  the  appellant.   It  was
    argued that the judge had jurisdiction to deal with the matter  in  the
    circumstances.  It had to be read with this more nuanced approach.   It
    could be seen from paragraph 48 of Sala what the ambit of the  decision
    was.  Also, what was said at paragraph 84:

         "A decision, taken by the Secretary of State in the exercise of her
         discretion, not to  issue  an  EFM  with  a  residence  card  under
         Regulation 17(4) is not a decision under the EEA  Regulations  2006
         which 'concerns... a person's entitlement  to  be  issued  with...a
         residence card'"


    was not applicable to the instant case.   The  Tribunal's  jurisdiction
    was limited to the refusal in  respect  of  Regulation  8(2)  and  Sala
    therefore was to be distinguished.


4.   In her submissions Ms Brocklesby-Weller  argued  that  Sala  should  be
    adopted and there was no distinction between being an  extended  family
    member by the two different methods in Sala and in  the  instant  case.
    It was fundamental that there was a lack of entitlement to a  residence
    card.  There was no substantive right after the card had been issued as
    could be seen from paragraph 79 onwards.

5.   By way of reply Mr Solomon argued that if the Tribunal  were  with  him
    there was no consideration of a Regulation  17(4)  discretion,  but  no
    error by the judge as the appeal had not been  allowed  in  respect  of
    Regulation 17(4) but under Regulation 8(2) only.  The judge  had  found
    in favour of the appellant.  The issue of exercise  of  discretion  was
    outstanding before the Secretary of State.  It was clearly a case  that
    fell under Regulation 8(2) only in  this  case.   This  could  be  seen
    particularly from paragraphs 15 and 16 of the  judge's  decision.   The
    exercise of the discretion in the issuing of the card was a matter with
    the Secretary of State.  In the alternative the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and awaited an exercise of discretion.

6.   I reserved my decision.

7.   Despite the ingenious arguments of Mr Solomon, I am not persuaded  that
    any material distinction can be drawn for the purposes  of  this  issue
    between a decision under Regulation 8(2) of the EEA Regulations and one
    under Regulation 8(5).  It is clear from the first  paragraph  in  Sala
    that the appeal raises the issue of whether a person who is  refused  a
    residence card as an extended family member under the Regulations has a
    right of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal under Regulation 26 of those
    Regulations, and it is clear from what is said at paragraph 2  that  no
    right of appeal exists.  Nor do I consider that it makes any difference
    whether or not  the  respondent  has  exercised  her  discretion.   The
    decision was not limited to the particular facts of the case, but is  a
    general conclusion that there is no appeal right  in  the  case  of  an
    extended family member who is refused a residence card.  I  agree  with
    the decision and as a consequence the judge's decision is set aside and
    for it is substituted a decision that there  was  not  a  valid  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen                   31 October 2016

