
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50312/2014
     IA/50317/2014
     IA/50318/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 15 April 2016                         |On 28 April 2016                    |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                           Mrs Harvinder Kaur Sall
                              Mr Amrinder Singh
                                    [J K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr T Tabori, Counsel, instructed by Glen Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of India.  The first appellant was born  on
    8 April 1981, the second appellant  on  31  July  1985  and  the  third
    appellant is their daughter born on [ ] 2011.  They applied for further
    leave to remain as Tier  4  (General)  Students  and  dependents  on  6
    October 2014 which was refused by the respondent on 28  November  2014.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon in a determination dated 19 August 2015
    dismissed the appellants' appeal.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul,  who
    stated that it is arguable that the core issue as the appellant asserts
    is that her PGD course ended on 7 September 2009.  The judge appears to
    have concluded that was so but following the case of Islam [2013]  UKUT
    00608 and the respondent's guidance that was not the end of a period of
    study.  It was arguable that the judge misinterpreted "end date" within
    the guidance which postdates Islam.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge in his  decision  dated  19  August  2015
    made the following findings, which I summarise.  The findings start  at
    paragraph 14 where he  states  that  the  appellant  asserts  that  she
    undertook the PGD between 15 September 2008 and 7 September 2009  which
    amounts to eleven months and 22 days.  The appellant asserts  that  the
    total period of study would therefore be four years, eleven months  and
    27 days in total.  The judge said he therefore has to determine whether
    the appellant was studying the PGD.  The case record sheet in  relation
    to the application for leave dated 21 May  2008,  on  page  1  of  that
    document, states that the course start date is recorded as 27 May  2008
    but at page 4  that  the  PGD  started  on  15  September  2008.   This
    corresponds with the appellant's account with the letter provided  from
    the college and therefore it is accepted that the course  commenced  on
    15 September 2008 and not 27 May 2008.

4.   The judge found that the appellant had leave  between  27  August  2008
    and 30 November 2009 to  study  the  PGD  which  she  commenced  on  15
    September 2008 and "ceased" on 7  September  2009.   She  notified  the
    respondent of this by way of her application for further leave dated 18
    November 2009.

5.   The respondent relies on the case of Islam (Para 245ZX(ha) five  years'
    study) [2013] UKUT 00608 (IAC) in which a  student  had  leave  between
    September 2005 and 30 November 2009 for four academic years but in fact
    ceased studying his course after two  years,  spending  the  final  two
    years within the United Kingdom but not studying.  It was  accepted  by
    the Upper Tribunal that he had dropped out after two years but  however
    ruled that the full  four  years  would  count  towards  the  five-year
    period.  Home Office guidance issued on 6  November  2014  at  page  60
    states that:

         "To calculate how long a Tier 4 (General) applicant has studied  at
         degree level or above, you must base  your  calculation  on  course
         start date and end dates...  When calculating the period, you  must
         not take into account additional periods of  leave  granted  before
         and after course dates."

6.   The judge stated at paragraph 22  that  it  is  clear  that  "whichever
    approach I take the appeal must fail".  He stated that:

         "It is not in dispute that including the intended course  of  study
         the appellant would accrue a total of four years and five days plus
         whatever is calculated in relation to the PGD.  If I were to follow
         the case of Islam I would have to add the total period in which the
         appellant had leave to study the PGD",


    which is 27 August to 30 November 2009, which is slightly over  fifteen
    months.  By this calculation of the course  start  date  and  end  date
    equates to almost eighteen months which when added to  four  years  and
    five days' results in approximately five and a half years.


7.   The other way the judge calculated was at paragraph 23 where he  stated
    that using the course start date of 15 September  2008  as  a  starting
    point in which the appellant applied for further leave and 18  November
    2009 as the end date. He prefers this approach as it is consistent with
    both Islam and the respondent guidelines and that results in  a  period
    of little over fourteen months which when added to four years and  five
    days results in a total of over five years and two months.

8.   The judge noted that on the basis  of  any  calculation  the  appellant
    does not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

9.   The grounds of appeal state the following which I  summarise.   From  7
    September to 27 May 2011, the appellant undertook a diploma in business
    management which was below degree level.  From 6 June 2011  to  6  June
    2014 the appellant  undertook  a  degree  level  bachelor  of  business
    administration - entrepreneurial management and this  three  year,  one
    day is agreed to count towards the five years under the  Rules.   On  6
    October 2014 she applied for a one year and four-day  course  of  study
    which is at degree level and which would count towards her five years.

10.  The judge in his decision at paragraph 16 identified the  issue  as  to
    when the appellant was studying the PGD.  The judge held despite having
    found as a fact that she commenced the PGD on 15 September  and  ceased
    on 7 September 2009 that: "If I was to follow the guidance I  would  be
    required to base my calculations on the course start date and  the  end
    date, that is 15 September 2008 to  12  March  2010  which  equates  to
    almost eighteen months".

11.  The judge also held that his preferred approach was to use  the  course
    start date and the date that the appellant applied for  further  leave,
    18 November 2009, as the end date and that this approach was consistent
    with the approach favoured by the respondent to base  the  calculations
    under paragraph 245ZX(ha) on the period of leave and not actual  study,
    the approach favoured by the appellant applying the  guidance  ignoring
    the respondent's own  subsequent  issued  guidance  and  his  preferred
    approach involving a composite of both using the course start  date  of
    15 September 2008 as the starting point  and  the  date  on  which  the
    appellant applied for leave to remain as at the end date.

12.   The  judge  misunderstood  the  appellant's  submission  holding  that
    "whichever approach I take the  appeal  must  fail".   The  appellant's
    approach was based on the guidance.  However, under the  guidance  when
    calculating how long a Tier 4 (General) Student applicant  has  studied
    at degree level or above the caseworker must use the course  start  and
    end dates.  In the appellant's case her cessation  of  study  generated
    her particular end date.  If students were held  to  the  original  end
    date not only would that sort of double-counting errors  that  vitiated
    the judge's preferred approach but  a  student  who  left  a  four-year
    degree course a few weeks into their course  would  be  nonetheless  be
    held to have studied, it for four years.  The appellant did not  merely
    interrupt her course briefly, she ended her involvement with  it,  thus
    generating a course end date within the meaning of the guidance.   This
    is contrasted with the mere interruptions to study  considered  by  the
    guidance.

13.  In relation to interruptions to study the  guidance  states  that  "you
    must include the full course period in  the  calculation  which  should
    only be deducted where there are compelling and compassionate reasons".
     In summary, the approach set out  by  the  guidance  was  the  correct
    approach.  The judge misinterpreted and  misapplied  the  guidance  and
    misstated the appellant's case and thereby led himself  into  error  in
    finding that the appellant has exceeded the five-year cap and  did  not
    satisfy paragraph 245ZX(ha).  It is a narrow point of law but the error
    committed when determining it caused the judge to refuse the appeal.

14.  At the hearing I heard submissions from  both  parties  as  to  whether
    there is a material error of  law  in  the  determination.   Mr  Tabori
    stated that the PGD that the appellant completed  and  she  obtained  a
    diploma, in contradiction to what is said  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    which was the cessation of studies Mr Tabori argued that the  appellant
    succeeded in her PGD, got her diploma and that was the end of a  period
    of study and that is what should count.  The appellant  never  intended
    to finish her MSc.  It was always her intention to do the one year  PGD
    course.  12 March 2010 was the end date of the MSc.  The appellant  did
    not interrupt her course.  She ended it.   End  dates  of  courses  are
    always expected end dates and can never  be  absolute  end  dates.   He
    argued that paragraph 245 requires a factual assessment and not a legal
    fiction.  It is when the appellant actually studied and  not  when  the
    course was supposed to end and she completed her course earlier but the
    point being that she completed it and did not interrupt it.

15.  Mr Melvin in his  argument  said  that  the  appellant  applied  for  a
    diploma course before she applied for the MSc and it would appear  that
    the court assumed that the appellant left her course  early,  that  she
    changed her course.  He said that the judge had not made any  error  of
    law because according to the guidance the leave  granted  was  for  the
    full course until 12 March 2010.  It was open to the judge to say  that
    that was the end date and which took the appellant over  the  five-year
    ceiling.

16.  Mr Tabori in his reply stated that she was only studying  for  the  PGD
    and she did not abort her studies.  They naturally ended on 7 September
    2009.   To  say  that  she  was  going  to  study  for  an  MSc  is   a
    mischaracterisation.  The PGD was leading to an MSc as  stated  in  the
    letter from the Greenwich College.

Finding as to whether there is an Error of Law in the decision

17.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  by  any  calculation  the
    appellant would have remained studying in a degree course for over five
    years which is the ceiling under the Immigration  Rules.   This  is  an
    appeal and has a very narrow issue as to when was the end date  in  the
    application that the appellant made which was from  15  September  2008
    and states that it was due to finish on  12  March  2010.   It  is  the
    evidence of the appellant and it has been argued on her behalf that she
    finished her course on 7 September and went on to do a  diploma  course
    which is below degree level.

18.  In the case of Islam the appellant in that case stopped studying  after
    two years and continued to live in this country and did not  study  and
    it was held that he had dropped out after two years and that the degree
    course which was supposed to go for four years would count towards  the
    maximum five-year period of study allowed.  In the appellant's case  it
    has been argued that she did not drop out of studies but  she  finished
    her PGD course and then went on to a diploma  course  which  was  below
    degree level.  It is not clear why she did that but, be that as it may,
    it does not influence any outcome.  So if this is  to  be  accepted  it
    would mean that she would have studied for eleven months and 22 days if
    indeed she ceased her course or she finished her course by 7  September
    2009 and by that calculation  she  would  not  go  over  the  five-year
    ceiling.

19.  The guidance states the following:

         "The additional periods allowed under the course and end  date  for
         example two to four months does not count  towards  the  three-year
         period.  However, if the person's study is interrupted for  example
         because the sponsor's licence is revoked the period of  interrupted
         study still counts towards the three years except in compelling and
         compassionate circumstances."


20.  The appellant  does  not  rely  on  any  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances because she argues that she meets the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules because there was no  interruption  in  her  studies.
    She did not drop out.  She continued to study in this country.

21.   This  whole  appeal,  as  Mr  Tabori  argued,  depends  on  a  factual
    assessment.   The  guidance  further  states  that  "if  there  is   an
    interruption of study you must include the full  course  period".   The
    guidance postdates Islam and the guidance is clear  that  only  if  the
    course has been interrupted.  The  appellant  provided  a  PGD  diploma
    awarded on 23 July 2009 and therefore the fact that a diploma has  been
    awarded shows successful completion of a course.

22.  It would appear from the decision of the judge  that  he  assumed  that
    the appellant ceased studying, which is why he calculated the  timeline
    as he did.  This might explain the judge's calculation.  So  therefore,
    if the calculation is done the appellant studied  her  PGD  course  for
    eleven months and 22 days.  She then studied for three  years  and  one
    day, which still leaves her with  one  year  and  four  days  remaining
    before she hits the ceiling of five years.

23.  Therefore the upshot is that the judge made a material error of law  in
    misunderstanding  the  factual  matrix  of  the  case.  Therefore,  the
    appellant is still within the ceiling of five years and I set aside the
    decision and  I  remake  it  and  on  the  evidence  I  find  that  the
    calculation that I have set out applies to this case and the  appellant
    succeeds in her appeal.


Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date this 25th day of April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make a reduced  fee
award of any fee which has been paid or may be payable.




Signed                                  Date 25th day of April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

