
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/50957/2013

                                                           IA/50975/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 3 August 2015                         |             On 2 October 2015      |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                                SUFFIAN UMAR
                               sarwat sikandar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Haji, Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, who had  been  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  1  Highly  Skilled  (General)
    Migrant, sought  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   His  application  was
    refused.  His ensuring appeal was heard by Judge Del Fabbro sitting  at
    Taylor House on 11 August 2014.  Both parties were represented.   In  a
    decision of 28 August 2014 the appeal was allowed under the Immigration
    Rules.

2.   The Respondent sought permission to appeal.  As  subsequently  expanded
    by procedural directions, this was granted on 20 October 2014 by  Judge
    Cruthers in the following terms:

         "1.  By a determination promulgated on 9 September 2014, First-tier
             Tribunal Judge Del Fabbro allowed these appeals 'to the extent
             that the refusal on general grounds was wrong in law' (page  5
             of the determination).   The  judge  arrived  at  that  result
             because  the  respondent  had  not  considered   the   general
             attributes criteria for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 1
             Highly Skilled General Migrant but had instead relied just  on
             Part  9  of  the  immigration  rules,   HC395   (specifically,
             paragraph 322(1C)((iv)).  It was the judge's  assessment  that
             the respondent had not made out her case pursuant to  Part  9.
             (The second appellant is the dependent  spouse  of  the  first
             appellant - paragraph 1 of the determination).


         2.   The first contention in the grounds on  which  the  respondent
             seeks permission to appeal (paragraphs 2 to  7)  is  that  the
             first appellant had admitted an offence within the  24  months
             preceding his application and so  'fell  squarely  within  the
             provisions of paragraph 322(1C)(iv)'.  Secondly, at paragraphs
             8 to 13 of the grounds, the respondent argues  that  what  the
             judge referred to as the 'principle (sic) issue' (paragraph 10
             of the determination refers) could have been resolved  if  the
             judge had granted the  2-3  hour  adjournment  sought  by  the
             respondent's counsel at the hearing on 11 August 2014.


         3.   The grounds are arguable."

3.   The Appellant attended the error of law hearing, which  took  the  form
    of submissions.  I have taken these into  account,  together  with  the
    skeleton argument of the Respondent.  I reserved my decision.

Decision

4.   A print of PNC identification details states that on 8  June  2012  the
    Appellant received a reprimand/warning/caution for one offence  against
    the person, namely battery, under Section 39 of  the  Criminal  Justice
    Act 1988.

5.   On that basis, the decision of the Respondent was based  in  part  upon
    paragraph 322(1C)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  Entitled  "Grounds  on
    which leave to remain and variation of leave to enter or remain in  the
    United Kingdom are to be refused", this reads:
         "(1C)    where the person is seeking indefinite leave to remain  to
              enter or remain:


              ...


              (iv)     they have, within the 24 months prior to the date on
                  which the application is decided,  been  convicted  of  or
                  admitted an offence for which they have  received  a  non-
                  custodial sentence or other out of court disposal that  is
                  recorded on their criminal record."

6.   A document headed "Basic Disclosure - Criminal  conviction  certificate
    issued under Section 112 of the Police Act 1997" in Scotland,  relating
    to the Appellant, reads:

         "All basic disclosure certificates are issued under section 112  of
         the Police Act 1997.  A  certificate  either  contains  information
         about every conviction of an applicant or states that there  is  no
         such  conviction.   Conviction   takes   its   meaning   from   the
         Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974, but it does not  include  any
         spent conviction.  The Rehabilitation of Offenders  Act  1974  sets
         out rehabilitation  periods  after  which  convictions  may  become
         spent; different rehabilitation periods apply in England and  Wales
         and in Scotland.


         ...


         Convictions


         The applicant has no convictions for disclosure."


7.   Guidance on spent and unspent convictions under the 1974 Act, at  pages
    29 and 30 of the Appellant's bundle, state that cautions, warnings  and
    reprimands are spent as soon as they are issued, and  that  conditional
    cautions are spent as soon as the conditions end.

8.   The judge recognised that, by accepting a caution from the police,  the
    Appellant had admitted an offence.  He treated the caution as  an  "out
    of court disposal".  He discussed at paragraph 14  the  meaning  of  an
    offence being "recorded on their criminal record".  He found  that  the
    burden lay upon the Respondent to establish that a caution was recorded
    on the Appellant's criminal record, and that this burden had  not  been
    discharged.  He was correct to do  so.   The  caution  was  immediately
    spent, and thus did not require disclosure, and  the  basic  disclosure
    certificate  stated  that  the  applicant  had   no   convictions   for
    disclosure. Thus the caution was not in law recorded on the Appellant's
    criminal record.

9.   The second ground of application for permission to appeal was that  the
    judge had been wrong to decline the request by the  Respondent  for  an
    adjournment of an estimated two or three hours in  order  to  ascertain
    the nature of the caution and  whether  it  was  recorded.   The  judge
    declined this application, recording at paragraph 10 his reasons, which
    were essentially that the  Respondent  had  had  ample  opportunity  to
    obtain this evidence, which was in any event unlikely  to  advance  the
    issue.  This reasoning was properly open to the judge.  The decision to
    grant or not an application for an adjournment is a discretion,  to  be
    exercised on judicial principles.  The judge so exercised it,  and  did
    not, I find, err in law in so doing.

10.  The determination does not reflect any error of law, and  is  therefore
    upheld.   Since  it  remitted  the  matter  to   the   Respondent   for
    reconsideration, the application awaits a fresh decision.

Notice of Decision

11.  The original decision does  not  contain  any  error  of  law,  and  is
upheld.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.

Signed
    Dated: 01 October 2015



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

