

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50854/2014
                                                               IA/50807/2014
                                                               IA/50853/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11 May 2016                           |On 19 May 2016                    |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN



                                   Between


                              VENKATESHAM ALLE

                               SRINIVAS AKKALA

                               PADMA PENDYALA
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the First and Second Appellants:    Mr P. Richardson,
                       Counsel instructed by Morgan Mark Solicitors
For the Third Appellant:                No appearance
For the Respondent:                     Mr S. Whitwell, Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    On 17 April 2014 the first and second  appellants  ("the  appellants")
    made an application for  leave  to  remain  as  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrants.  They  stated  that  they   were   business   partners   ("an
    entrepreneurial team") and submitted a number of pieces of evidence  in
    support of the application.  The third appellant is the dependent  wife
    of the first appellant.

2.    The respondent interviewed the appellants prior to making a  decision.
    No copies of the  interview  records  appear  to  be  included  in  the
    respondent's bundles. The date of the interview  is  unclear  from  the
    evidence currently before the tribunal.

3.    The respondent refused the applications in decision letters  dated  05
    December 2014.  The  respondent  considered  the  factors  outlined  in
    paragraph 245DD(i) of the immigration rules.  The  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellants had demonstrated that they  were  genuine
    entrepreneurs. No points  were  awarded  with  reference  to  paragraph
    245DD(k) of the immigration rules.

4.    The appellants appealed  against  the  decision.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge R.J.N.B. Morris ("the judge") dismissed the appeal in a  decision
    promulgated on 29 September 2015. In summarising the applicable law the
    judge said:

           "8.  In immigration appeals, the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the
           applicants and the standard of proof required is the balance  of
           probabilities. I can consider evidence about any matter which  I
           consider to be  relevant  to  the  substance  of  the  Decision,
           including evidence which concerns a  matter  arising  after  the
           date of the Decision.  The  appropriate  standard  of  proof  is
           whether  there  are  "substantial  grounds  for  believing   the
           evidence"."

5.    When she went on to make her findings relating to the  genuine  nature
    of the application the judge stated:

           "15.  Despite  the  Respondent's  clear  indication  as  to  the
           matters of concern which undermined the Appellants' application,
           the Appellants have not adequately addressed these concerns  nor
           adduced satisfactory oral or documentary evidence to address the
           matters set out in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  The  greater
           part of the  defects  identified  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
           Letters relate to  matters  specifically  covered  by  paragraph
           245DD, and in particular, paragraphs 245DD(h) and (i).  However,
           there is scant reference to them (if at all) in  the  First  and
           Second Appellants' Witness Statements  and/or  in  the  Skeleton
           Argument. Whilst the Appellants' oral Representative addressed a
           number of these points in  his  examination  of  the  First  and
           Second Appellants,  to  a  large  extent,  their  oral  evidence
           further undermined their applications.  Since  the  Reasons  for
           Refusal letters  are  detailed  documents,  it  would  serve  no
           purpose to repeat here all the matters set out  in  the  Reasons
           for Refusal Letters. However, by way of example  only  of  those
           serious defects which have not been address and therefore  still
           seriously undermine the Appellants' applications,  I  noted  the
           following..."

      The judge went on to consider a number  of  points  outlined  in  the
    reasons for refusal letters and made findings  in  light  of  the  oral
    evidence given at the hearing.

6.    The first and  third  appellants  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    against the First-tier Tribunal decision on the ground that  the  judge
    erred in taking into account the appellants' oral evidence contrary  to
    the  restrictions  outlined  in  section  85A   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002") in force at the  time  as
    interpreted by the Upper Tribunal in Ahmed (PBS:  Admissible  Evidence)
    [2014] UKUT 365.

7.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes granted permission  to  appeal  in  a
    decision dated 22 March 2016. The judge  took  into  account  the  fact
    that, by that stage, the second appellant was unrepresented but granted
    permission to all three appellants based on the grounds lodged  by  the
    first and third appellants.

8.    The respondent's rule 24 response dated 31 March  2016  accepted  that
    the judge was not entitled to  consider  subsequent  evidence  but  any
    error was not material because she was correct  to  conclude  that  the
    respondent had identified a number of inconsistencies in the  evidence,
    which led her to doubt the genuine nature of the application.

9.    There was no appearance by or on behalf of  the  second  appellant  at
    the hearing on 11 May 2016. Given that first and second appellants  say
    that they are business partners, and previously shared the  same  legal
    representative, it seemed unlikely that he was unaware of the  hearing.
    No explanation was provided for his absence. In the circumstances I was
    satisfied that I could proceed to hear the appeal.

Decision and reasons

10.   The central issue to be determined  in  this  appeal  is  whether  the
    judge made a material error of law by taking into account oral evidence
    given by the appellants at the hearing as part  of  her  assessment  of
    paragraph 245DD(h) of the immigration rules i.e. the assessment of  the
    genuine nature of the application.

11.         Section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002
    ("NIAA 2002") as it applied at the  date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing:

                 "Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions
           1) This section sets out the  exceptions  mentioned  in  section
              85(5).
           2) Exception 1 is that in relation to an  appeal  under  section
              82(1) against an immigration decision of a kind specified  in
              section 82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal may  consider  only  the
              circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision.
           3) Exception 2 applies to an appeal under section 82(1) if -
              a) The appeal is against an immigration  decision  of  a  kind
                 specified in section 82(2)(a) or (d),
              b) The immigration decision concerned an application of a kind
                 identified  in  immigration  rules  as  requiring   to   be
                 considered under the "Points Based System", and
              c) The appeal relies wholly or partly on grounds specified  in
                 section 84(1)(a), (e) or (f).
           4) Where exception 2 applies the tribunal may consider  evidence
              adduced by the appellant only if it -
              a) was submitted in support of, and at the time of making, the
                 application to which the immigration decision related,
              b) relates to the appeal in so far as  it  relies  on  grounds
                 other than those specified in subsection (3)(c),
              c) is adduced to prove that a document is genuine or valid, or
              d) is adduced in connection  with  the  Secretary  of  State's
                 reliance  on  a  discretion  under  immigration  rules,  or
                 compliance with a  requirement  of  immigration  rules,  to
                 refuse  an  application  on  grounds  not  related  to  the
                 acquisition of "points" under the "Points Based System"."

12.   In Ahmed and another (PBS: admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365  the
    Upper Tribunal concluded that the exception to  evidence  that  may  be
    considered in Points Based System appeals under section 85A(4)(d)  only
    applied to non-points based provisions of the rules. Paragraph 245DD(k)
    linked the provisions relating to the assessment of the genuine  nature
    of a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) application to the acquisition of points and
    therefore came within  the  restrictions  on  evidence  that  could  be
    considered by virtue of section 85A. In assessing the impact of section
    85A the tribunal stated [5]:

           "The purpose of that provision is quite clear. It is that  where
           a Points Based application is made and refused,  the  assessment
           by the Judge is to be  of  the  material  that  was  before  the
           decision-maker rather than a new consideration of the  material.
           In other words the appeal if it is successful is  on  the  basis
           that the decision-maker with the material before him should have
           made a different decision, not on the basis that a different way
           of presenting the application would have  produced  a  different
           decision."

13.   In Olatunde v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 670 the Court of Appeal  considered
    the impact of section 85A and concluded [17]:

           "17. ....the clear policy underlying sections 85 and 85A is that
           the tribunal should  be  able  to  consider  a  broad  range  of
           evidence in relation to appeals generally, but  a  more  limited
           range of evidence in relation to appeals against decisions which
           have to be considered under a Points Based system. This strongly
           supports the conclusion that section 85A(3)(a) is to be read  as
           referring to that element of appeal proceedings which involves a
           challenge to a decision of a kind specified in section  82(2)(a)
           or (d), whether or not the appeal also involves a challenge to a
           decision which falls under another paragraph of  section  82(2),
           in this case paragraph (ha)....

           18.  This analysis is support  by  the  decision  of  the  Upper
           Tribunal in Mushtaq v SSHD [2013] UKUT 00061 (IAC). It held that
           section 85A(3) can apply when an appeal is  brought  against  an
           immigration decision falling  within  section  82(2)(a)  or  (d)
           regardless of whether an  appeal  is  also  brought  against  an
           immigration decision of another kind..."

14.   The Court of Appeal went on to consider, on the  particular  facts  of
    one case, the 'genuineness' provisions contained in paragraph 245DD(h):

            "26.  Since sub-paragraph (h) is concerned with the  applicant's
           intentions with regard to the establishment of  a  business  and
           the investment of funds that are genuinely available to him,  it
           is difficult to see in what circumstances an applicant who fails
           to satisfy the Secretary of State of those matters could hope to
           satisfy her that his application as a whole was genuine and thus
           avoid falling foul of sub-paragraph (k). However, it  that  were
           in issue, I am inclined  to  think  that  section  85A(3)  would
           prevent the tribunal from taking into account new evidence  that
           related to the genuineness of the application insofar as it  was
           adduced to show that the requirements of sub-paragraphs (b), (c)
           and (d) were satisfied; and the failure to obtain  the  required
           number of points would inevitably lead to  the  refusal  of  the
           application."

15.   It is common  ground  between  the  parties  that  the  judge's  self-
    direction in paragraph 8 of the decision was erroneous. Nowhere in  the
    decision does she appreciate the impact of section 85A despite the fact
    that the appeal involves an application under the Points Based system.

16.   The statutory provisions and case law outlined above  shows  that  the
    clear intention of  section  85A  was  to  significantly  restrict  the
    evidence that could be considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  an
    appeal against a decision made  under  the  Points  Based  system.  The
    wording of section 85A  restricts  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  from
    considering "evidence" which was not  submitted  at  the  time  of  the
    making of the application. "Evidence" that could  be  considered  might
    include specified documentary evidence or answers  given  at  interview
    prior to refusal decision.

17.   While section 85A does not specifically restrict a judge from  hearing
    oral evidence as part of an appeal the effect of  the  provisions  mean
    that only oral evidence relating to the limited  number  of  exceptions
    can be considered. It would be open to a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  to
    consider the reliability of documentary  evidence  submitted  with  the
    application. It  would  also  be  open  to  a  judge  to  consider  the
    credibility of evidence given during an interview in the context of the
    other evidence submitted in support of the application.  It  is  likely
    that a judge would also be able to consider any obvious points made  by
    the appellant at  a  hearing  to  correct  clear  errors  made  by  the
    respondent in the assessment of  the  evidence.  For  example,  if  the
    reasons for refusal letter contained  a  clear  factual  error  or  the
    conclusions  were  irrational  on  the  evidence  submitted  with   the
    application. A judge would also be able to  consider  further  oral  or
    documentary evidence to prove that a document is genuine or valid.

18.   However, section 85A would restrict a judge from considering  ex  post
    facto evidence produced by the appellant, either by way of  documentary
    or oral evidence, which sought to bolster inadequate evidence  produced
    in support of the original application. If a document was inadequate or
    missing, further evidence produced on appeal to remedy  the  shortfalls
    could not be considered unless it came within one of the exceptions. If
    an answer in interview was inconsistent,  implausible  or  sufficiently
    unclear, it would not be open to a judge to take into  account  further
    oral evidence from the appellant seeking to expand or elaborate on  the
    issue  at  a  hearing.  Nor  would  it  be  appropriate   to   consider
    inconsistencies between evidence given at interview and at the  hearing
    unless it came within the scope of the exceptions. What  oral  evidence
    might be relevant to  the  exceptions  outlined  in  section  85A  will
    require  careful  consideration  by  a  judge  on  the  facts  of  each
    particular case.

19.   At first blush the restrictions  contained  in  section  85A  seem  to
    limit the range of assessment by a judge  to  something  more  akin  to
    review than an appeal. However, it is quite clear  that  the  intention
    was to restrict Point Based system appeals in such a way  (most  likely
    as a precursor to the abolition of rights of  appeal  in  Points  Based
    system cases that followed). In the remaining appeals before the First-
    tier Tribunal the decision making process is  an  appeal.  A  judge  is
    restricted in what evidence can be considered but can still assess  the
    evidence submitted  in  support  of  the  application  and  come  to  a
    different conclusion where appropriate.

20.   In this appeal the judge erred  in  failing  to  have  regard  to  the
    restrictions outlined in section 85A. Albeit that she was not impressed
    by the evidence given by the witnesses at the hearing and made negative
    findings it was not open to her to consider that further evidence.

21.   The question that I must consider is whether the  error  was  material
    to the outcome of the appeal in the  circumstance  of  this  particular
    case. The judge considered the reasons for refusal in  some  detail  in
    paragraph 15. She considered a number of points raised  with  reference
    to evidence submitted in  support  of  the  application  and  given  at
    interview albeit that she erroneously also went on to consider many  of
    the points with reference to further evidence given at the hearing. She
    concluded that the appellants failed to address the concerns raised but
    even if she had not done so it seems clear from an overall  reading  of
    her findings that the judge considered the  reasons  for  refusal  cast
    sufficient doubt on the application to justify refusal under  paragraph
    245DD(h).

22.   The appellants did not appear to take issue with the accuracy  of  the
    respondent's summary of the answers they were said  to  have  given  in
    interview. The respondent was entitled to take into  account  the  fact
    that there were a number of discrepancies on the face of the  documents
    submitted in support of the application. For  example,  inconsistencies
    as to the source of the funds as well as in relation to the name of the
    company. She was also entitled to take into account the fact that  some
    of the appellants'  answers  in  interview  were  rather  confused  and
    lacking in detail. While the appellants pointed out that the respondent
    was likely to be incorrect in stating that the business was  registered
    on 07 March  2013  (the  Current  Appointments  Report  states  it  was
    incorporated on 07 March 2014) that single factual error was not likely
    to make any material difference  to  the  overall  credibility  of  the
    application in light of the other issues raised.

23.    The  judge  took  into  account  the  evidence  submitted  with   the
    application and the reasons for refusal letter and it seems clear  from
    her findings that even  if  she  hadn't  considered  the  further  oral
    evidence given by the appellants she  was  satisfied  that  there  were
    sufficient  grounds  to  cast  doubt  on  the  genuine  nature  of  the
    application. For these reasons I conclude that, despite the  fact  that
    she erred in considering evidence restricted under section 85A, it  was
    not material to the outcome  of  the  appeal,  which  would  have  been
    dismissed even on the evidence submitted in  support  of  the  original
    application.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision did not involve the making  of  a  material
error on a point of law

The First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand


Signed   [pic]   Date 16 May 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
