
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50715/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 January 2016                   |On 24 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                 BISMARK [B]
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L J Doyle, M&K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal brought by the  Appellant  against  the  Respondent's
    decision of 8 December 2014 refusing to issue the Appellant a residence
    card which he had applied for on the basis that he was a family  member
    of a qualified person under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ('the 2006 Regulations').

 2. The Appellant is married to Mrs [A] and applied for a residence card on
    the basis that Mrs [A] is a dual Ghanaian and Dutch national who was  a
    qualified person under the 2006 Regulations, on the  grounds  that  she
    was present in the United Kingdom and was economically active.

 3. The Respondent interviewed both parties to the marriage on a date in or
    around December 2014.  In the decision letter the Respondent found that
    their marriage was one of convenience, specifying six discrete  reasons
    for that finding, as follows (un-numbered in the original, but which  I
    number here for convenience):

         "1       You stated that your sponsor recently went  to  Ghana  for
             two weeks to visit family, your sponsor stated that  she  went
             for 10 days to go to a funeral.

         2  Your sponsor stated that you originally came to the UK to  study
             English and work, you stated that you just came for a visit.

         3  You stated that you don't like  football,  your  sponsor  stated
             that you follow a team and you have watched football.

         4  Regarding the proposal, your sponsor stated that you decided  to
             get married in February  2012,  you  stated  that  it  was  on
             December 22nd on her birthday.  You stated that  her  children
             were not there and it was in the morning, she stated that  her
             children were there and it was in  the  evening.   You  stated
             that you did not stay over that  night,  your  sponsor  stated
             that you did.

         5  You stated that you did not celebrate the  wedding  in  the  UK,
             your sponsor stated that you prayed at church.

         6  You stated that your bins are green and that they are  collected
             on Thursday or Wednesday, your sponsor stated  that  they  are
             black and that they are collected on Friday."

 4. Both the Appellant and his wife provided witness statements in  support
    of the Appellant's consequent appeal, providing explanations for  those
    alleged discrepancies.

 5. The appeal came before Judge Grant at Hatton Cross  on  14  July  2015.
    She heard evidence from the Appellant and his wife and also from  a  Mr
    [P] and Miss [A-A], Mrs  [A]'s  adult  daughter.   The  judge  held  in
    paragraphs 8 to 12 that she agreed with the reasons relied upon by  the
    Respondent that the marriage was one of convenience.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on 4 August 2015 and was
    granted permission to appeal by Judge Andrew on 9 November 2015. One of
    the grounds of appeal which is now no longer relied upon, or if  it  is
    relied upon the Appellant accepts  that  it  cannot  currently  prevail
    following Amirteymour & Ors (EEA appeals; human rights) [2015] UKUT 466
    (IAC), is that in dismissing the appeal  the  judge  erred  in  law  in
    failing to have regard to the Appellant's rights under Article  8  ECHR
    in relation to any proposed removal of the  Appellant.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted in relation to that specific ground at  paragraph  3
    of Judge Andrew's grant of permission.

 7. The Appellant also raised grounds of appeal which I would  describe  in
    summary as follows:

         (i)      that the judge failed  to  have  adequate  regard  to  the
         Appellant's evidence, including the explanations  provided  by  the
         witnesses as regards the alleged discrepancies, and failed to  have
         regard to the remainder of the 126 questions which were not said to
         be discrepant;

         (ii)     that it was irrational for the  Judge  to  find  that  the
         Appellant having had in the early part  of  his  marriage  a  short
         extramarital affair, resulting in the  conception  of  a  child  to
         another woman, tended to indicate that the Appellant was not  in  a
         genuine relationship with his wife;

         (iii)    that the Judge had failed to make any clear finding as  to
         whether or not the Appellant's marriage  to  Mrs  [A],  which  took
         place by proxy in Ghana, was a lawfully valid marriage  under  even
         the Ghanaian or Dutch law.

 8. Those grounds were described by Judge Andrew as seeming to  be  nothing
    more than a disagreement with  the  judge's  findings.  However,  Judge
    Andrew gave permission to appeal generally and I  have  not  restricted
    submissions from Mr Doyle on behalf of the Appellant today.

 9. I heard submissions from the parties which are a matter  of  record.  I
    refer to them below as necessary.

10. In relying upon the grounds of appeal drafted  by  other  Counsel,   Mr
    Doyle did not seek to expand upon ground 3 which was to the effect that
    no finding was specifically made by  the  judge  at  First-tier  as  to
    whether or not the proxy marriage was valid.  Ground 3  also  seeks  to
    argue that the case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT
    0024, which held inter alia that to be  valid,  a  marriage  contracted
    between the appellant and a qualified person must be valid according to
    the  national  law  of  the  EEA  country  of  the  qualified  person's
    nationality, was incorrectly decided.

11. Mr Doyle does not seek to expand upon the grounds  of  appeal  in  that
    regard.  I have indicated to  him  that  I  feel  bound  to  adopt  the
    approach in the case of Kareem.

12. I find that there  is  no  discrete  finding  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge as to whether the marriage was valid in Dutch law.

13. Mr Doyle's remaining submissions related to the  judge's  finding  that
    the Appellant's marriage was one of convenience.   Upon  analysing  the
    reasons given by the Respondent in her decision letter  of  8  December
    2014 and the findings of the  judge  at  paragraphs  8  to  12  of  the
    decision, it would seem that the second and fifth reasons  advanced  by
    the Respondent did not receive any specific consideration by the  judge
    in  her  decision,  although  the  judge  did  find  that  there   were
    discrepancies in the Appellant's interviews and that she did not accept
    the explanations that had been provided. It may well be then  that  the
    judge should be treated as having adopted all six of the  reasons  that
    had been advanced by the Respondent in the decision letter.

14. However, I am concerned about the judge's conclusions in two  respects.
    Firstly, in relation to the finding about the  Appellant's  child,  the
    judge held as follows at paragraph 8:

         "I find that the Appellant has entered a marriage  of  convenience.
         During the duration of this  marriage  the  Appellant  has  had  an
         allegedly brief relationship with another woman which has  resulted
         in the birth of a child. These are not the actions of an  Appellant
         in a genuine relationship with the sponsor as alleged or at all.  I
         have heard  a  variety  of  explanations  for  that  conduct  which
         asserted that he got drunk and that it was a one-off  and  resulted
         in the birth of the child but the Appellant is plainly  on  cordial
         terms with the mother of the child and he sees the child and I draw
         an adverse inference as to the credibility of his  explanation  and
         that of the witnesses before me from the absence  of  any  evidence
         from the mother of that child."

15. It is not entirely clear to why an adverse inference ought to be  drawn
    against the Appellant's credibility merely from the fact that he seemed
    to be on cordial terms with the mother of his child. It may or may  not
    be likely that the mother of a child conceived  in  such  circumstances
    would allow the father of the child to maintain contact  with  her  and
    the child.

16. However, and more particularly, the adverse inference  that  the  judge
    drew was specifically stated to be on  the  basis  that  there  was  an
    absence of any evidence from the mother of that child.  That transpires
    to be factually incorrect.  There is a letter in the Appellant's bundle
    at page 22 from [CF],  the  mother  of  the  Appellant's  child,  which
    describes that the Appellant is the father of  their  child,  [G].  The
    letter confirms that the Appellant comes round once  a  week  to  spend
    quality time with his son and takes his  son  to  the  Appellant's  own
    house, sometimes to spend time there with him and his wife as well.  Ms
    [F] states that [G]'s welfare was extremely important to the Appellant,
    and she states that she wanted the Appellant to play an active role  in
    decision-making throughout their son's upbringing.

17. It was therefore factually incorrect for the judge to assert that there
    was no evidence from the mother of the Appellant's child.       Ms  [F]
    gave evidence of the nature of the Appellant's  relationship  with  his
    child. There  was  no  suggestion  within  her  letter  of  an  ongoing
    relationship  between  herself  and  the  Appellant.  I  am   therefore
    concerned that this affair, and the consequences of it, which appear to
    have played a significant role in the judge coming to  a  finding  that
    the Appellant's marriage is not a genuine one, is seriously  undermined
    by the judge having omitted reference to the letter from the mother  of
    the Appellant's child.

18. The second matter which I am concerned about  relates  to  one  of  the
    alleged discrepancies relied upon by the Respondent in  their  decision
    letter of 8 December 2014, that being that in relation to the proposal,
    the sponsor stated that "You decided to get married  in  February  2012
    whereas you [the Appellant] stated that it was on December  22  on  her
    birthday".

19. It seems relevant to refer directly to the evidence that both witnesses
    had given in the marriage interview commencing  at  question  39.   The
    question there was "So when did you decide to get married" to which the
    Appellant answered "December 22, it was  her  birthday.  There  was  no
    party". And the wife answered "in February 2012".

20. Considering those two answers in isolation there would appear to  be  a
    difference in the date given, but I find that it is also appropriate to
    consider the next question asked by the Respondent, which is "So that's
    when you decided to get married?"  That question may not have been  put
    to the Appellant because the text box in his column is blank,  but  the
    sponsor, the Appellant's wife, answered "No, 22 December  2011.  That's
    my birthday. He proposed."

21. It seems to me that the question such as "When did you  decide  to  get
    married?" can often lead  to  confused  answers  because  it  could  be
    understood to mean "On what date was the decision taken to  marry?"  on
    the one hand, or it could be interpreted as a question  of  "What  date
    did you decide to marry on?".  Any confusion which may  have  been   in
    the Appellant's wife's mind was immediately clarified in her answer  to
    question 40 and I find, and Miss Everett on behalf  of  the  Respondent
    agrees, that there is no discrepancy in relation to that question being
    the date the decision was taken to marry.  She  says  that  that  issue
    cannot be easily separated from questions which then immediately follow
    which deal with who was  present  at  the  time  that  the  Appellant's
    proposal to  his wife was made in which on any  assessment  there  were
    difference between the Appellant's and his wife's answers.

22. The judge held simply that there were discrepancies in relation to  the
    proposal.  She  does  not  particularise  whether  those  discrepancies
    related to the date of the proposal or who was present at the  time  of
    the proposal.

23. I find that there is an element of  doubt  as  to  the  safety  of  the
    judge's finding that there  was  a  material  discrepancy  between  the
    Appellant's and his wife's answers in relation  to  the  proposal  such
    that I am concerned  about the  sustainability  of  that  part  of  the
    judge's  decision.  Taken together with the judge's previous  error  by
    finding an absence of evidence  from  the  mother  of  the  Appellant's
    child, I find that there are  material  errs  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision that the marriage was one of convenience. Had  the  judge  not
    made such errors, I am not satisfied that the  judge  would  inevitably
    arrived at the same conclusion on the central issue.

24. There was however, following Amirteymour, no error in law in the  judge
    failing to make any findings as to whether refusal of a residence  card
    to the Appellant was unlawful under Article 8 ECHR.

    Notice of Decision

25. I set aside the decision of the judge dismissing the appeal.

26. Upon hearing from the parties as to the course of action to be taken in
    this matter, I find that the extent of fact-finding that is required to
    be made in the appeal (all matters, including whether the  marriage  is
    valid in law, and whether the marriage is one of convenience) are  such
    that remittal to the First tier Tribunal is appropriate.

27. The appeal is remitted to the First tier Tribunal.

28. The present decision was given ex tempore in court before the  parties.
    The Tribunal regrets the time taken for this  written  decision  to  be
    issued.


Signed:

      [pic]
Date:  21.10.16

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan
