

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: IA/50866/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 1st December 2014                         |On: 3rd December 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              Jabin Begum Poly
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pretzell, Counsel instructed by Makka
                       Solicitors Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Bangladesh date of birth 10th  December
    1987. On the 5th September 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herbert)
    allowed her appeal against a decision to refuse to vary  her  leave  to
    remain and to remove her from the United Kingdom pursuant to s47 of the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The Secretary of State now
    has permission to appeal against that decision[1].


 2.  The  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  concerned  Ms   Poly's
    application to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of  her
    marriage to a British national. She had arrived as a visitor  in  April
    2013 and in August 2013 married (according to Islamic Law) a Mr  Kaptan
    Miah, a man she claims to have  met  after  her  arrival.  On  the  1st
    October 2013 they married according to UK law.   They  wish  to  remain
    living in the UK rather than returning to Bangladesh because Ms Poly is
    fearful of her former husband's family.

 3. The Secretary of State rejected the application on the  basis  that  Ms
    Poly could meet neither  the  requirements  relating  to  private  life
    (paragraph 276ADE) nor family life (Appendix FM). It was  not  accepted
    that this was a genuine and subsisting marriage.  As to paragraph  EX.1
    the Secretary of State did not consider it to  apply,  but  notes  that
    even if it had done, the application would fail because Ms  Poly  could
    not meet the  eligibility  requirement  in  paragraph  E-LTRP.2.1  ("no
    switching" from visitor status).  The  Secretary  of  State  considered
    whether there are any exceptional circumstances and  finds  that  there
    are not.  The refusal letter concluded with a  paragraph  advising  the
    steps that  Ms  Poly  would  need  to  take  if  she  wished  to  claim
    international protection.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found that this is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    marriage. It found that Mr Miah would have to give up  his  job,  home,
    family and private life in the UK in order to relocate  to  Bangladesh.
    He would have no equivalent resources there.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered these factors to cumulatively amount to  an  "insurmountable
    obstacle". On that basis the First-tier Tribunal found  that  paragraph
    EX.1 of Appendix FM is engaged and allowed the appeal.

 5. The central ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    apparently treating EX.1 as "free-standing" when in fact it could  only
    be considered if Ms Poly had  met  the  relationship,  suitability  and
    eligibility requirements as a partner under FM. Since she did not, EX.1
    was not relevant to the decision. This  had  been  made  clear  in  the
    refusal letter.  This ground is made out. The Tribunal was perhaps  not
    aware of the decision in Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not  free  standing)
    [2014] UKUT 00063  (IAC).  That  decision  interprets  Appendix  FM  in
    exactly the manner that the ground contend it should  be  read.  If  an
    appellant cannot meet the eligibility requirements,  the  provision  is
    not engaged.

 6. Mr Pretzell conceded that this is the case.  He  acknowledged  that  Ms
    Poly had never advanced any claim to be able to  meet  the  eligibility
    requirements. Her case had always been based on Article  8  outside  of
    the Rules. It is her case that she meets all of the requirements of  FM
    bar eligibility and that there are particular reasons why it  would  be
    very onerous for her  to  return  to  Bangladesh  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance. She relies on Chikwamba v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  40  It  would
    appear that little consideration has been given to any of that.

 7. The parties  therefore  agree  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal cannot stand.  I am remitting this matter  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be remade, and I do so for two reasons. First of  all,  the
    extent of judicial fact finding required. Mr  Pretzell  tells  me  that
    there are up to 4 witnesses (including Ms Poly) who would like to  give
    evidence, and that an interpreter would be required.   Secondly because
    the case advanced by Ms Poly before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  not
    given proper consideration in this determination and she  is  therefore
    entitled to a fair and effective first-instance hearing.


      Decisions

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

 9. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  1st
                                December 2014
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 23rd October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Foudy

