

                                     [pic]


        The Upper Tribunal

        (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal number:
IA/50931/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester               |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                  |Promulgated                         |
|On December 14, 2015              |             On January 4, 2016     |
|                                  |                                    |

                                   Before


                          DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SHAHRAM AMIRI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Johnstone (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Lynch, Counsel, instructed by KD Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, citizen of Iran, appealed against the decision to cancel
    his leave to remain  on  the  basis  that  false  representations  were
    employed or material facts  were  not  disclosed  for  the  purpose  of
    obtaining leave to enter. That application was refused on  December  5,
    2014 and the appellant appealed this  decision  on  December  23,  2014
    under section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

 3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal De Haney on May
    22, 2015 and he allowed the appeal in a decision  promulgated  on  June
    11, 2015.

 4. The respondent sought permission to appeal that decision  on  June  18,
    2015 on the  ground  the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  solve  a  material
    conflict. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kelly on August 25, 2015 on the basis it  was  arguable  there
    was a contradiction in the Tribunal's decision.

 5. The matter came before me on the above date and on that  date  I  heard
    submissions from both Mr Lynch and Ms Johnstone.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make no order now.

    ERROR IN LAW

 7. Ms Johnstone relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted the Tribunal
    had erred by  allowing  the  appeal.  The  Tribunal's  decision  should
    clearly set out why a decision was taken and there was a clear conflict
    between paragraphs [9] and and [13]  of  its  decision.  There  was  no
    dispute the ETS certificate had been cancelled and the refusal set  out
    the inconsistencies in the evidence. The Tribunal's decision  was  both
    unclear and unsafe and the Tribunal had wrongly assumed he  had  passed
    an exam earlier because in his own  interview  he  agreed  he  had  not
    completed his test. She invited me to set aside the decision.


 8. Mr Lynch submitted that Ms Johnstone's submissions were mere semantics.
    Whilst it was possible there was a  typographical  error  it  was  also
    arguable that "appropriate cross examination" meant none was necessary.
    The real issue was whether there was any confusion  in  the  Tribunal's
    mind when considering the evidence and he submitted the  Tribunal  made
    relevant findings that were open to  it.  Save  for  the  reference  in
    paragraph [9] of the decision to cross examination the grounds revealed
    no arguable error. He invited me to dismiss the appeal.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDING

 9. The respondent had cancelled the appellant's leave  to  remain  because
    she was not satisfied his qualification had  been  obtained  correctly.
    This issue was raised in the refusal letter and the matter went  to  an
    appeal hearing.


10. The appellant  attended  and  was  asked  extensive  questions  by  his
    counsel. The respondent was represented and the Tribunal's  notes  make
    clear  that  no  questions  were  put   to   the   appellant   by   her
    representative.

11. Whilst the Tribunal erroneously referred to the "cross-examination"  in
    paragraph [9] of its  decision  I  am  satisfied  that  the  Tribunal's
    decision made it clear in paragraph  [13]  of  its  decision  that  the
    respondent's representative chose not to cross-examine.

12. Ms Johnstone submitted the  position  was  unclear  but  the  fact  her
    colleague's notes contained no cross-examination details and the  Court
    record makes clear there was  no  cross-examination  leads  me  to  the
    conclusion that the respondent would have been in no doubt  that  there
    was no cross-examination.

13. The only other issue  arising  out  of  this  appeal  was  whether  the
    findings made by the Tribunal in paragraphs [13] to [17] were  open  to
    it. In those paragraphs the Tribunal considered the  issues  raised  by
    the respondent in the refusal letter and findings were made  that  were
    clearly open to it on the evidence presented and in the absence of  any
    cross-examination by the respondent's representative. At paragraph [17]
    the Tribunal firmly concluded the appellant had taken the test  himself
    and rejected the respondent's  claim  that  false  documents  had  been
    submitted.

14. Ms Johnstone's final submission related to the Tribunal's  observations
    in paragraph [18] but these comments do  not  impinge  on  the  earlier
    findings made by the Tribunal about the test document.

15. I refuse the application to appeal.

    DECISION


16. There was no material error and I uphold the earlier decision  allowing
    the appeal.


Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD

I uphold the fee award.

Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

