
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50175/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th March 2016                           |On 12th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                SUNIL SUNDAS
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Babarinde, Hatten Wyatt Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's appeal. However, I shall refer to  the
    parties as in the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant is  a  citizen  of
    Nepal born on 6th August 1982.  His  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse leave to remain under Appendix FM of the Immigration
    Rules was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Loughridge in a decision
    dated 23rd June 2015.

2.   The Respondent appealed on the grounds that the judge  had  misdirected
    himself in law in concluding at paragraph 26


         "Applying the relevant law to the established facts,  I  find  that
         the decision of the Respondent is not in accordance  with  the  law
         and the applicable Immigration Rules. It is absolutely  clear  that
         there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the  Applicant  and   Mr
         Vincentski continuing their family life together in Nepal. Doing so
         is not even remotely realistic.  The  principal  obstacle  is  that
         Nepal is a society which does not accept openly  gay  relationships
         and they would face significant difficulties if they cohabited  and
         generally conducted themselves in public as a  gay  couple.   These
         difficulties could not in my view be overcome or would entail  very
         serious hardship in that they  would  have  to  hide  their  sexual
         orientation and conduct their relationship in a wholly  clandestine
         manner."

3.   The Respondent submits  that  these  findings  are  predicated  on  the
    Appellant being forced into a heterosexual marriage  against  his  wish
    and having to conceal or suppress his  sexual  orientation,  being  the
    fundamental characteristics of his personality. It  is  submitted  that
    the Appellant appears to be running  a  protection  based  argument  or
    extraterritorial Article 8 against the lower threshold in the  form  of
    EX.1(b).

4.   Secondly, it is submitted that the judge  failed  to  give  reasons  or
    adequate reasons for a material matter, namely there was no  background
    evidence that has been recorded in the  determination  to  support  his
    finding on the position of homosexuality in Nepal. There was no oral or
    documentary evidence recorded that the Appellant would be forced into a
    marriage against his will, should he relocate to Kathmandu.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Molloy
    on 24th November 2015 for the following reasons:


         "The grounds have merit in that they firstly suggest that the judge
         has effectively determined a protection  claim  based  upon  sexual
         orientation rather than apply the Immigration Rules under  scrutiny
         with reference  to  insurmountable  obstacles  being  evidenced  to
         continuing family life overseas, and secondly suggest a failure  to
         provide reasons and/or adequate reasons on material matters bearing
         in mind that the oral  and  documentary  evidence  which  has  been
         produced is not set out in the determination.


         When reading the witness statements of the Appellant and his  civil
         partner the case appears to have been advanced that neither of them
         would be able to enjoy family life in Nepal because of  the  recent
         earthquake in that country yet this is not mentioned in the judge's
         decision at all. Those witness statements do not make reference  to
         the couple facing sexual discrimination in Nepal because  of  their
         orientation, nor do they make reference to it  not  being  possible
         for the couple to conduct themselves in public as a gay couple  yet
         these matters are recorded in the determination."

Submissions

6.   Mr Duffy stated that he did not rely on ground 1,  namely  whether  the
    circumstances  which  were   before   the   judge   could   amount   to
    insurmountable obstacles. However, he relied on ground  2,  namely  the
    lack of reasons,  because  there  was  no  reference  anywhere  in  the
    determination to background material to support his  finding  that  the
    Appellant and his partner would not be able to continue  their  private
    and family life on return to Nepal. There was no  documentary  evidence
    to support such a finding and there was  no  evidence  in  the  witness
    statements to enable the judge to come to that conclusion. Accordingly,
    the judge had erred in law in  failing  to  give  reasons  for  such  a
    finding or to demonstrate the evidence upon which he relied.

7.   Mr Babarinde, who was present at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, submitted that there was evidence before the judge  on  which
    he came to the conclusions he did at paragraphs 13 and 14, namely:


         "13. Although the law in Nepal accepts homosexuality,  it  is  very
         different in practice in terms  of  society  itself.  Gay  men  are
         almost always forced into being bisexual, in other words  they  are
         almost always married and have to conduct their  gay  relationships
         in secret. This is the position throughout  the  country  including
         the capital Kathmandu.


         14.  In  reality  therefore  it  would  not  be  possible  for  the
         Appellant and Mr Vincentski to be openly gay in Nepal."

8.   Mr Babarinde submitted that this evidence was given  by  the  Appellant
    and his partner at the hearing  and  was  recorded  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings. Therefore, whilst there  was  no  background  material  to
    support such a finding the judge was  entitled  to  rely  on  the  oral
    evidence given at  the  appeal,  particularly  having  found  that  the
    Appellant's relationship was credible on the basis of the oral evidence
    and documentary evidence before him.

9.   It is also worth noting that the  Respondent  did  not  appear  at  the
    appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and there was  no  cross-
    examination of the witness and no suggestion that the  Appellant  could
    live an openly gay life. It was for the judge to decide the  appeal  on
    the evidence which was before him.

10.  Whilst Mr Babarinde accepted that there was no documentary evidence  to
    show that the Appellant would be forced into being  bisexual  and  into
    marrying, the judge was entitled to accept the  oral  evidence  of  the
    Appellant and therefore to  conclude  that  there  were  insurmountable
    obstacles to family life continuing outside the UK. The judge was  also
    entitled to rely on the evidence  of  Mr  Vincentski  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to him relocating to Nepal.

Discussion and conclusions

11.  Given the oral evidence which before the judge, his finding that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside the  UK
    was open to him on the evidence. Indeed, Mr  Duffy  does  not  seek  to
    challenge that finding and has not pursued ground 1.

12.  The Respondent challenges the judge's lack of  reasons  for  coming  to
    that conclusion. It is clear that the judge heard  oral  evidence  from
    the Appellant and his partner. Although the judge did not set  out  the
    oral evidence, it was apparent from his findings that he  accepted  it.
    Any lack of reasoning was not material to the  decision  because  there
    was evidence before the judge to enable him to come to the  conclusions
    he did. It could not be said that his conclusions were perverse.

13.  Accordingly, there was no material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The judge properly considered insurmountable obstacles  and  took  into
    account all relevant evidence before him including the oral evidence of
    the Appellant and his partner. The judge was entitled to rely  on  such
    evidence in order to come to his conclusion that family life could  not
    continue outside the UK or that it would entail very  serious  hardship
    for the Appellant or his partner.

14.  I find that the judge properly applied the  Immigration  Rules  to  the
    facts as he found them and  his  findings  were  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him. There was no material error of law in the decision
    of 23rd June 2015 and the Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.




              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 30th March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


