
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50060/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27th June 2014                             |On 15th August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                             mr haitham al-faroh

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Moran, Legal Representative of Alex Moran
                    Immigration and Asylum
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Syria.  He sought to obtain  a  permanent
    residence card as a family member of an EEA national.  That application
    made on 25th March 2013 was refused by the  respondent  in  a  decision
    dated 20th November 2013.

2.   Although the appellant had produced considerable evidence that  he  was
    working there was a paucity of evidence that the sponsor  was  somebody
    who was exercising treaty  rights.   In  particular  there  was  little
    evidence that the EEA sponsor  was  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the
    United Kingdom before 2011, given that there was a  requirement  for  a
    continuous period of five years of treaty rights  before  qualification
    for permanent residence.

3.   Indeed  when  attempts  were  made  to  verify  the  sponsor's  claimed
    employer it was noted that the company Mega Services Limited was listed
    as dissolved since  2009  and  attempts  to  contact  that  company  by
    telephone proved to be unsuccessful.

4.   The issue of Article 8 ECHR was also  considered  and  the  context  of
    family  and  private  life  within  the  Immigration  Rules.   It   was
    considered that the appellant did not succeed on either  basis  outside
    of the Regulations.

5.   Grounds of appeal were  submitted  against  that  decision  essentially
    that the removal of the appellant would be  in  breach  of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention.  It  was  expressed
    that the  decision  made  was  tantamount  to  the  revocation  of  the
    appellant's existing residence card leaving the appellant with no valid
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  It was suggested  that  removal
    to Syria would be in breach of the fundamental human rights.

6.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Cope on 10th  February
    2014.  In effect the Judge considered that the reasons for refusal were
    well-founded and that there was very little  evidence  to  support  the
    suggestion that the  sponsor  was  exercising  treaty  rights  for  the
    continuous period before the application in March  2013.   It  was  not
    sufficient that the sponsor was relying upon the appellant's  earnings,
    it must be shown that the sponsor herself was exercising treaty rights.

7.   The Judge declined to deal with the issue of human rights on the  basis
    that there was no removal direction in place and indicated that it  was
    always open to the appellant to make a formal  application  for  asylum
    should that be the case.

8.   Grounds of appeal were submitted against that  decision  on  the  basis
    that it was unnecessary for there to  be  removal  directions  for  the
    safety of removal to be considered in the context  of  JM  (Liberia)  v
    Secretary of State [2006] EWCA Civ  1402.   Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted and thus the matter came before me in pursuance of that grant.

9.   Ms Pettersen, who represents the Secretary  of  State,  contended  that
    the grounds of appeal were in general misconceived.  The appellant  had
    been granted a residence card under the 2006 Regulations on  14th  June
    2010  which  continued  until  14th  June  2015.   There  had  been  no
    revocation of that leave so there was  no  question  of  the  appellant
    being removed prior to  that  date.   Mr  Moran,  who  represented  the
    appellant, requested a two month adjournment in order for the  accuracy
    of that statement to be confirmed.  There was no imminent likelihood of
    the appellant being removed from  the  jurisdiction.   There  was  time
    enough for the proper evidence to  be  obtained  as  to  the  sponsor's
    working and indeed a proper basis for asylum to be presented if  indeed
    that was intended.

10.  I indicated that if the  decision  of  14th  June  2010  had  not  been
    revoked that the appellant  consider  his  position  in  pursuing  this
    particular appeal.

11.  Subsequent to that hearing on 10th July 2014 I have received  a  letter
    from the appellant's solicitors confirming that they wish  to  withdraw
    the appeal.

12.  Under the Rules once the Upper Tribunal is seized of an appeal  it  can
    only be withdrawn by the party with leave.

13.  Leave for the appeal to be withdrawn is granted as requested.

14.  Thus the appeal before the Upper Tribunal is withdrawn  such  that  the
    original decision before the First-tier Tribunal  stands,  namely  that
    the appellant's appeal  in  respect  of  the  2006  Regulations  stands
    dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
