
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50947/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2015                    |On 24 August 2015                    |
|Delivered orally                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                     eS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION PRESERVED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C J (the Appellant's partner)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of  France,  born  on  22
    June 1984, against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colvin
    who, sitting at Hendon Magistrates' Court on 9  April  2015  and  in  a
    determination subsequently promulgated on 7  May  2015,  dismissed  the
    appeal of the Appellant against the decision of the Respondent dated 11
    December 2014 to make a deportation order against him on the grounds of
    public policy/public security in accordance  with  Regulation  19(3)(b)
    and  Regulation  21  of  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 and by virtue of Section 5(1) of the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

2.   The immigration history of the Appellant as  succinctly  summarised  at
    paragraph 2 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's determination is that:

         "He came to the UK in 2002 to join  his  mother  and  sisters.   He
         first came to the attention of the authorities on 9 April 2005  for
         an offence of theft and possessing an offensive weapon for which he
         was subsequently convicted and sentenced to a community  order  and
         unpaid work requirement of 100 hours.  Between 29 June 2006 and  23
         August 2013 the appellant incurred 13 convictions for 25  offences.
         On 13 January 2014 at Lewes Crown Court the appellant was convicted
         of possessing with intent to  supply  a  controlled  drug  Class  A
         (heroin) and driving offences.  On 16 May 2014 he was sentenced  to
         a total of 3 years imprisonment and disqualified from driving for 6
         months.  He was served with the Deportation Order  on  11  December
         2014 and he lodged this appeal on 23 December 2014."

3.   Under the heading "Assessment of Harm" the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    took account of  the  evidence  that  led  him  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat affecting one of the fundamental interests of society and in  so
    doing he took account of the OASys Report dated 15 December  2014  that
    stated that the Appellant's risk of re-offending  was  medium  and  the
    risk of serious harm to the public was low.

4.   The Judge then proceeded to note and summarise  in  bullet  points  the
    following remarks elicited from that report:

         ".   The appellant's response to probation supervision has not been
             successful in the past.  He repeatedly breached  his  previous
             orders.

         .    There is an established pattern of abusive  behaviour  against
             intimate partners.

         .    The current offence is  part  of  an  established  pattern  of
             similar  offending  albeit  previous  convictions  relate   to
             possession of Class B whereas  this  is  more  serious  as  it
             relates to Class A.

         .    In custody the appellant  had  completed  L2  English  and  L1
             Maths.  He is engaging with RAPt and wishes  to  complete  the
             parenting course.

         .    The appellant states that he started using cannabis at the age
             of 18 and by 21 he was using cocaine.  The heroin use was  new
             which he started at the age of 27.

         .    The appellant says that the drugs influenced his mood and  led
             him to be violent and aggressive towards certain  friends  and
             his partner and that he is no longer smoking drugs  and  feels
             his relationship is now stable.

         .     The  appellant  is  'quite  motivated'  in   addressing   his
             offending.  The positive factors to be maintained or developed
             are the appellant's willingness to engage in the Sentence Plan
             and address his offending behaviour."

    The Judge went on to say that he was  satisfied  "on  taking  all  this
    evidence into  account"  that  the  Appellant  represented  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society.

5.   Under the  heading  "Rights  of  residence"  at  paragraph  16  of  his
    determination the Judge had this to say:

         "16. The appellant is a national of  France  and  therefore  an  EU
             citizen.  He initially said in evidence that he came to the UK
             in 2000 to join his mother and sisters  but  altered  this  in
             cross-examination to 2002 after saying that he was aged 17  to
             18 when he arrived.  There is no corroborating evidence as  to
             when the appellant did  come  to  the  UK  and  he  was  first
             sentenced to imprisonment in 2009."

6.   I pause there, because Ms J who made representations on behalf  of  the
    Appellant, her partner, before me, referred to a tenancy  agreement  of
    2001 that she maintained she had tried to produce before the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who had said that it was not necessary.  This of  course
    is not a  challenge  that  was  raised  before  and  it  has  not  been
    accompanied by any statement of truth but nonetheless, as a  matter  of
    justice, I invited her to let me see a copy of the agreement which  she
    showed to me and it was clear, indeed she  realistically  agreed,  that
    there was nothing in  that  tenancy  agreement  that  referred  to  the
    Appellant or indeed suggested or provided any form of evidence that  he
    had  been  in  this  country  in  2001.   Further,  I  noted  from  the
    determination  of  the  Judge  and  from  his  handwritten  Record   of
    Proceedings that in oral evidence, the  Appellant  made  no  suggestion
    that he had come here earlier  than  2002  and  in  fact  unequivocally
    stated that that was the year in which he came to the United Kingdom.

7.   The Judge at paragraph 16 of his determination continued as follows:

         "However, even if it is accepted that he came in 2002 and therefore
         has 5 years continuous residence before 2009, he has also  to  show
         that he was exercising Treaty rights during this period in order to
         come within Regulation 15.  The  only  evidence  of  the  appellant
         working is a letter from employers, Mitchells & Butlers, confirming
         that he worked from August 2011 to March 2013  and  a  PAYE  coding
         notice for 2011.  There are no further tax documents such  as  P60s
         for this 5 year period 2002 and the appellant himself was  somewhat
         vague as to his 'part-time jobs'.  On the basis  therefore  of  the
         evidence before me I am satisfied that the appellant has not  shown
         that he has gained permanent residence under Regulations 15 and 21.
          It means that the lower test is  applicable  to  the  deportation:
         namely, that it is justified on grounds of  public  policy,  public
         security or public health." (Emphasis added)

8.   There can be no doubt upon  my  reading  the  determination,  that  the
    Judge most carefully considered in terms  of  Article  8  and  in  some
    detail, the Appellant's family life relationship with his children  and
    partner in terms not least of the proportionality  of  his  removal  to
    France.  This was set out with comprehensive reasons over paragraphs 24
    to 33 of his decision.  I do not propose to recite in full all  of  his
    reasoning but it is right to say,  as  drawn  to  my  attention  by  Ms
    Fijiwala, that the Judge was clear that he accepted that the likelihood
    was that the Appellant did have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    with both children.  This was of course a point also emphasised  to  me
    by Ms J in her representations.

9.   The Judge then considered whether it  would  be  unduly  harsh  on  the
    children to be required to live in France if the Appellant was deported
    pointing out  that  in  that  assessment,  that  there  were  different
    considerations for each of the children.  Most  importantly,  he  noted
    that the eldest child had her biological father in the UK with whom she
    continued a relationship and  that  she  was  well-established  in  her
    primary school at the age of 9.  He went on to  say  that  he  did  not
    therefore consider that it would be in her best interests and/or  would
    be unduly harsh, to expect the eldest child to have to move  to  France
    and indeed, the Judge noted that according to Ms J in her evidence, the
    child's biological father would be unlikely to  give  permission.   The
    Judge went on to say that as the best interests of both  children  were
    to remain living with their mother, this necessarily meant in practical
    terms that both children should remain in the UK.

10.  The Judge continued at paragraph 28 of his determination that "It  then
    had to be asked whether the effect of the Appellant's deportation would
    be unduly harsh on the children" and he recognised, as he put it,  that
    this was "a  more  difficult  issue  to  assess  due  to  the  lack  of
    information about the children before me".  The only evidence was  that
    the eldest child had a relationship with her biological father and  the
    younger daughter who was the child of the  Appellant,  was  still  very
    young at 2� years.  He recorded that Ms J had stated  that  the  eldest
    child was not doing so well at school but there was no confirmation  of
    this from the school.  The Judge continued:

         "On this evidence alone, it is not in my view possible to say  that
         it would be  unduly  harsh  on  the  children,  especially  as  the
         appellant will be deported to France which is  relatively  easy  to
         visit.  It is also said that the appellant's mother does travel  to
         London and it may well be that she would be willing  to  assist  in
         accompanying the children for stays with the appellant in France."

11.  The Judge then turned to the relationship between the Appellant and  Ms
    J who is a British citizen.  He noted that they lived together for  two
    years until March 2013 when the Appellant was asked to leave the family
    home due to  his  lifestyle  of  taking  drugs.   It  seemed  that  the
    relationship between the appellant and Ms J did not continue after this
    and since November 2013  he  had  been  detained.   The  Judge  however
    recorded that Ms J in her evidence confirmed that she  visited  him  in
    prison regularly and now  wished  for  the  relationship  to  continue,
    because she loved him and needed his support with the children.

12.  The Judge noted that the Respondent in her  deportation  letter  stated
    that the couple might have a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  on
    account of the prison visits and he then  referred  to  a  letter  from
    Macmillan Welfare Benefits Advice Service of May 2014 referring to Ms J
    as a lone parent.  Again it is  clear  on  a  reading  of  the  Judge's
    reasoning, that he found these matters to pose a  difficult  assessment
    for him, particularly in light of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  was
    considered to be at medium  risk  of  re-offending  and  therefore  his
    "lifestyle" problems that caused  the  breakdown  of  his  relationship
    previously, had yet to be tested but, on the balance of  probabilities,
    he took the view that it had not been shown this  was  a  "genuine  and
    subsisting relationship at the present time - that  is  a  relationship
    which goes beyond prison visiting".

13.  However, for the sake of completeness, the Judge went on to say  if  he
    was wrong in reaching that view, it was necessary to consider the  same
    test of undue harshness in relation to Ms J.  He had already found that
    in practical terms due to the circumstances of the eldest  child,  that
    Ms J did not have a choice about living in France.  He continued:

         "So the real issue is whether it would be unduly harsh  on  her  if
         the appellant is deported.  This raises the issue of her health and
         the treatment/monitoring that she is still receiving at  the  Royal
         Marsden Hospital."

    The Judge then went on to deal with the medical evidence in relation to
    Ms J's medical condition.

14.  At paragraph 31 the Judge  continued  that:  "This  was  then  the  key
    issue: would it be unduly harsh on Ms J to be required  to  manage  the
    two children  in  these  circumstances  without  the  Appellant?"   The
    evidence as to whether she had support from her own family was unclear.
     The Judge recorded that in oral evidence Ms J stated that she  got  no
    support from her mother and sister living in Aldershot but there was no
    corroboration of  this  and  the  letter  from  the  Macmillan  Welfare
    Benefits Advice Service of May 2014 referred to a friend assisting  and
    that a house swap had been arranged for her sister to move in to assist
    with the children's care.

15.  After further careful consideration the Judge at paragraph 32 said:

         "After careful deliberation I have reached the view that  it  would
         not be unduly harsh.   Whilst  I  do  not  underestimate  the  very
         difficult personal circumstances faced by Ms J, it is the  lack  of
         evidence to show either that she is  not  assisted  and/or  is  not
         coping with the children that in the end has led me to  reach  this
         view.  However, I am also very aware that  Ms  J  was  put  in  the
         position of presenting this case herself as the appellant  was  not
         granted legal aid for a representative, a  matter  that  is  to  be
         regretted in light of the circumstances of the case."

16.  I again pause,  because  yet  again  before  me,  Ms  J  presented  her
    partner's case with great eloquence and the Tribunal is grateful to her
    for taking the trouble to do so.  At the outset of the  hearing  before
    me, I indeed carefully went through the nature of the  hearing  and  my
    initial task, that she confirmed to me that she had understood,  namely
    as to whether or not the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on a point of  law,  that  may  have  been
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

17.  Under the heading "Proportionality" at paragraph 33  of  his  decision,
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge made specific reference to Regulation  21
    and Article 8 pointing out that he had to consider  all  these  matters
    and make an assessment of proportionality.  It would be as well to  set
    out his conclusions:

         "On the one hand I am satisfied that due to the serious  nature  of
         the index offence and the  medium  risk  of  reoffending  that  the
         appellant represents a genuine,  present  an  sufficiently  serious
         threat to come within the EEA Regulations.  I have also found  that
         his prospects  for  rehabilitation  are  not  prejudiced  by  being
         deported to France.  He lived in France until the age of  18  where
         he still has family members such as his mother and sister.  He  has
         previously been employed as a chef and it is reasonable  to  expect
         that he could find similar employment in France.  Whilst he is  the
         stepfather and father of two young children I have not  found  that
         it would be unduly harsh on them if he is deported to  France.   In
         relation to Ms J, I have not found on the evidence that she and the
         appellant are presently in a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
         for the reasons given above.  Even if it is considered that she  is
         in a genuine and subsisting relationship I have not  found  on  the
         evidence before me that it would be unduly  harsh  on  her  if  the
         appellant is deported.  In these circumstances, I am satisfied that
         the decision to deport the appellant is proportionate."

18.  In granting permission to appeal, it was considered by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge at paragraph 6 "at  least  arguable  that  although  the
    Judge  considered  aspects  of  the  character  and  quality   of   the
    Appellant's private life there has been insufficient reasoning  of  the
    issue of the ten year continuous residence point".

19.  Thus the appeal came before me on 10 August 2015 when, as  I  carefully
    explained  to  Ms  J,  my  first  task  was  to  decide   whether   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  errors  on  a
    point of law that may have  materially  affected  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.  I proceeded to hear and carefully consider Ms J's  submissions
    and those of Ms Fijiwala for the Respondent and I now give my decision.

Assessment

20.  Whilst the grant of permission appears to be limited to what the  Judge
    in granting permission stated at paragraph 6, I have  decided  for  the
    sake of completeness and in order to place my reasons for finding there
    has been no error on a point of law in the Judge's determination in its
    proper context, to deal with the grounds of application as a whole.

21.  It is submitted that given that the Presenting  Officer  conceded  that
    the Appellant had established five years'  continuous  residence,  that
    the Judge should not have undermined the concession by making a finding
    that the Appellant did not obtain five years' continuous residence.   I
    have to say that I find that such a challenge is wholly misconceived.

22.  Firstly, it is clear that as recorded by the Judge at paragraph  10  of
    his  determination  when  summarising  the  Respondent's  case  and  as
    reflected in the deportation letter, that he recorded that it  was  not
    accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant had been resident in  the
    UK in accordance with the 2006 Regulations for a continuous  period  of
    five years because he had failed to provide adequate evidence  that  he
    had been exercising treaty rights for such a period and in any case  he
    had received a  number  of  custodial  sentences  which  could  not  be
    included when calculating the  length  of  residency.   So  clearly  no
    concession was made by the Respondent, indeed it was to  the  contrary.
    It was not a matter of whether the Appellant had spent five  continuous
    years here but whether he had spent that period of time  in  accordance
    with the requirements of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

23. Secondly, at paragraph 11 of his determination and in  summarising  the
    Presenting  Officer's  submissions,  the  Judge   recorded   that   the
    Presenting Officer relied upon the deportation letter and that  as  the
    Appellant's first imprisonment was in 2009 it was accepted that he  had
    five years' continuous residence.  In other words  the  concession,  if
    that is what it was, amounted to an acceptance that the  Appellant  had
    lived in the UK for five years, but the  question  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, was whether  the  Appellant  had  enjoyed  five  years'
    continuous residence in the UK in accordance with  the  Regulations,  a
    point also and clearly made in the Respondent's  decision  letter,  and
    the Judge found that it had not.

24. In that regard, and contrary to the assertion in the grounds, the Judge
    never accepted that the Appellant had  arrived  in  this  country  from
    France in 2002.  Indeed at paragraph 16 of his determination the  Judge
    recorded that the Appellant had initially stated in  evidence  that  he
    came to the UK in 2000 to join his mother and sisters

         "... but altered this in cross-examination to 2002 after saying  he
         was aged 17 to 18 when  he  arrived.   There  is  no  corroborating
         evidence as to when the Appellant did come to the  UK  and  he  was
         first sentenced to imprisonment in 2009".

    The Judge continued:

         "Even if it was accepted that the appellant came here in  2002  and
         therefore had five years' continuous residence before 2009 he still
         had to show that he was exercising Treaty rights during this period
         in order to come within Regulation 15.  The only  evidence  of  the
         appellant working is a letter from his employers confirming that he
         worked from August 2002 to March 2013 and a PAYE coding notice  for
         2011.  There are no further tax documents such  as  P60s  for  this
         five year period from 2002 and the appellant himself  was  somewhat
         vague as to his 'part-time jobs'.

         "On the basis therefore of the evidence before me  I  am  satisfied
         that the appellant has not  shown  that  he  has  gained  permanent
         residence under Regulations 15 and 21.  It  means  that  the  lower
         test is applicable to the deportation: namely, that it is justified
         on grounds of public policy, public  security  or  public  health."
         (Emphasis added)

25.  The grounds further contend that the Judge  failed  to  consider  as  a
    real possibility,  that  the  Appellant  had  been  in  the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of ten years prior to the date  of  decision  meaning
    the highest threshold would be  applied.   Indeed  in  that  regard  Ms
    Fijiwala had referred me to relevant case law  including  that  of  the
    Second Chamber in a preliminary ruling in MG Case C-400/12  16  January
    2014, that in summary pointed out, that if the person  failed  to  meet
    the continuous residence period of five years, then of course, it  must
    inevitably have an adverse impact on whether or not  he  has  completed
    ten years such residence.

26.  Firstly, such a contention falls away because it is predicated  on  the
    mistaken premise that the Judge had accepted that the Appellant came to
    the UK in 2002 (see above).

27.  Secondly, the provisions of Regulation  21(4)  (a)  lay  down  that  it
    first has to be established that  the  first  five  years  amounted  to
    continuous residence in accordance with the Regulations.   If  that  is
    established then to move up to the next threshold level  the  Appellant
    has to show ten years' continuous residence.  However, in this case the
    Judge had already made a sustainable finding that the Appellant had not
    in accordance with the Regulations.  It follows that in  the  light  of
    that finding, it did not matter whether the Appellant  could  establish
    that he had been present in the United Kingdom  for  ten  years.   Thus
    contrary to the assertion in the grounds, it was not incumbent upon the
    Judge to consider this possibility as  in  the  light  of  his  earlier
    finding this could not be, as described  in  the  grounds,  "a  crucial
    aspect" of the Appellant's case.

28.  The grounds continued: there was a range of  different  ways  in  which
    the Appellant might  have  been  exercising  treaty  rights  from  2002
    onwards and that it was incumbent upon the Judge to make  "findings  of
    fact in relation  to  what  periods  of  time  from  2002  onwards  the
    Appellant was exercising treaty rights".  Such  a  challenge  is  again
    wholly misconceived.

29.   Firstly,  the  grounds  acknowledge  that  "there  was  a  paucity  of
    documentation before the Tribunal relating to the exercising of  treaty
    rights".  Further, that the Appellant had no legal representative would
    hardly have negated the fact that it was incumbent  on  the  Appellant,
    upon whom the burden of proof lay, and  certainly  not  the  Judge,  to
    establish that he was exercising treaty rights in the  period  of  five
    years that he claimed to have been continuously residing in the  United
    Kingdom.

30.  The grounds in support of the misconceived contention that  the  burden
    somehow lay on the Judge, have continued  to  rely  upon  the  mistaken
    understanding that the Judge had found  that  the  Appellant  had  left
    France in 2002.  He did not so find.  In fact the Judge had  simply  in
    the alternative and on an "even if" basis, considered  the  Appellant's
    position in terms of the 2006 Regulations.

31.  The grounds contend that the Presenting Officer had "conceded that  the
    Appellant had five years' continuous residence" but as I  have  already
    made clear that is very different from his  having  conceded  that  the
    Appellant was exercising treaty rights during that period in accordance
    with  the  Regulations  and  the  Presenting  Officer  made   no   such
    concession.

32.  Finally, it is said the Appellant made reference  to  "part-time  jobs"
    and that the Judge should have made  findings  as  to  the  periods  of
    employment; how long they lasted; whether the Appellant's evidence  was
    credible in relation to those periods of employment and whether,  as  a
    consequence of the claimed part-time jobs,  he  was  exercising  treaty
    rights.  Such a contention fails  to  appreciate  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to look at all the evidence put before him and  make  a  clear
    finding of fact on that evidence and that is precisely what  the  Judge
    did in concluding at paragraph 16 and on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    before him, that he was satisfied that the Appellant had not shown that
    he had gained permanent residence under Regulations 15 and 21.  To thus
    contend as the grounds so do, that the Judge  had  to  first  undertake
    some further investigation of his own, is in such circumstances  wholly
    misconceived.  Finally, in that regard, it is notable  that  even  now,
    the Appellant has not offered any or any cogent evidence  that  he  was
    exercising treaty rights throughout the five year period.

33.  As to the challenge to the Judge's Article  8  assessment,  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was clear at paragraph  33  of  his  determination,
    that in considering the proportionality of the Appellant's  removal  to
    his home country of France, he was satisfied "that due to  the  serious
    nature of the index offence and the medium  risk  of  re-offending  the
    Appellant represented  a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat to come within the EEA Regulations."  The Judge also found  that
    the Appellant's prospects for rehabilitation  were  not  prejudiced  by
    being deported to France where he had lived, on his evidence, until the
    age of 18 and where he still had family members  including  his  mother
    and sister and where he had previously been employed as a chef  and  it
    was reasonable to expect him to find similar employment in France.

34.  The Judge had clearly considered the best interests of the  Appellant's
    child and stepchild, indeed making it clear  at  paragraph  24  of  his
    determination, that it was important to address  their  best  interests
    first.  He noted that both children were British citizens  and  upon  a
    careful consideration of the evidence,  the  Judge  accepted  that  the
    likelihood was that the Appellant did have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with them.

35.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  went  on  to  properly  observe  in  a
    detailed and well-reasoned determination that I consider  was  prepared
    with evident care, that there were different considerations for each of
    the children because of the eldest child's continuing relationship with
    her biological father in the United Kingdom and vice versa as  well  as
    the fact that she was established and settled in her  school.   It  was
    therefore not in her best interests, indeed it would be unduly harsh to
    expect her to move to France and the evidence was that  her  biological
    father was not understandably likely to give permission in  any  event.
    The best interests of both children were found to be to  remain  living
    with their mother and this "necessarily meant in practical  terms  that
    both children remain in the UK with their mother".

36.  The Judge went on to conclude on the evidence before him that it  would
    not be  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to  be  separated  from  the
    Appellant, especially as the Appellant would  be  deported  to  France.
    That was relatively easy to visit and it might  be  that  on  occasions
    their mother would be able to assist in accompanying the  children  for
    stays with the Appellant in France.

37.  I do not understand the First-tier Judge to have  been  minimising  the
    impact of the removal of the Appellant on the children.  The Judge  was
    merely observing that removal need not necessarily lead to a total  and
    permanent rupture.  The ultimate question was whether the separation of
    the children from the Appellant resulting from their mother's  decision
    for the reasons identified such as her health  and  in  particular  the
    circumstances of her eldest daughter not to accompany the Appellant  to
    France, be justified in the present circumstances in the  interests  of
    public  policy  and  public  order.   The  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    concluded that it was.  It was a decision  to  which  on  the  evidence
    before him, he was entitled to come.

38.  In conclusion, I find this is not a case where the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's reasoning was such that the Tribunal were unable to  understand
    the thought processes he employed in reaching  his  decision  -  see  R
    (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  I find that the Judge properly  identified
    and recorded the matters that he  considered  to  be  critical  to  his
    decision on the material issues raised before him in this appeal.

Notice of Decision

39.  The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law such as to be material to the outcome and I therefore do
    not set aside the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction can lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date: 18 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein
