
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50399/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  16th July 2014                            |On 17th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MRS TAIWO RONKE YUSUF
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms A Everett , Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr N Aborisade of OA Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State but I will refer to  the
       parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on  11th  November  1972.
       She arrived in the UK on 6th March 2006 with entry  clearance  as  a
       visitor. She has five dependents: her husband and four children.  On
       15th March 2011 she applied for leave to remain in  accordance  with
       Article 8 ECHR for herself  and  her  family.  The  application  was
       refused without the right  of  appeal  on  19th  June  2012.  A  new
       application was made on 13th August 2012, and this was refused  with
       the right of appeal on 14th November 2013. Her  appeal  against  the
       decision was  allowed  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Gibbs in a  determination  promulgated  on  the  29th
       April 2014.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Osborne on 28th May 2014 on the basis that it was arguable that  the
       First-tier judge had  erred  in  law  in  the  approach  to  Gulshan
       (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640.  She
       had also arguably failed  to  fully  engage  with  Azimi-Moayed  and
       Others (Decisions affecting children: onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT
       00197, in failing to treat the best interests  of  the  children  as
       simply a starting point, and thus failing to give weight to the lack
       of leave to remain by the appellant and her dependents and  to  give
       reasons why they could not return to Nigeria as a family unit

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions

    5. Ms Everett relied upon the grounds of appeal.

    6. Ms Everett submitted that in accordance with EV (Philippines) v SSHD
       [2014] EWCA Civ 874, which at paragraphs 33,  50  and  58  clarified
       that the principle of best interests of the child had to  be  looked
       at in the context of the parents having no leave to remain and  thus
       not being entitled to remain here. It had to be  looked  at  on  the
       basis of real world facts, with the ultimate question being: "is  it
       reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with no right to
       remain to the country of origin?" Thus even if the interests of  the
       child were to continue in education in the  UK  their  overall  best
       interests could be to return with their parents  to  Nigeria.  Judge
       Gibbs had failed to follow the approach set out  in  this  precedent
       and had thus erred in law as she had not set out what  the  position
       of the children would be in Nigeria.

    7. She also submitted that Judge Gibbs had erred in  her  treatment  of
       Azimi-Moayed which, as set out in the grounds,  required  the  start
       point of the best interests of children to be with their parents who
       are being removed unless there are reasons to the contrary,  and  in
       her failure to give reasons why the children  could  not  return  to
       Nigeria.

    8. Mr Aborisade submitted that Judge Gibbs had not erred  in  law.  She
       had come to a decision that was open to  her  on  the  facts.  Judge
       Gibbs had had material about the situation in Nigeria before her: it
       was set out in the refusal letter and also in the appellant's bundle
       at pages 27 to 47. At paragraphs 7 and 9 of the determination  Judge
       Gibbs records the appellant's evidence and submissions on her behalf
       that she and her husband have family in the UK but not  in  Nigeria;
       that she and her husband have been able to  work  in  the  UK  doing
       hairdressing and cleaning; that they would have nowhere to live  and
       would be  destitute  in  Nigeria  and  thus  that  they  would  have
       insufficient money to provide  their  children  with  education  and
       medical care if they were returned to Nigeria. At  paragraph  10  of
       the findings and conclusions  section  of  her  determination  Judge
       Gibbs states that the  appellant  is  a  credible  witness  and  she
       accepts the evidence that she has given.  If  the  determination  is
       read as a whole it is therefore clear that the situation in  Nigeria
       on return  was  factored  in  to  the  proportionality  exercise  as
       required by Judge Gibbs. Further, as was said  at  paragraph  40  of
       Mukarkar v SSHD [2006] EWCA  Civ  1045:  "The  mere  fact  that  one
       tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually generous view of the
       facts of a particular case does not mean that it has made  an  error
       of law..."

    9. I informed the parties at the end of the hearing  that  I  found  no
       error of law in the determination of Judge Gibbs for the reasons set
       out below.

Conclusions

   10. There can be no error of law in relation to the determination of the
       matter under Article 8 ECHR for failure to identify reasons to  look
       at the matter outside of the Immigration  Rules  if  ultimately  the
       proportionality  exercise  is  conducted  properly  and  a   legally
       defensible decision that the decision of the  Secretary  of  State's
       refusal of leave to remain is contrary to Article 8 ECHR is reached.
       This "full" exercise  itself  must  show  more  than  arguable  good
       grounds  for  granting  leave  outside  the  Immigration  Rules   in
       accordance with Article 8 ECHR,  and  thereby  satisfy  the  Gulshan
       test.  I   will   therefore   focus   primarily   on   whether   the
       proportionality exercise conducted  by  Judge  Gibbs  discloses  any
       error of law.

   11. It is notable however that Judge  Gibbs  cited  Gulshan  and  before
       embarking on  her  general  consideration  of  Article  8  ECHR  did
       identify matters which she considered were arguable good grounds for
       granting leave outside of the  Immigration  Rules,  which  were  the
       medical  condition  of  appellant  and  her  eldest  son   who   has
       significant hearing loss; the length of residence of  the  children;
       the fact none of the children were born in  Nigeria  or  have  lived
       there; and the fact that three out of  the  four  children  were  in
       school  in  the  UK.  This  is  set  out  at  paragraph  12  of  her
       determination, referring back to paragraphs 10 and 11.

   12. As has  been  submitted,  the  case  of  Azimi-Moayed  requires  the
       Tribunal to start from a position whereby dependent children  should
       return to their country of nationality with their  parents  if  they
       are unlawfully in the UK unless there are reasons to  the  contrary.
       However it also identifies the fact that it is in the  interests  of
       children to have stability and continuity of social and  educational
       provision and the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the
       society to which they belong, and that seven years is generally seen
       as a lengthy period of residence which can lead to ties which it  is
       inappropriate to disrupt. As set out in EV (Philippines): "Thus  the
       ultimate question will be is it reasonable to expect  the  child  to
       follow the parent with no right to remain to the country of origin."

   13. Judge Gibbs  clearly  makes  her  proportionality  decision  in  the
       context of acknowledging that the appellant and her family  have  no
       leave to remain, see  paragraph  15  of  the  determination  in  the
       finding and conclusions section. She also balances the right of  the
       respondent to maintain immigration control and the failure  to  meet
       any  aspect  of  the  Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  19  of  her
       determination.

   14. I accept the submission  of  Mr  Aborisade  that  Judge  Gibbs  does
       include the evidence of the appellant about the situation in Nigeria
       in her findings and conclusions at paragraph 10, and thus adopts the
       submissions that the children  would  face  destitution  in  Nigeria
       without a home, access to education and medical treatment as part of
       her findings. It might have been helpful if she had done  this  more
       explicitly but nevertheless the determination should be  read  as  a
       whole, and she does clearly and unambiguously adopt the evidence  of
       the appellant which she finds credible in its entirety. At paragraph
       16 of the determination Judge  Gibbs  then  examines  the  level  of
       integration of the children in the UK which includes the  fact  that
       the oldest child has been in the UK for more than seven  years;  the
       fact that the other children have never been to Nigeria having  been
       born in the UK; and that  due  to  their  period  of  residence  and
       integration that all  the  children  "belong  to  British  society".
       Judge Gibbs gives some, but not significant weight, to  the  medical
       problems of  the  appellant  and  her  eldest  son,  having  clearly
       acknowledged that this was not a case that could meet the  threshold
       test under Article 3 ECHR for a medical case - see paragraphs 11 and
       17 of the determination.

   15. I find  that  Judge  Gibbs  has  conducted  her  assessment  of  the
       proportionality of the  appellant  and  her  children's  removal  in
       accordance with the guidance case law. She has answered the ultimate
       question as to whether it was reasonable to expect the  children  to
       follow the parents with no  right  to  remain  in  the  UK  back  to
       Nigeria. She has identified factors which led her to conclude it was
       not appropriate for the appellant and  her  children  to  return  in
       accordance with the approach set out in Azimi-Moayed.

Decision

   16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making
       of an error on a point of law.

   17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the  appeal  under
       Article 8 ECHR is upheld.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
16th July 2014
