
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number:     IA/50019/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 25th  July 2014                    |On: 1st August 2014       |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                                Linda Boateng
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondent is a national of Ghana born on the 28th  December  1990.
On the 8th May 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Howard) allowed  her
appeal against a decision to refuse to issue her with a residence  card
confirming her right of residence as the spouse of an EEA national. The
Secretary of State now has permission to appeal against that decision.

The matter in issue at the date  of  refusal  was  simply  whether  the
Appellant's marriage to her husband, conducted by proxy in  Ghana,  was
considered valid by the Ghanaian authorities.

The First-tier Tribunal resolved that issue in the  Appellant's  favour
and allowed the appeal.

Although the Secretary of State takes no issue  with  the  findings  of
fact in respect of the Ghanaian marriage it is now submitted  that  the
First-tier Tribunal erred in allowing the  appeal.   The  decision  was
well after the Upper Tribunal promulgated the decision in Kareem (proxy
marriage - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) and there was a failure
to take that decision into account. The burden of  proof  lies  on  the
Appellant to establish that her marriage would also be considered valid
in France, the country of nationality  of  her  EEA  spouse.  For  that
reason the appeal cannot succeed because the Appellant has produced  no
evidence to that effect.

I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law  in  failing  to  have
regard to the decision in Kareem. The decision is set aside.

I re-make the decision in the appeal  by  dismissing  the  appeal.  The
Appellant has not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof  in  showing  her
marriage is considered valid by French law.


Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and it
is set aside.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

I make no direction as to anonymity.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              25th July 2014
