
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50840/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |    Decision & Reasons         |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 28 September 2015                         |    On 22 October 2015         |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY

                                   Between

                        shileola olabanji akinrinlola
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Shah, instructed by Vision Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-Tier Tribunal. We find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this case is a Nigerian national.  He was born  on  10
    March 1975.  The respondent decided on 27 November 2014 to  refuse  him
    entry to  the  UK.   On  arrival  at  Heathrow  Airport  the  appellant
    presented a visa endorsed with a family visit visa issued on 6 November
    2014 valid until 6 November 2016 which had effect as leave to enter the
    UK for a maximum period of 180 days.  The reason why the appellant  was
    refused entry was that the Immigration Officer was satisfied that false
    representations were employed or material facts were not disclosed  for
    the purpose of obtaining the visa.  According to the reasons given in a
    notice dated 27 November 2014 refusing leave to enter, checks had  been
    made regarding the appellant's previous  travel  history  which  showed
    that he fraudulently obtained  a  counterfeit  Ghanaian  Nigerian  date
    stamp for 22 April 2009 and 29 April 2009 on his Nigerian passport.  In
    addition further examination of his passport had revealed a counterfeit
    Malaysian visa purported to have been issued on 28 June  2011  and  two
    further counterfeit entry and exit stamps on the same passport.    Also
    two corresponding Nigerian exit and entry stamps were considered to  be
    counterfeit.  On the basis of this the respondent  was  satisfied  that
    the appellant had made false representations to create a  false  travel
    history for himself and had the Visa Officer been aware  he  would  not
    have issued this or any other previous visa.  The  Immigration  Officer
    therefore considered that the visit visa should be cancelled.

2.   The appellant appealed that decision to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He
    appealed on the basis that he maintained that the visa stamps were  not
    counterfeit and asserted that he would be providing  adequate  evidence
    of the same in his appeal bundle.  He also asserted that the respondent
    had not provided him with any verification report confirming  that  the
    travel stamps were counterfeit and  he  was  not  able  to  take  issue
    therefore with that allegation at that time.

3.   His appeal was dealt with on the papers.  He elected  not  to  have  an
    oral hearing.  His appeal was determined on 10 March 2015 by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ghani and was dismissed in a decision promulgated on  16
    April 2015.   The First-tier Tribunal found that there was no  evidence
    before it from the appellant to confirm that the stamps in his passport
    were not counterfeit.  The First-tier Tribunal concluded in the absence
    of any evidence whatsoever from the  appellant  that  the  respondent's
    decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules.

4.   The appellant then sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tier
    Tribunal.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ransley on 25 June 2015.  He noted that the grounds  only  really
    raised one issue, namely  that the judge erred in law in  finding  that
    the respondent's decision was in  accordance  with  the  law  when  the
    respondent had failed to  provide  any  evidence  to  substantiate  the
    allegation that the visa stamps in the  appellant's  Nigerian  passport
    were counterfeit.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ransley,  in  granting
    permission, considered it was arguable that the judge erred in law  due
    to the failure to apply the well-established legal principle  that  the
    burden  of  proof  is  on  the  respondent  to  provide   evidence   to
    substantiate the allegation of  deception.   The  grant  of  permission
    states  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  not  have  found   the
    respondent's decision to be in accordance with  the  Immigration  Rules
    when there was no evidence from  the  respondent  to  substantiate  the
    allegation of deception.

5.   The matter now comes before the Upper  Tribunal  to  determine  whether
    there is a material error of law and what to  do  about  it.   I  heard
    representations both from Mr Clarke for the Secretary of State  and  Ms
    Shah for the appellant.  According to Ms  Shah,  neither  she  nor  the
    appellant had had sight of the respondent's bundle in this appeal.   It
    had not been served on the appellant and consequently the appellant had
    not received any evidence in  relation  to  the  Immigration  Officer's
    allegations that he  had  counterfeit  stamps  in  his  passport.   The
    Tribunal file also does not hold a copy of the respondent's bundle.  Mr
    Clarke had on his file a large bundle of  documents  including  forgery
    reports from experts.  Mr Clarke agreed before me that in light of  the
    fact that  the  respondent's  bundle  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and was also not served upon the appellant there had to be  an
    error of law in the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There
    had been no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal to substantiate the
    allegation of deception.   The  burden  of  proof  is  clearly  on  the
    respondent to provide cogent evidence in regard to  any  allegation  of
    fraud and that had not been done.

6.   I find therefore that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The burden of proof  was  on  the
    respondent to substantiate the ground for refusing entry,  namely  that
    the appellant had made false representations.  There  was  no  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal to substantiate this claim.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal materially misdirected itself and reversed the burden  of
    proof in finding that the Appellant had produced no evidence to confirm
    that stamps  were  counterfeit  and  dismissing  the  appeal.   In  the
    circumstances I conclude that there was a material error of law.

6.   I then asked  for  submissions  from  the  representatives  as  to  the
    appropriate forum for the re-making of the  decision.   Mr  Clark  made
    representations that the appropriate forum would be the Upper  Tribunal
    in the light of the necessity for limited  judicial  fact-finding.   Ms
    Shah made representations that the appropriate forum would be the First-
    tier Tribunal in light of the fact that the  appellant  would  have  to
    provide evidence in rebuttal and had not had sight of the  respondent's
    bundle.

7.   Having regard to Part 7.2  (a)  of  the  Practice  Statements  for  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  Upper
    Tier Tribunal, I conclude that the absence of the  respondent's  bundle
    in this case meant that the appellant was deprived of  a  fair  hearing
    and consequently in the circumstances the appropriate course of  action
    is to remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and remit  the  case  to
the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. No findings are preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
