

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
IA/50653/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |  Determination & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 13th June 2017                      |  On 15th June 2017                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                 MITALY DEY
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Iqbal, of Counsel, instructed by Solicitors Inn
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 16th  August  1986.
       She arrived in the UK on 18th September 2010 as  a  Tier  4  student
       migrant. She had leave in that capacity until April 2012.  She  then
       extended her leave as a Tier 1 post study  work  migrant  until  3rd
       August 2014.

    2. On 21st July 2014 the appellant  applied  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
       entrepreneur migrant. This application was refused on  1st  December
       2014 as it was  not  believed  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine
       entrepreneur.  Her  appeal  against  the  decision  to  refuse   was
       dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ian  Howard,  in  a  joint
       determination which also dealt with her business  partner  Mr  Hasan
       Attique, promulgated on the 9th September 2015. However,  an  appeal
       to the Upper Tribunal was successful  and  Deputy  Judge  Drabu  CBE
       remitted the matter to be reheard by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
       decision promulgated on 9th March 2016. The  appeal  was  remade  by
       Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cas  O'Garro  in  relation  to  the
       appellant alone, and dismissed in a  decision  promulgated  on  13th
       October 2016.

    3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Southern on
       9th May 2017 on the basis that it was arguable that  the  First-tier
       judge had erred in law for the  reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds,
       although  he  commented  that  it  might  not  be  material  as  the
       appellant's business partner had  returned  to  Pakistan  after  the
       first appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed.

    4. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. At the  commencement  of  the  hearing  I
       asked the parties to make submissions  both  on  error  of  law  and
       remaking as  the  issue  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
       materially erred in law by failing to give reasons for finding  that
       the appellant was not a genuine entrepreneur (if such an  error  was
       found) could only be answered by understanding  the  extent  of  the
       evidence that she was or was not such a person. It  was  clear  that
       the reasoning was very limited but if there was good  evidence  that
       she was not a genuine entrepreneur this  would  not  be  a  material
       failing.

Submissions - Error of Law and Remaking

    5. The grounds of appeal contend that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not
       look at the appellant's evidence either in terms of what she said at
       interview; her documentary evidence as before the respondent at  the
       time of decision; or her oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal as
       there are no findings on any of  these  matters,  and  there  was  a
       failure to assess whether the  appellant  was  a  credible  witness.
       Instead the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal became excessively  and
       unnecessarily concerned with the question of post-decision evidence.
       The only statement regarding any of  the  matters  relevant  to  the
       assessment of genuineness is  that  made  at  paragraph  40  of  the
       decision where  it  is  said  that  the  appellant  "has  not  dealt
       adequately or at all with  the  concerns  raised  about  the  market
       research  or  the  concerns  about  the  limited  evidence  she  has
       submitted  to  the  respondent  about  her  experience  to  run  her
       business". This is said to be unlawful as  it  is  not  a  statement
       backed up with any reasons, and  does  not  comply  with  Budhathoki
       (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 at paragraph 14.

    6. Mr Iqbal submitted orally that there were three issues raised in the
       refusal letter which were said to  mean  the  appellant  was  not  a
       genuine  entrepreneur.  Firstly,  failings  in  her  business  plan;
       secondly her lack of knowledge and experience as a legal consultant;
       thirdly that she had not  utilised  her  post-study  work  leave  to
       develop the business she now relied upon. By  these  submissions  he
       outlines his position that the errors  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       were material in failing to give reasons for the appellant not being
       genuine as on a proper examination of material she is to be seen  as
       genuine. Mr Iqbal's submissions regarding these contentions  by  the
       respondent are, in summary, as follows.

    7. Mr Iqbal submits that there was no obligation for the  appellant  to
       have used her post-study work leave to establish her  business,  and
       this does not mean that the she is not a  genuine  business  person.
       She had incorporated her business within  3  months  of  making  her
       application and that was all that was required by  the  entrepreneur
       Rules.

    8. In relation to her previous experience Mr Iqbal notes that  she  has
       highly relevant qualifications.  The  appellant's  business  H  &  M
       Associates is a legal consultancy and the appellant has a bachelor's
       law degree from Bangladesh, an LLM in business  and  commercial  law
       obtained in the UK and a graduate diploma in law (formerly the  CPE)
       from studies in the  UK.  She  has  also  done  relevant  work.  She
       submitted her CV to the respondent and in that document which  shows
       she has  previously  worked  as  a  paralegal  assistant  and  legal
       assistant in the UK, and in Bangladesh as an assistant to  a  lawyer
       in a court. At interview the appellant gave details in  response  to
       question 9 about her  UK  work  as  a  legal  assistant.  It  should
       therefore be accepted that the appellant is genuine in the sense  of
       having relevant academic/ work experience to this field.

    9. In relation to market research Mr Iqbal submits that the  allegation
       of the respondent is  that  her  document  is:  "copied  from  other
       sources  and  adapted  for  your  company".  This  is  a   perfectly
       reasonable and genuine  approach.   It  is  also  contended  by  the
       respondent that the appellant  had  insufficient  knowledge  of  the
       competition. At interview in response to question 18  the  appellant
       was not able to give a precise number of competitors  but  indicated
       that the competitors mostly  only  dealt  with  immigration  matters
       which is not one of the business sectors this company aims  to  deal
       with, see H & M business plan at page P9 of  the  bundle  where  the
       areas are described as: "student consultancy, business  consultancy,
       tax return, will making and drafting and divorce".

   10. The next criticism is that the  appellant  did  not  know  how  many
       clients she had, however in response to question 22 at interview she
       said ten to twelve clients and gave full details of the most  recent
       client including name, type work done and payments made.

   11. The respondent also contends that there is a lack  of  detail  about
       services and no structure to  the  payment  plan  in  the  contracts
       however if the contract in the respondent's bundle at page A  A  1-2
       is examined with Glaxy Accountancy at item 4 an hour rate is set out
       and time scale for payment is set out, and there is a description of
       the services to be provided. Similarly, in the contract with Salam &
       Co Solicitors at X1 the services are  described  as  completing  out
       sourced tasks and procuring business for Salam & Co and the  payment
       to be decided on a case to case basis with payments to  be  made  by
       monthly invoicing. It is submitted for the appellant that  there  is
       therefore a relevant amount of detail.  It is  reasonable  that  the
       retainer agreements have less detail, and it cannot be properly said
       that  preparing  wills  and   divorce   documents   is   simply   an
       administrative task, and not appropriate for a legal consultancy.

   12. Also in relation to  the  business  plan  it  is  contended  by  the
       respondent that Americanised  spelling  and  using  copied  sections
       interspersed with personalised sections. It is submitted  that  this
       is a perfectly reasonable approach for a genuine business plan.

   13. Finally, in relation to the  business  plan  it  is  said  that  the
       appellant had not considered how she would support  herself  in  her
       business as her salary had not been fixed, and there was not a back-
       up plan regarding the initial  stages  of  the  business.  Mr  Iqbal
       submitted that the  appellant  had  been  awarded  full  points  for
       maintenance so clearly had that amount of funds  to  deal  with  her
       support during the initial stages of business. Further the  business
       plan at page P28 of the bundle shows the modest  salaries  that  the
       appellant intended to pay  herself  in  the  initial  years  of  the
       business.

   14. Mr Iqbal also  submitted  that  in  coming  to  the  conclusion  the
       appellant was not genuinely  intending  or  able  to  establish  her
       business the respondent had not raised  issues  about  a  number  of
       factors set out as relevant at paragraph 245DD  of  the  Immigration
       Rules, and so was satisfied  that  she  had  a  credible  source  of
       funding, her good immigration history, and that she was a registered
       director and had the appropriate  registrations  and  accreditation.
       Overall he submitted that on the balance of probabilities she was  a
       genuine entrepreneur; that the First-tier Tribunal decision erred in
       law for insufficient reasoning  and  that  the  decision  should  be
       remade allowing the appeal.

   15. The respondent argues in a Rule 24 notice that it was lawful for the
       First-tier Tribunal to consider issues of new evidence  under  s.85A
       of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  because  the
       appellant put forward a new business scenario when she was the  sole
       director as her business partner had left the UK, and in the context
       of this situation gave sufficient reasons for his decision.

   16. Mr Tufan accepted however that s.85A of  the  2002  Act  was  not  a
       relevant matter: the appellant  was  not  trying  to  introduce  new
       material not before the respondent to argue that she  was  genuinely
       in business. He accepted the appellant had  relevant  qualifications
       but relied upon the points in the refusal  letter  and  argued  that
       there was sufficient reasoning in the First-tier Tribunal  decision,
       and that in the alternative  any  failure  to  give  more  extensive
       reasons was not a material error as on the balance of  probabilities
       the appellant was not a genuine  entrepreneur.   In  particular,  Mr
       Tufan drew attention to the fact that the appellant  had  been  very
       vague about the financial provisions for her salary in  the  initial
       period of the business; the number of competitor businesses and  her
       market research and the number of clients her business  had  at  the
       point of interview.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   17. The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Garro starts from
       the proposition that as the appellant's business partner had  ceased
       to be part of the business proposal that this  was  a  situation  of
       "new evidence" and thus the  appellant  could  not  succeed  as  the
       application was not as originally put to the respondent  due  to  Mr
       Attique's departure, see paragraphs 36 to 38  of  the  decision.  On
       this basis the First-tier  Tribunal  deals  very  briefly  with  the
       actual evidence of  the  appellant  from  all  sources,  and  simply
       identifies that limited evidence was before the respondent about how
       this appellant had done her market research and  had  experience  to
       run such a business so the refusal was lawful as the respondent  had
       made a  fair  assessment  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  genuine
       entrepreneur.

   18. S.85A(4)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
       prevents the considering of evidence which was not submitted  to  at
       the time of the making of the application. Ahmed and  Another  (PBS:
       admissible evidence) [2014] UKUT 00365  (IAC)  confirmed  that  this
       prohibition extends to non-points scoring issues under  the  points-
       based Rules such as genuineness. I find that the First-tier Tribunal
       erred when using this provision to say that the appellant could  not
       succeed in her appeal as I find it was irrelevant. The appellant was
       not trying to rely upon any new evidence, she just wanted  her  case
       assessed against the evidence she  submitted.  She  did  not  submit
       evidence her business partner had left the UK and ask to be  allowed
       to rely upon  it  in  the  assessment  of  her  genuineness,  as  is
       suggested by paragraphs 36 and 37 of the decision,  but  wanted  the
       genuineness of her application assessed  only  on  her  evidence  as
       originally presented to the respondent. In this respect,  therefore,
       I find that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

   19. The First-tier Tribunal does then nonetheless go on to consider  the
       assessment of the evidence, albeit very briefly at paragraphs 40 and
       41 of the  decision,  so  it  is  key  whether  this  assessment  is
       sufficient in its consideration of material evidence and  in  giving
       sufficient reasons. I  find  that  there  is  an  error  of  law  as
       characterised in Budhathoki as I find that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       has not identified and resolved: "the key conflicts in the  evidence
       and explained in clear and brief terms their reasons for  preferring
       one case to the other so that the parties can  understand  why  they
       have won or lost." In simple terms the First-tier Tribunal  has  not
       gone through the issues identified by  the  respondent  as  counting
       against the appellant  and  those  which  were  in  her  favour  and
       explained sufficiently why they find that these  matters  means  the
       appellant is not  a  genuine  entrepreneur  intending  and  able  to
       establish her business on the balance of probabilities.

   20. I find that the error  is  material  as  the  outcome  of  a  proper
       resolution of this issue could not be  clear  without  remaking  the
       appeal, and although ultimately the respondent may  well  not  grant
       leave to remain in this case, as the  appellant's  business  partner
       has left the UK without  pursuing  his  appeal,  this  appellant  is
       entitled to a decision from the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  whether
       she has presented on the balance of probabilities a genuine business
       proposal. Even if leave to remain is not granted  at  this  juncture
       this is an issue which may  be  of  importance  in  keeping  her  UK
       immigration record "clean", and  perhaps  in  relation  to  any  new
       application she may wish to make in the future. It is  relevant,  in
       this respect only that she does continue to operate her business.

   21. As a result of these conclusions I set aside  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal in its entirety and proceed to remake  it  based
       on the submissions by the parties as set out above.

 Conclusions - Remaking

   22. The appellant is refused because the respondent says she cannot meet
       the requirements of paragraph 245DD (k) of the Immigration Rules  in
       showing that she genuine intended and  was  able  to  establish  her
       legal consultancy business within the next six months. In R (on  the
       application of Zhang) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
       IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00138(IAC)  the  Upper  Tribunal   stated   that:
       "Furthermore, as a matter of commonsense, when an ECO  is  assessing
       whether an Applicant genuinely  intends  to  establish,  and  invest
       money in, a business in the United  Kingdom,  all  of  the  relevant
       circumstances pertinent to such a consideration should  be  assessed
       in the round."

   23. Whilst accepting that the respondent  has  rightly  identified  some
       aspects of the appellant's business venture which  had  elements  of
       vagueness, particularly the financial provisions for her  salary  in
       the early  days  of  her  business  and  the  number  of  competitor
       businesses in her local area  I  am  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
       probabilities that this appellant intended and was able to establish
       her legal consultancy business within the next  six  months  at  the
       time of  decision  based  only  on  material  that  was  before  the
       respondent for the following reasons. She clearly had some provision
       for her initial financial support having satisfied the "maintenance"
       requirements of the relevant Immigration Rules. and also had set out
       a low initial salary to be achieved of �7800  for  herself  and  her
       business partner in her  business  plan.  The  appellant  gave  full
       answers about how she  had  promoted  her  business  with  marketing
       through leaflets, community papers and community radio stations  and
       on-line websites in response to questions 19 to 21 at her interview.



   24. I  further  find  that  the  appellant  had  highly  relevant  legal
       qualifications and also  relevant  work  experience  for  doing  the
       relatively low level legal work her business proposal was based upon
       such as the preparations of wills, powers of  attorney  and  divorce
       petitions. She had a business plan which whilst clearly being  based
       on precedents was by the respondent's own admission adapted  to  the
       particular needs of her own enterprise. She had some contracts which
       were specific about the tasks to be undertaken and modes of  payment
       as well as more vague retainers which I find to be reflective of the
       likely arrangements to be made by  a  business  such  as  her  legal
       consultancy where the businesses she was aiming to assist would  not
       know exactly the demands that they might  experience  and  thus  the
       work that they would subcontract. She was  able  to  give  a  fairly
       precise number of contracts she had  obtained  and  a  comprehensive
       account of work done for the last client she had dealt with  at  her
       interview. The respondent was satisfied  that  she  had  a  credible
       source of funding and that she was a registered director and had any
       appropriate registrations  and  accreditation.  I  do  not  find  it
       relevant that she did not use all of her post-study migrant leave to
       remain to develop her legal consultancy business; that she has  done
       other non-relevant work in the  past;  or  that  her  business  plan
       contained Americanised spelling.


          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   3. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Signed:

Fiona Lindsley

Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 Lindsley
               Date: 13th June 2017



Fee Award        Note: this is not part of the determination.

    In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal  by
    allowing it, I have considered whether to make a fee award. I have  had
    regard  to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards   in
    Immigration Appeals. I have decided to make a whole fee  award  because
    the decision I have made was based solely on the information before the
    respondent at the date of decision.

Signed:

Fiona Lindsley

Upper                Tribunal                 Judge                 Lindsley
                  Date: 13th June 2017






