
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/50256/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Determination Promulgated  |
|On November 19, 2014                  |On November 25, 2014       |
|                                      |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS VICTORIA UMORU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Westmaas, Counsel, instructed by    Greenland
Lawyers LLP


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, born July 27, 1971 is a citizen of Nigeria. She came  to
    the United Kingdom as a visitor in 2006 and was accompanied by her five
    children who at the date of the original hearing  were  aged  eighteen,
    sixteen, twelve, ten and eight years of  age.  She  took  no  steps  to
    regularise  any  of  their  statuses  until  September  2012  when  she
    submitted applications on behalf of them all under paragraph 276ADE  HC
    395 and article 8 ECHR. These applications were rejected on October  4,
    2012 because incorrect fees were enclosed. The error was  corrected  on
    December  12,  2012  and  the  respondent  thereafter  considered   the
    applications and refused them all on August 21, 2013 and  at  the  same
    time a decision to remove them  was  also  taken.  This  appellant  was
    offered an in-country right  of  appeal  but  the  children  were  only
    offered an out of country appeal.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  November  27,
    2013. On August 29, 2014 Judge of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  Seelhoff
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard her appeal. He refused it
    under the Immigration Rules but allowed it under article 8  ECHR  in  a
    determination promulgated on September 8, 2014.

 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on September 15,  2014  and  on
    October 17, 2014  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pooler  granted
    permission to appeal finding it arguable the FtTJ had possibly erred in
    his approach to the article 8 assessment by failing to give reasons for
    finding compelling circumstances not  recognised  by  the  Rules  which
    would give rise to consideration of the  appellant's  circumstances  by
    reference to article 8 ECHR.

 5. The appellant and her children all attended the hearing before  me  and
    were represented by counsel.

    SUBMISSIONS


 6. Mr Avery adopted his grounds of appeal and submitted:


      a. The FtTJ erred by failing to consider the  applications  under  the
         Rules first and foremost.


      b. Where the appellant did not meet the Rules the FtTJ had to approach
         the appellant's appeal  from  the  premise  the  Rules  had  to  be
         complied with and where the Rules were not met the FtTJ  must  have
         regard to that fact.


      c.  The  FtTJ  failed  to  have  regard  to  the  public  interest  in
         maintaining immigration control. The FtTJ's comments  in  paragraph
         [22] were erroneous because the tests set out in  Section  117B  of
         the 2002 Act  underpinned  the  Rules  rather  than  superseded  or
         replaced them.


      d. The FtTJ allowed the appeal because he concluded that removal would
         be disproportionate in light of the fact the children had been here
         for over seven years  and  the  majority  of  them  were  attending
         school. The FtTJ failed to have  regard  in  assessing  the  public
         interests Sections (2) to (5)  of  Section  117B  and  allowed  the
         appeal because of section 117B(6).


      e. The FtTJ failed to deal with the appeal having regard to  the  fact
         it was the appellant's appeal and approached the appeal  as  if  it
         was the children's appeal. The FtTJ failed to take into account any
         of the factors that related to the appellant and simply allowed the
         appeal as he felt removal was not in the public interest because of
         the children's length of stay and the fact they were in education.


      f.     Mr  Avery  reiterated  that  the  FtTJ  did  not  consider  the
         application under the Rules and whilst there had been consideration
         of Section 117B this was incomplete and failed to take into account
         the principles of EV (Philippines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874
         where the Court of Appeal set out how "best interests of the child"
         should be approached.


      g. The appellant was an overstayer who had been here unlawfully  since
         the expiry of her "visa" in or around 2007. The  FtTJ  should  have
         assessed her claim in the real world and  on  that  basis  and  the
         child's interests should have been considered in that light.


      h. By concentrating solely on the children the FtTJ materially erred.


 7. Mr Westmaas  responded  to  the  respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submitted there was no error in law. He submitted:

      a. The FtTJ approached the decision with the Rules in mind because  he
         set out the law in paragraph [5] of his determination. He noted the
         respondent's position in paragraph [12] of  his  determination  but
         then went onto make findings between paragraphs [16] to [21] of his
         determination.


      b. The FtTJ took into account the appellant's immigration history  and
         attached no weight to her  claim  that  she  knew  nothing  of  the
         immigration procedures. He found she knowingly overstayed illegally
         but he found his main focus had to be the children and  their  best
         interests.


      c. He accepted the children  and  the  appellant  had  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship and that they had each lived here for  over
         eight years at the date of hearing. He also took into account their
         ages and the fact one of the children was  in  the  middle  of  her
         GSCE's as well as the general school reports.


      d. He concluded the children were well integrated and had spent  their
         formative years in the  United  Kingdom.  Removing  them  would  be
         disruptive and given the importance of consistency in education  he
         found it would not be in their best interests to  be  removed  from
         their schooling.


      e. All these assessments were under the Rules and it is submitted  the
         FtTJ took the Rules as his starting point.  He  then  proceeded  to
         consider the appeals outside of the Rules and the fact there was no
         public interest in removing a child where it would be  unreasonable
         to expect that child to leave.


      f.    The FtTJ then  noted  that  the  private  life  created  by  the
         appellant should have minimal weight  attached  to  it  as  it  was
         created whilst the appellant was here unlawfully. He  accepted  she
         had family life with her children and that removal,  whilst  legal,
         would be not be in the public interest and consequently he properly
         allowed the appeal.


 8. I reserved my decision on all issues.

    MY FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 9. Two issues have arisen as a result of the permission granted  by  Judge
    of the First Tier Tribunal Pooler. The  first  issue  forms  the  first
    ground of appeal namely that the FtTJ  erred  by  not  considering  the
    application under the Rules. The second issue concerns whether the FtTJ
    gave full consideration to the public interest issues that are set  out
    in the Immigration Act 2014 and cases such as EV.


10. In paragraph [5] the FtTJ noted,

             "In the first instance it is for the appellant to  prove  that
             she meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules in respect
             of private life. If she does not meet the immigration rules  I
             must consider her article  8  claim  in  the  context  of  the
             Immigration Rules, current case law  and  in  the  context  of
             Sections 117A and 117B of the 2002 Act."

11. The FtTJ commenced his consideration of the application correctly as he
    acknowledged the application had to  be  considered  under  the  Rules.
    However, the rest of paragraph [5] of his  determination  is  merely  a
    recital of Section 117B of the 2002 Act which is  the  public  interest
    considerations in article 8 cases. The FtTJ set out case  law  she  had
    regard to in paragraph [6] but this case law is only concerned with the
    best interests of the children. It should  be  noted  that  that  Upper
    Tribunal decision  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
    children; onward appeals) Iran (Rev 1) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) has to  be
    considered in light of the Court of Appeal  decision  of  EV  that  was
    handed down on June 25, 2014 (two months before the hearing before  the
    FtTJ).

12. To understand the FtTJ's approach  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  the
    findings that are set out from paragraph [15] of his determination. The
    FtTJ  recorded  that  the  appellant's  representative   accepted   the
    appellant could not meet the Rules and by implication  that  meant  she
    could not meet Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE,  which  of  course  is
    article 8 within the Rules. There  is  a  string  of  authorities  that
    provide guidance on how to approach the thorny issue  of  what  happens
    where a person does not meet the Immigration Rules.

13. The correct approach is to look at the appellant's  claim  and  to  ask
    whether the claim satisfies the Rules and if it does not meet the Rules
    then the FtTJ should consider whether there is anything exceptional  or
    compelling so that removal would be unjustifiably harsh. If the  answer
    to that question is "yes" then the FtTJ should then consider article  8
    ECHR and apply the test set out in Razgar [2014] UKHL  00027  and  that
    includes a proportionality assessment.

14. There is no reference to what  aspects  of  Appendix  FM  or  paragraph
    276ADE the appellant met. The FtTJ simply assessed the article 8  claim
    placing great weight on the children's best interests.  The  assessment
    he carried out between paragraphs [15] and [21] is clearly not,  as  Mr
    Westmaas invited me to find, an  assessment  under  the  Rules  but  is
    merely the FtTJ's assessment under article 8 with reference in part  to
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act which is of course  legislations  he  must
    have regard to when assessing article 8 ECHR.

15. At paragraph [22] the FtTJ the  set  out  the  Gulshan  test  as  being
    "appeals can only succeed outside the rules in unusual  circumstances".
    This is not the test to apply when considering whether an appeal  could
    succeed.

16. It is clear the appellant could not satisfy  paragraph  276ADE(iii)  to
    (vi) and by implication she cannot succeed under the  Rules  under  the
    umbrella of "private life".

17. The appellant is single and  lives  with  her  children.  In  order  to
    succeed under the Family Life Rules, as the parent of a child, she  had
    to satisfy Sections R-LTRPT and E-LTRPT of Appendix FM. She  could  not
    satisfy this requirement because the children were neither British  nor
    settled here and the children had not at the date of  application  been
    living here for at least 7 years.

18. The appellant is unable  to  succeed  under  Appendix  FM  because  the
    children are neither settled nor British and  that  ignores  any  other
    problems the appellant may have in meeting the  Rules.  In  particular,
    she could not satisfy E-LTRPT 3.1 or any of the financial  requirements
    set out in E-LTRP4.1 or 4.2. She cannot take advantage of Section  EX.1
    because of the earlier issues. Although the  appellant  speaks  English
    she is not from a country set out in GEN1.6 of  Appendix  FM  and  must
    therefore demonstrate she satisfies E-LTRPT 5.1.

19. The FtTJ has considered none of the above.

20. Although I am satisfied the FtTJ erred in his approach  to  family  and
    private claims I am satisfied that this was not  material  because  the
    FtTJ has  clearly  given  reasons  why  he  intended  to  consider  the
    application outside of the Rules. He took the view, as he was  entitled
    to, the Rules did not cover her family situation. There is therefore no
    material error on the first ground of appeal.

21. The real  issue  is  whether  the  subsequent  assessment  contained  a
    material error. It is here that  the  FtTJ's  failures  set  out  above
    become relevant because any proportionality assessment must have regard
    to all factors including any compliance with the Immigration Rules.

22. Mr Westmaas has submitted the FtTJ did have regard to all  matters  and
    he points to paragraph [15] of the determination.

23. The FtTJ noted in paragraphs [15] to [21] of his determination:

      a.  The  appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  and   deliberately
         overstayed and knew the majority of her residence was illegal.
      b.  He  rejected  her  claim  to  have  no  knowledge  of  immigration
         procedures.
      c. She neglected to resolve her immigration status.
      d. The focus of his considerations was the  children  and  their  best
         interests and whether it would be  reasonable  to  expect  them  to
         leave.
      e. The children had all spent eight years and two months as at  August
         2014 in the country. Three of the children  had  spent  their  most
         formative years here but they had all spent more of their formative
         years in the United Kingdom as against Nigeria.
      f.     The  two  eldest  minor  children,  in  particular,  were  well
         integrated in the United Kingdom.


24. The FtTJ, quoting from Section  117B(6),  found  there  was  no  public
    interest in requiring the parent of a qualifying  child  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom.

25. Whilst Mr Westmaas sought to persuade me that there was no error in law
    in the FtTJ's approach I am satisfied the assessment was flawed because
    the FtTJ placed far too much emphasis on the  children  without  having
    regard to any countervailing circumstances.

26. Numerous authorities remind us that  the  children's  interests  are  a
    primary consideration but they are not the only consideration.

27. The FtTJ acknowledged certain negative issues in paragraph [15] of  his
    determination and whilst there was a reference  to  this  in  paragraph
    [24] of  his  determination  the  FtTJ  overlooked,  in  his  balancing
    exercise, the importance of the  public  interest  and  also  what  the
    Courts have said about children who are not British.

28. Mr Avery referred me to the decision  of  EV.  This  decision  was  not
    placed before the FtTJ it seems albeit it appears to have  been  handed
    down some two months earlier. Mr Avery reminded me what  the  Court  of
    Appeal said in that case when considering the  best  interests  of  the
    children and the Court leaves no room for any doubt as to  what  weight
    should be given to children who are not British and whose parents  have
    no legal right to remain in the United Kingdom.

29. The Court of Appeal stated in EV (Phillipines) & Ors v SSHD [2014] EWCA
    Civ 874:


             "35. A decision as  to  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of
             children will depend on a number of factors such as (a)  their
             age; (b) the length of time that they have been here; (c)  how
             long they  have  been  in  education;  (c)  what  stage  their
             education has reached; (d) to what  extent  they  have  become
             distanced from the country to which it is proposed  that  they
             return; (e) how renewable their connection with it may be; (f)
             to what extent they will have  linguistic,  medical  or  other
             difficulties in adapting to life in that country; and (g)  the
             extent to which the course proposed will interfere with  their
             family life or their rights (if  they  have  any)  as  British
             citizens.


             55. Underlying these statements of principle is the real world
             fact that the parent has no right to remain in the UK.  So  no
             counter-factual assumption is being made and the interests  of
             the other family members are to be considered in the light  of
             the real world facts....


             58. In my judgement  therefore  the  assessment  of  the  best
             interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
             are as they are in the real world. If neither parent  has  the
             right to remain then that is the background against which  the
             assessment is conducted. Thus the ultimate question  will  be:
             is it reasonable to expect the child to follow the parent with
             no right to remain to the country of origin?


             59. On the facts of ZH it was not  reasonable  to  expect  the
             children to follow their mother to Tanzania, not least because
             the family would  be  separated  and  the  children  would  be
             deprived of the right to grow up in the country of which  they
             were citizens.


             60. That is a long way from the facts of our case. In our case
             none of the family is a British citizen. None has the right to
             remain in this country. If the mother is removed,  the  father
             has no  independent  right  to  remain.  If  the  parents  are
             removed, then it is entirely reasonable to expect the children
             to go  with  them.  As  the  immigration  judge  found  it  is
             obviously  in  their  best  interests  to  remain  with  their
             parents. Although it is, of course a question of fact for  the
             tribunal, I cannot see that the desirability of being educated
             at public expense in the UK can outweigh the  benefit  to  the
             children of remaining with their parents. Just  as  we  cannot
             provide medical treatment for the world, so we cannot  educate
             the world."

30. The FtTJ had regard to their  ages,  their  length  of  time  here  and
    education but he failed to have  regard  to  the  matters  set  out  in
    paragraph [35(d) to (g)] of EV and he also failed to attach any  weight
    to the fact the mother had no right to remain here in  her  own  right.
    The FtTJ should have approached the case from the position that neither
    the children nor the appellant had any legal basis  to  stay  here  and
    then balanced those matters that he felt were in her favour.

31. Mr Avery's submissions about the FtTJ's approach go to the heart of how
    an article 8 claim should be considered. The FtTJ in  this  appeal  was
    entitled to place weight on the children's best interests but he failed
    to approach the proportionality correctly. It is the FtTJ's failure  to
    have full regard to the public interest that leads to me to find  there
    is a material error.

32. Both representatives had agreed that I could remake  this  decision  if
    there was an error without any further submissions.

    ASSESSMENT OF ARTICLE 8 CLAIM


33. I approach this issue on the basis that this is a case, which should be
    considered outside of the Rules. I have given my  reasons  earlier  for
    this finding.


34. Applying the approach contained in Razgar I find there was both  family
    and private life and removal would interfere with private life but  not
    necessarily family life  because  the  family  would,  if  removed,  be
    removed as a family. Interference was in accordance with the law and in
    pursuit of one of the legitimate aims set  out  in  Article  8(2).  The
    issue was therefore whether the interference was proportionate  to  the
    pursuit of the legitimate aim.

35. I accept the  FtTJ's  findings  in  paragraphs  [16]  to  [18]  of  his
    determination. I also accept the eldest minor children  are  integrated
    into the United Kingdom and removal would be a disruption to  the  life
    they have come to know. I would also accept the three younger  children
    have more experience of life in the United Kingdom than Nigeria and  in
    the case of the youngest two children they probably have little  or  no
    memory of Nigeria.

36. However, the children have achieved this position because the appellant
    came to the United Kingdom for a visit and deliberately overstayed. The
    FtTJ heard the evidence and  reached  that  conclusion  and  also  made
    further  adverse  findings  as  set  out  in  paragraph  [15]  of   the
    determination.

37. In assessing the article 8 claim I must have regard  to  the  fact  the
    children are not to blame for the appellant's actions but I  must  also
    not lose sight of the fact this is the appellant's application.

38. Section 117B sets out those factors that must be  considered  when  the
    public interest is being looked at and I find as follows:

      a. The maintenance of immigration control is in the public interest.
      b. The appellant speaks English and presumably has at times  supported
         herself and her family here albeit illegally.
      c. She is currently not financially independent  and  is  therefore  a
         burden on the taxpayer.
      d. The private life created was at a time when the appellant  and  her
         children were here unlawfully.
      e. Private life has been created when  their  immigration  status  was
         precarious.
      f.    The public interest does not require removal  where  she  has  a
         genuine and subsisting relationship to a  qualifying  child  (which
         she does) and it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
         leave the United Kingdom.


39. I have to consider whether Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act is  a  trump
    card for the appellant in light of the fact it states that where  there
    is such a relationship public interest does not require removal.  I  am
    satisfied that this is an  important  issue  but  it  is  qualified  by
    Section 117B(6)(ii) which sets out a "reasonableness" test.  If  having
    considered all of the evidence I thought it would not be reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave then the mother's application  would  succeed
    under article 8 ECHR.


40. The Court of Appeal in EV made clear the desirability of being educated
    at public expense in the UK could  not  outweigh  the  benefit  to  the
    children of remaining with their parents. Just as  the  United  Kingdom
    could not provide medical treatment for the  world,  so  it  could  not
    educate the world. In assessing where a child should live the Court  of
    Appeal made clear that this should be  with  their  parent/parents.  At
    paragraph [58] of EV the Court of Appeal confirmed  the  assessment  of
    the best interests of the children must be made on the basis the  facts
    are as they are in the real world. This appellant has no personal right
    to remain in the United Kingdom and  that  is  the  background  against
    which the assessment should be conducted.


41. Is it therefore reasonable to expect the child  to  follow  the  parent
    with no right to remain to the country of origin?


42. The children's best interests  are  a  factor  to  consider  but  those
    interests must not be looked at in isolation and they are not  a  trump
    card. In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 the Supreme Court stated:

             "25... It was legitimate for the decision-maker to ask herself
             first whether it would have been proportionate to  remove  the
             parents if they had no children and then, in  considering  the
             best  interests  of  the  children  in   the   proportionality
             exercise,  ask   whether   their   well-being   altered   that
             provisional balance. When one has regard to  the  age  of  the
             children, the nature and  extent  of  their  integration  into
             United Kingdom society, the close family unit  in  which  they
             lived and their Congolese citizenship, the matters on which Mr
             Lindsay relied did not create  such  a  strong  case  for  the
             children that  their  interest  in  remaining  in  the  United
             Kingdom could have outweighed the considerations on which  the
             decision-maker  relied  in  striking  the   balance   in   the
             proportionality exercise (paras 17 and 18 above)."

43. I have had regard to the positive  findings  made  in  respect  of  the
    children as set out in paragraph [35] above but  in  carrying  out  the
    final question posed in  Razgar  and  the  question  posed  in  Section
    117B(6)(ii) I also have to have regard to the matters set out above  in
    paragraph [23] above and in  considering  the  best  interests  of  the
    children I must also take into account the views  of  both  the  Courts
    particularly in Zoumbas  and  EV.  Section  117B(6)  does  not  require
    removal in the public interest where the appellant has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying child but only where it would
    be unreasonable to require that  child/children  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

44. These children are Nigerian. They were all born there and they  do  not
    qualify for UK citizenship. They  have  benefited  from  education  and
    health care whilst here unlawfully  here  but  educational  and  health
    facilities are available in Nigeria. The children have integrated  well
    (including the adult child) and those attending  school  appear  to  be
    progressing well. However,  I  am  first  and  foremost  assessing  the
    appellant's  appeal  and  there  is  nothing,  apart  from  the  issues
    surrounding her children, anything positive that can be said about  her
    claim. She failed in her own right to satisfy the Immigration Rules and
    she has established private life whilst here unlawfully and her actions
    have prevented her children from being brought up in their own country.



45. Balancing all of these matters carefully I find that it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to require the children to leave the United  Kingdom  with
    their mother. The FtTJ rejected the appellant's fears and they would be
    returning to their country of birth.

46. I find it would be proportionate to require the appellant to leave  the
    United Kingdom.

    DECISION


47. There was a material error of law in so far as article 8 is  concerned.
    I set aside that decision and I dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.


48. For the sake of clarity I confirm  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules is also dismissed.

49. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.



Signed:     Dated: November 24, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not alter the fee award decision.

Signed:     Dated: November 24, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
