
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50116/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MUTIAT AJOKE SALAMI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Reynolds of Counsel, instructed by Daniel Aramide
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Wylie promulgated on 24 July 2015 brought with the permission of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Frankish granted on 5 November 2015.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  is
    the appellant and  Ms  Salami  is  the  respondent,  for  the  sake  of
    consistency with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I shall  refer
    to the Ms Salami as the Appellant and the Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.

3.   I am grateful for the helpful and  realistic  approach  adopted  by  Mr
    Reynolds this morning  who  accepts  the  substance  of  the  challenge
    brought by the Respondent to the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Wylie.  In such circumstances it is unnecessary for me to  rehearse  in
    detail the immigration history and other factual circumstances  of  the
    Appellant, all of which are a matter of record and  are  in  any  event
    summarised in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

4.   The principal issue in the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    whether or not the Appellant was the 'extended family  member'  of  her
    sister, Mujidat Ottun (who has  been  an  Irish  citizen  since  2006),
    within the meaning of regulation  8(2)  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

5.   The relevant family history and supporting evidence  is  summarised  at
    paragraphs 7-11 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and on this
    basis the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  was
    indeed an extended family member of her sister within  the  meaning  of
    regulation  8(2).   This  is  not  now  disputed  in  the  Respondent's
    challenge to the Upper Tribunal.

6.   However, without more the First-tier Tribunal Judge  then  simply  went
    on to allow the Appellant's appeal - stating erroneously that he did so
    under the Immigration Rules.

7.   The reference to the Immigration Rules I would be content  to  consider
    to be nothing more than a slip, but there is a more  fundamental  error
    on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Judge failed to have
    regard at all to regulation 17(4), and  in  this  context  I  note  the
    citation in the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal from the headnote of the
    case of Ihemedu (OFMs - meaning) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00340 (IAC)  which
    is in the following terms:

         "Regulation 17(4) makes  the  issue  of  a  residence  card  to  an
         OFM/extended family member  a  matter  of  discretion.   Where  the
         Secretary of State has not yet exercised that discretion  the  most
         an Immigration Judge is entitled to do is to allow  the  appeal  as
         being not in accordance with the law leaving the matter of  whether
         to exercise this discretion in the Appellant's favour or not to the
         Secretary of State."

8.   The judge failed to have regard to Regulation 17(4) and  to  apply  the
    guidance in the case of Ihemedu and in that regard I am satisfied there
    was a material error of  law.  The  judge  should  properly  have  only
    allowed the appeal to the limited  extent  identified  in  the  passage
    quoted from Ihemedu. This matter is now to be corrected  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

9.   I set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  There  is  no
    dispute as to the factual findings, and  accordingly  in  remaking  the
    decision I allow the appeal on the basis of those facts,  acknowledging
    that the Appellant is the extended family member of her sister pursuant
    to regulation 8(2): but the appeal is only allowed to the extent of the
    Respondent's decision being not in accordance with the law, and so  the
    exercise of  discretion  under  regulation  17(4)  remains  outstanding
    before the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

10.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
    is set aside.

11.  I remake the decision  in  the  appeal.  The  appeal  is  allowed:  the
    Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the  law  and  so  the
    Appellant's application remains outstanding  before  the  Secretary  of
    State and requires to be determined in accordance with the law.

12.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:  Date: 25 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
