
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50218/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th November 2015                |On 14th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              syed shtar abbas
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Afzal


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Ince made following a hearing at Bradford on
    13th April 2015.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan who entered the UK as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student on 3rd April 2012.  He successfully applied  for  the
    visa to be extended until 27th September 2014.

 3. He applied for a further extension of his visa on line but  was  unable
    to take the IELTS test because he did not have his passport.  He  wrote
    to the Secretary of State asking for  a  certified  copy  so  that  his
    national ID card could be renewed by the Pakistani High Commission  but
    there was no response to his letters.  Without the  certified  copy  of
    the passport he was unable to take the IELTS test and  his  application
    was refused.

 4. It was conceded at the hearing that in these circumstances the claimant
    could not succeed under the Immigration Rules since he still had no CAS
    letter and the college's licence had, in  the  interim,  been  revoked.
    Article 8 was the only arguable matter before him.

 5. The judge concluded that the Secretary of State had acted  unfairly  by
    not responding to the claimant's requests for his passport over a four-
    week period.  He decided to remit the appeal to the Secretary of  State
    for her to consider the claimant's position under Article  8  which  he
    said would have the advantage of  allowing  her  to  reflect  upon  his
    finding that she had acted unfairly.  Furthermore it  would  allow  the
    claimant to supply additional evidence  and  make  further  submissions
    about his private and family life and his relationship with his  Polish
    girlfriend.

The Grounds of Appeal

 6. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the application considered by the Secretary of State was  one  to  vary
    leave as a student.  No application was made concerning  human  rights.
    The decision included  a  One-Stop  Warning  inviting  a  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds but the claimant had not provided one.  The decision
    was therefore not unlawful.  So far as the relationship with the Polish
    woman was concerned there was no indication that this  formed  part  of
    the application for variation of leave.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Woodcraft on 21st August 2015 for the reasons  stated  in  the
    grounds.

 8. Following the grant a Rule 24 reply was  filed.   The  claimant  stated
    that he had been found to be a credible witness and it would have  been
    prudent to make a fresh decision instead of  challenging  it  entailing
    delay and expense.

Submissions

 9. I did not need to call upon Mr McVeety.

10. Mr Afzal submitted that all Tribunals had a duty to ensure  that  their
    obligations under the ECHR were complied with.  He denied that  Article
    8 had not been pleaded since they were referred to in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.

Findings and Conclusions

11. The decision before the Secretary of State  was  whether  the  claimant
    could succeed in his application to vary his leave as a student.  It is
    accepted by his representatives that he could not.  In his  grounds  of
    appeal challenging the decision he relied on the  delay  in  sending  a
    certified copy of the passport.  He also stated that if he  is  removed
    without completing his education his studies would go astray.  He  then
    concluded

         "It appears that when the case worker did not find CAS letter  with
         the application he did not bother to ask the appellant  the  reason
         for not  sending  the  CAS  letter  but  preferred  to  refuse  his
         application straightaway which is not fair and is a breach  of  his
         basic human rights guaranteed under the ECHR especially Article 8."

12. That is not a formulation of a claim to be allowed to remain in the  UK
    on private or family  life  grounds.   The  claimant  was  specifically
    invited in the Section 120 notice to state any additional  grounds  for
    his wishing to remain in the UK and he did not do so.

13. There is nothing unlawful in the Secretary of State failing to consider
    a claim which was never made.

14. In any event, even  if  she  had  done  so,  the  claim  is  absolutely
    hopeless.  The claimant has been in  the  UK  for  a  relatively  short
    period of time and came for a temporary purpose.  He did not put before
    the Secretary of State any information which could lead her to conclude
    that he enjoyed family life here.

15. It was not open to the judge to remedy  what  he  considered  had  been
    unfair behaviour by the Secretary of State by remitting the appeal back
    to her.  There was no basis for finding that the original decision  was
    unlawful and therefore no  basis  for  remitting  the  decision  to  be
    remade.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.   The  decision
is remade as follows.  The claimant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
