
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50080/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 2 May 2017                         |On 8 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    R L B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Hodgetts instructed by South West Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The anonymity order made in our decision promulgated on 10  March  2017
    remains in force.  The order was imposed,  and  remains  in  force,  in
    order to protect the anonymity of RLB's children.

 2. For convenience, we will refer to the parties as they  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of the United States of America who was born
    on [ ] 1984.  In 2009,  the  appellant  began  a  relationship  with  a
    British Citizen ("JB").  They married in the United  Kingdom  in  April
    2011.  They have three children, "A1" born on [ ] 2011, "A2" born on  [
    ] 2013 and "A3" born on [ ]  2015.   All  three  children  are  British
    Citizens.

 4. The appellant served in the US Military.  As a consequence, during  the
    course of his relationship with JB, he spent much of his  time  in  the
    USA.  JB lived in the USA (although not necessarily with the appellant)
    between March 2012 and February 2013 along with A1.  They  returned  to
    the UK in late February 2013.  Shortly after, JB  discovered  that  she
    was pregnant.  The appellant came to the UK as a visitor on 15  October
    2013 shortly before A2 was born.  Thereafter, he overstayed  his  leave
    and has remained in the UK since that date.

 5. On 19 August 2014, the appellant and JB were interviewed by Immigration
    Officers and the appellant was served with a notice  of  removal  under
    s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

 6. In September 2014, the local social services became involved  with  the
    appellant and his family following contact from the police.  This arose
    because of information received from the USA concerning the appellant's
    conduct there in May-October  2012.   That  conduct  involved  sexually
    explicit contact with women  and  young  girls  through  internet  chat
    rooms.  Some of those with whom he was in  contact  were  underage.   A
    civil  investigation  took  place  in  the  USA  and  subsequently  the
    appellant was discharged from the US Military for misconduct.

 7. The appellant was told by the social services that he should inform  JB
    of the investigation in the US or the children (A1  and  A2)  would  be
    removed and placed in care.  When he did so, the relationship  with  JB
    came to an end and they separated on 29  September  2014.   JB  suffers
    from mental health problems and A1  and  A2  went  to  live  with  JB's
    parents.

 8. Currently, as a result of Family Court proceedings A1 and A2 live  with
    their maternal grandparents under Child Arrangement  Orders.   A3,  who
    was born in February 2015, is subject to a  care  order  and  initially
    resided  with  JB.   However,  since  January  2017,   because   of   a
    deterioration in JB's mental health, A3 has  been  placed  with  foster
    parents.

 9. The appellant, pursuant to an order of the Family Court, has supervised
    contact with A1 and A2 on 10/12 per year basis.  Although the appellant
    does not formally have contact with A3 pursuant to a  court  order,  A3
    has accompanied A1 and A2 on occasions of supervised contact  with  the
    appellant.  JB has contact with A3 four times a week.

10. At the hearing, we were told that the  appellant  has  applied  to  the
    Family Court for custody  of  all  three  children,  in  particular  in
    relation to A3.  That application, we were told, was made on  26  April
    2017.  A copy of the application is in the papers.

11. On 10 October 2014, the appellant was detained in order to remove  him.
    However, on 10 November 2014, the appellant applied for leave to remain
    relying upon Art 8 of the ECHR and, in  particular,  his  relationships
    with his children.

12. On 8 December 2014, the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's
    claim for leave under Art 8 and made a new decision to remove him under
    s.10 of the IA Act 1999.  The appellant was released from detention  in
    January 2015.

The Appeal

13. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   His  appeal  was
    heard on 26 May 2016 by Judge Loughridge.  He relied  upon  Art  8  and
    principally upon his relationships with A1 and A2.   He  did  not  then
    rely on any relationship with A3, who at that time lived with  JB,  and
    he accepted JB's position that she did not wish the appellant  to  have
    any contact with her or A3.

14. Judge Loughridge allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8.  First, he
    concluded that the appellant could not succeed under the relevant rules
    in Appendix FM because his history of sexual activity conducted via the
    internet with, inter alia, underage girls  meant  he  fell  within  the
    suitability requirement in S-LTR.1.6.1 in that it  made  his  "presence
    ... in the UK ... not conducive to the public  good"  so  that  it  was
    "undesirable to allow [him] to remain  in  the  UK".   Secondly,  Judge
    Loughridge accepted that the appellant had a  "genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with A1 and  A2  who  were  each  a  "qualifying
    child" as defined in s.117D(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("NIA Act 2002").  Applying s.117B(6) of  the  NIA  Act
    2002, Judge Loughridge found that it was  not  "reasonable  to  expect"
    either A1 or A2 to leave the UK and, as a result, the  public  interest
    did not require the appellant's removal.  Thus, the judge  allowed  the
    appeal under Art 8 outside the rules.

15. The Secretary of State sought to appeal that decision.  Permission  was
    initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but on 17  November  2016,
    the Upper Tribunal granted the Secretary of State permission to appeal.



16. The appeal came before  us  on  27  February  2017.   In  our  decision
    promulgated on 10 March 2017, we concluded that the judge's decision to
    allow the appeal under Art 8 involved the making of a material error of
    law in that the judge had failed  to  take  into  account  the  "public
    interest" in determining whether it was reasonable to expect A1  or  A2
    to leave the UK as required by the Court of Appeal's decision in R  (MA
    and Others) (Pakistan) v SSHD [2016]  EWCA  Civ  705  which  post-dated
    Judge Loughridge's decision.

17. As a consequence, we set aside Judge Loughridge's decision and directed
    that the appeal be relisted before  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  order  to
    remake the decision under Art 8.

The Hearing

18. The hearing to remake the decision took place on 2 May  2017  when  the
    appellant was again represented by  Mr  Hodgetts  of  Counsel  and  the
    Secretary of State was, on this occasion, represented by  Mr  Kotas,  a
    Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

19. Mr Hodgetts indicated that he did not intend to call any oral  evidence
    and that the appeal should proceed on the basis of submissions and  the
    documentary evidence before us.

20. In that latter regard, in addition to the bundles of  documents  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  ("FTT1"  and  "FTT2"),  Mr  Hodgetts  sought
    permission to admit before us three further bundles ("UT1",  "UT2"  and
    "UT3" respectively) under rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269 as amended) and a position  statement
    from the local social services dated 27 April 2017.  Mr Kotas indicated
    that he had no objection to these  documents  being  admitted  and,  on
    behalf of the Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  admit  into
    evidence  email  correspondence  from   the   USA   relating   to   the
    investigation of the appellant there.  Mr Hodgetts did  not  object  to
    the  admission  of  this  email  having  taken  instructions  from  the
    appellant.

21. In the circumstances, we considered it proper to admit the new evidence
    under rule 15(2A).

The Submissions

22. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Hodgetts put the appellant's case on two
    bases under Art 8 of the ECHR.

23. Mr Hodgetts principally placed reliance upon s.117B(6) of the  NIA  Act
    2002.

24. Mr Hodgetts submitted that the appellant had a "genuine and  subsisting
    parental relationship" with each  of  A1,  A2  and  A3  who  were  each
    qualifying children.  It was in their best interests to retain  contact
    with the appellant.  He submitted that these matters had been  accepted
    by the Senior Presenting Officer  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  its
    earlier hearing.

25.  Mr  Hodgetts  accepted  that  in  the  light  of  MA  (Pakistan)   the
    "reasonableness" of whether A1, A2  and  A3  should  leave  the  United
    Kingdom had to be determined in the light of the public interest.

26. Mr Hodgetts relied upon the following factors:

    (1)  All three children are British;

    (2)  A2 and A3 were born in the UK and had never left the UK.   A1  was
         also born in the UK and had only spent time between March 2011  and
         February 2013 elsewhere, in the USA;

    (3)  The three children currently had a stable  existence;  A1  and  A2
         living with their  maternal  grandparents  and  A3  with  a  foster
         family;

    (4)  If they moved to the USA, their circumstances  would  be  unstable
         and insecure in the light of the appellant's circumstances.

27. Mr Hodgetts relied upon the Family Court's decision (HHJ Horton)  dated
    23 February 2016 (pages 5-6, UT3) that the ten times per  year  contact
    with  the  children  was  not  sufficient  to  "develop  the  sort   of
    relationship that these children  should  eventually  have  with  their
    father" ([42]).   He relied on the judge's acceptance that  it  was  in
    the interests of the children to have a  "good  quality,  long  lasting
    relationships with both their parents" ([43]).

28. Mr Hodgetts relied upon Judge Loughridge's finding that  the  appellant
    presented a "low" risk to  underage  girls  in  the  UK.   Mr  Hodgetts
    submitted that the evidence demonstrated that the appellant had engaged
    with his risk of re-offending and he relied upon the  evidence  from  a
    therapist Dr Smith (at pages 59-60, UT2) and the more  recent  evidence
    from Dr Smith dated 28 April  2017  (at  pages  21-22,  UT3)  that  the
    appellant had undergone further sessions.

29. Mr Hodgetts submitted that it was simply the  case  that  the  children
    could not go to the USA.  Mr Hodgetts relied upon  the  Family  Court's
    judgment where it was stated by  HHJ  Horton,  if  the  appellant  were
    deported to the USA (at [45]):

         "Contact to the children should only take place  in  this  country,
         unless the children's carers themselves take the  children  to  the
         United States therefore, whilst the father is in the United States,
         the only contact I can endorse  is  that  suggested  by  the  local
         authority, which as I understand it is indirect."

30. Mr Hodgetts also referred to the "Position Statement"  dated  27  April
    2017 from the solicitor to the Child Protection  Team  for  the  social
    services responsible for the children that there  was,  in  effect,  no
    prospect whatsoever of the court allowing the children to live with the
    appellant in the USA.

31. Mr Hodgetts submitted that, applying s.117B(6), it was,  as  a  result,
    not reasonable to expect the children to leave the UK.

32. Alternatively, Mr Hodgetts submitted that it would breach Art 8 not  to
    allow the appellant to remain in the UK in order  to  pursue  and  take
    part in the Family Court proceedings which he had  begun  on  26  April
    2017 seeking custody of all three children.  He relied upon  the  Upper
    Tribunal's decision in RS (Immigration and  Family  Court  Proceedings)
    India [2012] UKUT 00218 (IAC).

33. Mr Kotas submitted that s.117B(6) did not apply as A1, A2 and  A3  were
    not being required to leave the UK.  Further,  he  submitted  that  the
    judge in the family proceedings had not ruled out  the  possibility  of
    the children going to the USA.  The appellant was not without means and
    the children would be going to an  English  speaking  country.   Having
    regard to the public interest based upon the appellant's misconduct, Mr
    Kotas submitted that it would be reasonable in all the circumstances to
    expect the children to leave the UK and s.117B(6) did not apply.

34. Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of
    the rules and his family life had been established  whilst  his  status
    was "precarious".  Having regard to all  the  circumstances,  Mr  Kotas
    submitted that it would be proportionate to remove the appellant.

Discussion

35. Whilst Mr Hodgetts only relied upon s.117B(6) of the NIA Act  2002,  we
    must approach the  issue  of  whether  a  breach  of  Art  8  has  been
    established in a structured way applying the 5-stage test in R (Razgar)
    v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27. We must consider the rights of the whole  family
    including his children and their grandparents (see Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD
    [2008] UKHL 39).

36. We are satisfied that Art 8.1 is engaged  as  the  appellant's  removal
    will seriously interfere with  the  family  and  private  life  of  the
    appellant, his children and their grandparents if he is removed to  the
    USA.  We accept that the decision is in accordance with  the  law.   It
    was not suggested before us that the appellant could succeed under  the
    Immigration Rules.  Further, the appellant's removal will  be  for  the
    legitimate aims of effective immigration control and  preventing  crime
    and disorder.

37. The crucial issue is that of proportionality.  That  issue  requires  a
    fair balance to be struck between the public interest  and  the  rights
    and interests of the appellant and others protected  by  Art  8.1  (see
    Razgar at [20]).  In R(MM and others)(Lebanon) v SSHD [2017]  UKSC  10,
    the Supreme Court reminded us at [43] that the "central issue" is:

         "Whether a fair  balance  has  been  struck  between  the  personal
         interests of all members of the family in maintaining their  family
         life ... and the public interest in controlling immigration".

38. We must take into account the "best interests" of  the  children  as  a
    primary, but not determinative, consideration (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD
    [2011] UKSC 4 and Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74 at [10]).

39. In carrying out that balancing  exercise  and  reaching  a  finding  on
    proportionality, the Tribunal must "have regard" to the  considerations
    set out in s.117B of the NIA Act 2002 (s.117A).

40. Section 117B is in the following terms:

         "117B. Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in  all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

41. The public interest in this appeal, including  that  reflected  in  the
    fact that the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the  Rules,  is
    entitled to "considerable weight" (see MM and others at [75]; and  also
    Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 at [46] et  seq  and  R  (Agyarko  and
    another) v  SSHD  at  [46]-[48]).   The  search  is  for  "sufficiently
    compelling" circumstances to outweigh the public interest  because  the
    refusal of leave would result  in  "unjustifiably  harsh  consequences"
    (see Agyarko at [48]).

42. First, the public interest in effective immigration control is  engaged
    (s.117B(1)).

43. Secondly, the appellant speaks English so that the public  interest  in
    s.117B(2) is not engaged but  the  fact  that  the  appellant's  speaks
    English does not provide a positive right to leave and is, at  best,  a
    neutral factor (see Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803 at [59]-[61]).

44. Thirdly, we were no expressly addressed on the  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant was financially independent for the purpose of s.117B(3).  We
    are content to assume that he is but that too is a neutral factor  (see
    Rhuppiah above).

45. Fourthly, we accept that the appellant's  private  life  has  developed
    whilst he has either been in the UK unlawfully or whilst  his  presence
    was precarious and so is entitled to  "little  weight"  (s.117B(4)  and
    (5)).  However, the way Mr Hodgetts put the appellant's  claim  was  on
    the basis of his family life with his children rather than his  private
    life in the UK.   ( Section 117B((4) only applies to 'family life' with
    a partner.)

46. We turn now to s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002  upon  which  Mr  Hodgetts
    placed reliance.  It is helpful to remind ourselves of the  wording  of
    s.117B(6) which provides as follows:

         "117B(6)      In the  case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                deportation, the  public  interest  does  not  require  the
                person's removal where -

                (a)   the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                     relationship with a qualifying child, and

                (b)   it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                     leave the United Kingdom."

47. As regards that provision, two propositions follow from  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in MA (Pakistan).   First,  if  the  appellant  falls
    within the terms of s.117B(6) then his removal is  not  in  the  public
    interest and, as a result,  his  appeal  under  Art  8  would  succeed.
    Secondly, in determining whether it would "not be reasonable to expect"
    the children to leave the United Kingdom, not only their  circumstances
    must be  taken  into  account,  but  also  the  public  interest  (here
    represented primarily by the appellant's accepted misconduct)  must  be
    factored in.  The Court of Appeal approved the approach in its  earlier
    decision of MM (Uganda) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 450 when considering, in
    the context of a deportation case, s.117C(5) and the  requirement  that
    the effect of deportation on a  partner  or  child  should  be  "unduly
    harsh" in order for the public interest not to require deportation of a
    person sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than  four  years.
    At [45] in MA (Pakistan), Elias LJ (with whom King LJ and  Sir  Stephen
    Richards agreed) stated:

         "In my judgment, if the court should have regard to the conduct  of
         the applicant in any other matters relevant to the public  interest
         when applying the 'unduly harsh' concept under Section 117C(5),  so
         should it when considering the  question  of  reasonableness  under
         Section 117B(6)."

48. That approach was, of course, the basis upon which  we  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision as it had not been applied by the First-
    tier Tribunal in this appeal.

49. We do not accept Mr Kotas' submission that s.117B(6)  cannot  apply  as
    the children will not be required to leave the UK.  It cannot,  in  our
    view, be interpreted in this narrow way.  The answer is plain from  the
    wording itself.  The paradigm case to which  it  applies  is  when  the
    appellant seeks to rely upon his or her relationship with a  child  who
    is a British citizen.  Such a child can never be required to leave  the
    UK - he or she is not subject to immigration control.  All that can  be
    asked, and answered, is whether such a child can be expected to leave.

50. Is Mr Hodgetts then correct in his  submission  that  if  the  children
    cannot leave the UK then ipso facto it  would  "not  be  reasonable  to
    expect" the children to leave the UK?

51. In our judgment, that is not  the  correct  approach  in  principle  to
    s.117B(6).  First, Mr Hodgetts submission was, in part,  based  upon  a
    contrast between  s.117C(5)  and  s.117B(6).   He  submitted  that  the
    former, in the deportation context, contemplated the possibility of  an
    inevitable split in the family but only if that split  had  an  "unduly
    harsh" impact upon a child (or partner) would the public  interest  not
    require deportation.  By contrast, he submitted  s.117B(6)  focused  on
    whether it would be reasonable for the child to "leave" the UK and,  if
    it was not so, then  removal  was  not  in  the  public  interest.   Mr
    Hodgetts submitted that, in effect, if the Secretary  of  State  wished
    the appellant to leave  the  UK  then  she  could  make  a  deportation
    decision based upon his misconduct.  Whilst the latter  possibility  is
    always open to the Secretary of State, it is not,  in  our  judgment  a
    necessary  pre-requisite  for  "removal"  of  an  individual  where   a
    qualifying child cannot accompany or follow the individual abroad.

52. First, Mr Hodgetts submission reads, in our judgment, too much into the
    different wording of s.117C(5) and s.117B(6).  It fails  to  recognise,
    as the decisions of the Court  of  Appeal  acknowledge,  that  the  two
    provisions exhibit common features in the context  of  deportation  and
    removal respectively.  We have already referred to the analogy drawn by
    the Court of Appeal in MA (Pakistan) between the  two  provisions.   Of
    course, we accept that the concept of an "unduly harsh"  impact  rather
    than whether leaving the UK would be "reasonable" places a greater onus
    upon an individual seeking to resist deportation rather  than  removal.
    But, in our judgment, we see nothing in the differential wording of the
    two provisions to support Mr Hodgetts bald proposition that if a  child
    cannot leave it is not reasonable to expect it to do so.

53. Secondly, and leading on from what we have just said, at its  heart  Mr
    Hodgetts submission conflates the practicality of a child  leaving  the
    UK with the normative question of whether it is reasonable to expect it
    to do so.  In our judgment, the now unequivocal case law of  the  Court
    of Appeal - which is binding upon us -  requires a balancing  exercise,
    taking  into  account  the  public  interest,  to  be  carried  out  in
    determining whether it would be reasonable to expect a child  to  leave
    the UK.  That, demonstrates that the practicality  of  (or  even  legal
    prohibition upon) leaving the UK  is  not  a  determinative  factor  in
    reaching a conclusion on whether it is "not  reasonable"  to  expect  a
    child do so.  Mr Hodgetts submission, if correct, would in a case where
    a child cannot leave the UK result in the application of  s.117B(6)  to
    prevent an individual's removal without any consideration of the public
    interest.  As regards the latter, such an approach would run counter to
    that set out in MA (Pakistan) (approved in AM (Pakistan) and  others  v
    SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180).

54. Consequently, we reject  Mr  Hodgetts  submission  that,  even  if  the
    evidence establishes that A1, A2 and A3, cannot leave the  UK  that  is
    not, in itself, determinative of whether or not it  is  "reasonable  to
    expect" them to do so.

55. We now turn to  consider  the  application  of  Art  8,  in  particular
    s.117B(6) to the facts.  Many, if not most, of the facts in this appeal
    are not in dispute.

56. It was accepted by Judge Loughridge that the appellant has  a  "genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship" with A1  and  A2.   That  is  not
    challenged.  The appellant has, since January 2017,  also  had  contact
    with A3 through, as we understand it, the informal  arrangement  of  A3
    accompanying the other children  at  times  of  contact.   It  was  not
    suggested before us that, as a result, the appellant had anything other
    than a "genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship"  with  A3.   We
    accept that relationship exists.  Of course, as British citizens,  each
    child is a "qualifying child" by virtue of s.117D(1)  of  the  NIA  Act
    2002.

57. Mr Kotas did not seek to argue before us that it was other than in each
    of  the  children's  "best  interests"  to  retain  contact  with   the
    appellant.  That was clearly the position of HHJ Horton in his judgment
    of 23 February 2016 in the family  proceedings.   As  we  have  already
    seen, he ordered that the appellant should have contact with A1 and  A2
    on ten occasions each year.  A3 was not part of those  proceedings  but
    nothing in the evidence  before  us  leads  us  to  conclude  that  any
    different decision would have been made in relation  to  A3.   We  have
    seen in the documents reports from the social workers  in  relation  to
    the supervised contact with A1,  A2  and  A3  (pages  1-44,  UT1).   It
    suffices to say that these are positive and  entirely  consistent  with
    contact being in the children's best interests.

58. We accept that the present position is that none of  the  children  are
    able to leave the UK, in particular to accompany or join the  appellant
    in the USA.  In relation to A1 and  A2,  HHJ  Horton  at  [45]  of  his
    decision considered the position of A1 and  A2  if  the  appellant  was
    deported.  He said this:

         "I have also considered the position if the father is  deported  to
         the United States.  The circumstances that may be in play then  are
         almost impossible to predict.  I do not know  whether  he  will  be
         allowed back into this country on another  Visa  having  failed  to
         return after this one.  I do not know  whether  the  United  States
         military will take action against him, whether he will  be  subject
         to any penalties or restrictions over there.  All I can say at this
         stage, doing the best I can, is that  I  am  quite  satisfied  that
         given the particular difficulties that there are in this case  that
         contact to the children should only take  place  in  this  country,
         unless the children's carers themselves take the  children  to  the
         United States.  Therefore, whilst  the  father  is  in  the  United
         States, the only contact I can endorse is  that  suggested  by  the
         local authority, which as I understand it is indirect.  These  days
         there are, as we are only too aware in this case, numerous ways  of
         maintaining  indirect  contact  electronically,  and   subject   to
         necessary safeguards that contact could be explored if  the  father
         is deported to the United States."

59. In the "Position Statement" dated 27 April 2017 the  solicitor  in  the
    social services Child Protection Team makes plain that any  application
    by the appellant to take the children to the USA would be  "strenuously
    opposed by the Local Authority" and in  the  writer's  view  "based  on
    thirty eight years' experience  in  family  law"  such  an  application
    "would not succeed" (para 6).  The writer then sets  out  a  number  of
    factors, including the appellant's likely unsettled  situation  in  the
    USA,  his  'misconduct'  which  had  not  been  sufficiently  "robustly
    addressed" by therapy via the internet, the  appellant's  "very  little
    experience" of parenting children in particular as a  single  full-time
    carer and, in any event, the children's move to the USA, when they  are
    currently  settled  in  the  care  of  the  maternal  family,  was  not
    indicative that their welfare would be better served by moving  to  the
    USA with the appellant.

60. Consequently, we accept that it is in the best interests of  the  three
    children to maintain contact with the appellant.  We also  accept  that
    it is not in the best interests of the children to move to the USA and,
    in the light of the evidence before us, there is no realistic  prospect
    that a court would permit that based on the evidence available  to  us.
    We also accept that the present position is  that  the  three  children
    cannot leave the UK in order to accompany or join the appellant in  the
    USA.  The evidence, which we accept, leads  us  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant is unlikely to obtain an  order  from  the  Family  Court  to
    achieve that end.

61. In reaching a finding on whether it would be "reasonable" to expect the
    three children to leave the UK, we take account of  that  reality.   We
    also take into account that  the  children  are  British  Citizens  and
    currently enjoy a stable environment with their  maternal  grandparents
    (A1 and A2) and with a foster family (A3).  We  note  that  the  Family
    Court may be asked to place A3 with his siblings or seek to  place  him
    with a view to adoption.  In either event, A3's future depends upon the
    Family Court's assessment of his "best interests" in the UK.  We accept
    that if the appellant were permitted to take the children to  the  USA,
    relatively speaking their environment would become unstable by contrast
    to their position in the UK.

62. We must, in addition, have regard to the public interest in making  our
    evaluation of whether it would be "reasonable" to expect them to  leave
    the UK as MA (Pakistan) mandates.  In that case, the  Court  of  Appeal
    recognised that a child's "best interests" did not dictate  whether  it
    would be "reasonable" for them to leave the UK  (see  [47]).   Further,
    whilst the determination of a child's "best interests" did  not  permit
    consideration of the "conduct and immigration history of  the  parents"
    ([47]), as part of the public interest those matters were  relevant  in
    determining the question of "reasonableness".  However, the fact that a
    child was a "qualifying child" (in that he or she had been  in  the  UK
    for seven years, a fortiori a British Citizen) was the  starting  point
    that "leave should be granted unless there are powerful reasons to  the
    contrary" (see [49]).

63. What then is the public interest relied upon by the Secretary of  State
    in this appeal?  First, of course, the appellant has been an overstayer
    since his visit visa expired on 15  April  2014.   He  only  sought  to
    regularise his stay in the UK after he was  served  with  a  notice  of
    removal and detained in November 2014.

64. Secondly, Mr Kotas relied upon the appellant's admitted  misconduct  in
    2012 in the USA.  This misconduct involved sexual activity  with  young
    girls via the internet.  Judge Loughridge dealt  with  the  appellant's
    conduct,  in  the  context  of  the  suitability  requirement  in   the
    Immigration Rules, as follows at paras 38-39:

         "38.     It is important not to lose sight of the seriousness  what
             the Appellant has done, notwithstanding that  the  conduct  in
             question was back in 2012 and he has now shown  remorse.   HHJ
             Horton has referred to  "sexual  activity  conducted  via  the
             internet with underage girls" and goes  on  to  say  that  the
             Appellant "to his credit, has admitted to such activity".  His
             admission in  his  witness  statements  in  these  proceedings
             actually falls slightly short of saying that he knew,  at  the
             time of initiating online sexual activities, that any  of  the
             other participates were underage.  Specifically, his admission
             is that one of the girls, who was actually  12/13  years  old,
             said in her profile that she was 17 and only told him her true
             age once online sexual activity had already started.  However,
             what is clear is that  the  Appellant  was  reckless,  and  he
             acknowledges that he should have made sure that  none  of  the
             girls he contacted and engaged with in sexual  activities  was
             underage.  There is sometimes a thin line between recklessness
             and intent, and in my view in the  context  of  S-LTR.1.6.  it
             makes little if any difference which  side  of  the  line  the
             Appellant falls.

         39.  There is scant jurisprudence on S-LTR.1.6. Mr Hodgetts submits
             that the Respondent's policies  direct  decision-makers  to  a
             Criminality Guidance document, and appear to suggest that what
             is needed must involve criminality.  I am not  convinced  that
             this necessarily helps  the  Appellant  because  his  admitted
             conduct can readily  be  said  to  involve  criminality,  even
             though he has never been formally charged or convicted.   ....
             The fact that HHJ Horton has commented "there is a  suggestion
             that [the Appellant]  has  sought  to  draw  back  from  [his]
             admissions  and  to  minimise  his  responsibility   for   his
             actions", and "there is a sexual risk to be addressed"  causes
             concern,  as  do  references  to  the  Appellant's   impulsive
             behaviour,  which  is  clearly  ongoing  rather  than   merely
             historic.  I accept Mr Hodgetts' submission  that  the  sexual
             risk is low but the fact is that the Appellant's  presence  in
             the UK gives  rise  to  a  risk  to  underage  girls  in  this
             country."

65. It would appear, and the contrary was not suggested before us, that the
    appellant was dishonourably discharged from the US Military as a result
    of his conduct.

66. As regards to the current position, we were shown an email forwarded by
    the UK police and from a Military Justice attorney in the Office of the
    Staff Judge Advocate's Office in  Ft  Bragg.   That  email  appears  to
    acknowledge that there is an  ongoing  investigation  by  the  civilian
    police in relation to the appellant's conduct including an exploitation
    case and the possession and possibly  production  and  distribution  of
    child pornography.  It is not clear to us that this  undated  email  is
    contemporaneous.  It refers in the final substantive paragraph  to  the
    appellant going "AWOL ... over a year ago".  As Mr Hodgetts  submitted,
    the appellant went AWOL in 2013.  Whilst, of course, that  is  "over  a
    year ago" the context might suggest that the writer meant by the phrase
    "over a year ago" that it had happened "just over a year ago" and  that
    the email was written just over a year after the appellant  went  AWOL.
    That would date the email as some  time  in  2014  and  it  would  not,
    therefore, be contemporaneous.  We  see  some  force  in  Mr  Hodgett's
    submission.  We were not provided with any further material which would
    allow us to date the email from the Office of the Staff Judge Advocate.
    We  note  that  Judge  Loughridge  (at  [41])  doubted  whether,  as  a
    consequence of the appellant being allowed to  leave  the  USA  without
    difficulties in October 2013, the appellant  was  of  interest  to  the
    civilian authorities in the USA.  On the basis of the  evidence  before
    us  we  are  unable  to  find  that  there  is  any  ongoing   criminal
    investigation or otherwise into the appellant's  2012  conduct  in  the
    USA.

67. However, the appellant's past conduct remains and it  involved  serious
    misconduct which, as Judge Loughridge found in para 39  and  which  was
    not gainsaid by Mr Hodgetts, was serious criminal activity involving at
    least one underage girl.

68. Judge Loughridge found that the appellant's risk of  re-offending,  and
    therefore risk to underage girls in the UK,  was  "low".   Mr  Hodgetts
    prayed in aid the appellant's therapy sessions with  Dr  Smith.   These
    are on-going.  HHJ Horton noted that for  the  appellant  there  "is  a
    sexual risk to be addressed and, in particular,  the  emotional  issues
    that are raised and which need looking at by him" (see para 30  of  the
    judgment).  Dr Smith's letter dated 21 February 2017 (at  pages  59-60,
    UT2) identifies that the therapy is on-going and does not  "include  an
    assessment of risk".  It notes that the appellant is committed  to  the
    process and "can be critically insightful" and offered  goals  for  the
    future "focusing on abuse issues  in  relationships  and  how  to  meet
    emotional, relational and sexual needs  in  pro-social  ways."   As  we
    already noted, in his letter of 28 April 2017,  Dr  Smith  notes  that,
    having previously ended, a further two one hour sessions in  March  and
    April have taken place.

69. Whilst we acknowledge the appellant's on-going  therapy,  it  is  self-
    evident that that therapy has  not  been  completed  and  there  is  no
    evidential basis for us to reach any different conclusion.  Mr Hodgetts
    did not invite us to do so. We note the reservation made in the  letter
    dated 27 April 2017 from a  solicitor  in  the  local  authority  Child
    Protection Team, no doubt based upon his 38 years' experience in family
    law, that:

         "It is understood that he has undertaken some internet  counselling
         which the Local Authority does not consider to be adequate,  robust
         or challenging to address [the appellant's] issues.   The  internet
         is [the appellant's] chosen 'modus operandi' for his offending, and
         in which he is skilled at presenting a  persona  whilst  concealing
         his true intent."

70. Taking into account  all  the  evidence,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
    appellant  continues  to  represent  a  "low"  risk  of   re-offending.
    However, whilst low, the consequences of any re-offending would be very
    serious exposing potentially underage girls to sexual  exploitation  on
    the internet.  The public interest reflected in the seriousness of  the
    past offending and the risk of future offending is no less in this case
    than it would be if the appellant were facing deportation.  We  accept,
    however, that the threshold for satisfying the "reasonableness" test in
    s.117B(6) is lower than that of "undue harshness" in s.117C(5)  of  the
    NIA Act 2002.

71. Carrying out  the  balancing  exercise,  we  have  regard  to  all  the
    circumstances we have set out above both in relation to  the  appellant
    and A1, A2 and A3 and  the  public  interest.   Taking  them  all  into
    account, we have  reached  the  conclusion  that  the  public  interest
    outweighs the personal circumstances of the appellant and the  children
    such that it is not established that it would  be  "not  reasonable  to
    expect" the children to leave the UK.

72. Having reached that finding, we reject Mr Hodgetts submission that  the
    appellant succeeds in establishing a breach of Art 8 by virtue  of  the
    application of s.117B(6) of the NIA Act 2002.

73. Taking the circumstances as a whole, as we  have  set  out  above,  the
    appellant's  removal  is  proportionate  having  regard  to   all   the
    circumstances.  We bear in mind  the  "best  interests"  of  the  three
    children and the public interest in effective immigration  control  and
    in the prevention of crime and disorder which is engaged in  this  case
    because of the appellant's 'misconduct'.  We bear in mind that, as  HHJ
    Horton noted in his  judgment,  if  the  appellant  were  removed  then
    appropriate indirect contact could be maintained from the USA  via  the
    internet.  We note the judge's comments concerning  the  importance  of
    direct  contact  to  maintain  the  current  relationship  between  the
    appellant and his children and, potentially, the need for more if those
    relationships are to develop (see paras [40] and [42]).   Such  contact
    may not be excluded for ever as the children grown up.  We give primary
    consideration  to  those  interests  whilst  acknowledging  that   some
    contact, albeit indirect, can be maintained from the USA  as  envisaged
    by the judge.  Nevertheless, the  impact  upon  the  children  and  the
    appellant which will result if he is removed to the USA  is  outweighed
    by the public interests reflected in the appellant's serious misconduct
    and future risk, albeit "low", of re-offending  in  the  UK  but  which
    would result in serious offending against underage girls in the UK.  We
    are not satisfied that there are any  "compelling"  circumstances  that
    produce an unjustifiably harsh consequence so as to outweigh the public
    interest.

74. For these reasons, we reject the  appellant's  primary  case  that  his
    removal to the USA would breach Art 8 of the ECHR.

75. Mr Hodgetts alternative position was that it would a breach  Art  8  to
    remove  the  appellant  in  the  short-term  because  he  has  made  an
    application to the Family Court for custody of his three  children  and
    his removal would prevent his involvement in those proceedings.

76. The relevant case law is contained within the  appellant's  authorities
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.  It begins  with  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in MS (Ivory Coast) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 133,  then
    RS (Immigration and Family Court Proceedings) India [2012]  UKUT  00218
    (IAC), Mohan v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1363 and concluding  with  Mohammed
    (Family Court Proceedings - Outcome)  [2014]  UKUT  00419  (IAC).   The
    correct approach was set  out  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  consisting  of
    McFarlane LJ, Blake J and UTJ Martin  in  RS  (which  was  subsequently
    approved by the Court of  Appeal  in  Mohan).   The  head  note  in  RS
    summarises the position as follows:

         "1.  Where a claimant appeals  against  a  decision  to  deport  or
             remove and there are outstanding family  proceedings  relating
             to a child of the claimant, the judge of the  Immigration  and
             Asylum Chamber should first consider:

             i)   Is the outcome of  the  contemplated  family  proceedings
                  likely to be material to the immigration decision?

             ii)  Are there compelling public interest reasons  to  exclude
                  the claimant from the United Kingdom irrespective  of  the
                  outcome of the family proceedings or the best interest  of
                  the child?

             iii)     In the case of contact proceedings  initiated  by  an
                  appellant in an immigration appeal, is there any reason to
                  believe that the family proceedings have  been  instituted
                  to delay or frustrate  removal  and  not  to  promote  the
                  child's welfare?

         2.   In assessing the above questions, the judge will normally want
             to consider: the degree of the claimant's previous interest in
             and contact with the child, the timing of contact  proceedings
             and the commitment with which they have been progressed,  when
             a decision is likely to be reached, what  materials  (if  any)
             are already available or can be  made  available  to  identify
             pointers to where the child's welfare lies?

         3.   Having considered these matters the judge will  then  have  to
             decide:

             i)   Does the claimant have at least an  Article  8  right  to
                  remain until the conclusion of the family proceedings?

             ii)  If so, should the appeal be allowed to a  limited  extent
                  and a discretionary leave be directed as per the  decision
                  on MS (Ivory Coast) [2007] EWCA  Civ 133?

             iii)     Alternatively, is it more  appropriate  for  a  short
                  period of an adjournment to be granted to enable the  core
                  decision to be made in the family proceedings?

             iv)  Is it likely that the family court would be assisted by a
                  view on the present state  of  knowledge  of  whether  the
                  appellant would be allowed to remain in the event that the
                  outcome of the family proceedings is  the  maintenance  of
                  family contact between him or her  and  a  child  resident
                  here?"

77. We answer the points in Q1 as follows:

    1(i)     The outcome of the  contemplated  family  proceedings  is  not
         likely to be material  to  the  immigration  decision.    The  best
         interests of the children are not, in truth, a  matter  of  dispute
         before us.  On the  evidence  before  us,  there  is  no  realistic
         prospect that the appellant will attain anything other than  access
         to his children in the family proceedings.  There is no prospect of
         the children going with him to the USA.  The position is  therefore
         likely to remain as at present or there is the  possibility  of  A3
         being subject to adoption and the consequent loss of any access  by
         the appellant.

    1(ii)    Consequently, on the basis of  the  public  interest  we  have
         already identified earlier, the public interest in his  removal  is
         compelling irrespective of the outcome of those proceedings.

    1(iii)   It  was  not  suggested  before  us  that  the  appellant  has
         commenced family proceedings in order to  delay  or  frustrate  his
         removal or not to promote his children's welfare.

78. Turning to Q3, in Mohammed at [22] the Upper Tribunal stated that:

         "The guidance is  concerned  with  whether  there  is  a  realistic
         prospect of the Family Court making a decision  that  will  have  a
         material impact on the relationship between a child and the  parent
         facing immigration measures such as deportation."

79. In resolving that issue, we bear in mind what has been said  on  behalf
    of the local social services in the letter of 27 April 2017.   We  also
    take account of a record of a meeting of the local authority  dated  28
    March 2017 (at pages  1-4,  UT2).   Whilst  it  is  unlikely  that  any
    decision  in  the  family  proceedings  will  materially  enhance   the
    appellant's relationship with his children, there is the prospect  that
    an adoption order may  be  sought  in  relation  to  A3  by  the  local
    authority.  That we were told by Mr Hodgetts would be  opposed  by  the
    grandparents and by the appellant.  It is not clear to us whether  this
    possibility would form part of the proceedings begun by the  appellant.
    The report of the meeting of the local authority notes that the plan in
    relation to A3 was "somewhat vague in its description and detail".   It
    is far from clear to us that this option is being actively  pursued  by
    the local authority and would form part of the proceedings begun by the
    appellant seeking custody.  We  were  not  provided  with  any  further
    information concerning the appellant's application which we  were  told
    had been made on 26 April 2017 other than a copy of the application  is
    at pages 17-54 of the UT2.  Given the limited information that we  have
    before us concerning a potential adoption plan for A3 being pursued  by
    the local authority, and bearing in mind  that  the  family  proceeding
    begun by the appellant are unlikely to result in a decision which would
    have any impact upon the decision to  remove  the  appellant,  we  have
    concluded that the appellant's removal would not breach Art  8  on  the
    alternate basis put forward by Mr Hodgetts.

80. We would add that  Mr  Hodgetts  did  not  invite  us  to  adjourn  our
    proceeding pending resolution of the family proceedings.

Decision

81. For the reasons set out in our earlier decision promulgated on 10 March
    2017, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 involved the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision is set aside.

82. We remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8.



                                 Signed





                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Dated  1 June 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As we have dismissed the appellant's appeal, no fee award is payable.



                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Dated 1 June 2017



