
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50430/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 December 2014                           |On 23 January 2015            |
|Prepared 19 December 2014                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           AMBER ELIZABETH DUTHIE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D O'Callaghan, Counsel instructed by Messrs Kilby
                    Jones Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Afako  who  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 27 June 2014 allowed the appeal of Miss Amber  Elizabeth
    Duthie against a decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to  vary
    her leave to remain under the provisions  of  paragraph  245HD  of  the
    Immigration Rules: she  was  refused  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant.

2.   Although the Secretary of State is the appellant before me I  will  for
    ease of reference refer to  her  as  the  respondent  as  she  was  the
    respondent in the First-tier.  Similarly I will refer to Miss Duthie as
    the appellant as she was the appellant in that tier.

3.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Australia  born  on  1  July  1974  who
    entered Britain as a work permit holder in 2007.  She was granted leave
    to remain until 3 December 2012.  Having entered Britain she worked  as
    a restaurant manager in a number of restaurants before, in October 2012
    making an application for leave to remain for a further  period.   That
    application was refused on 27 February 2013 on the basis that  she  had
    not  provided  a  valid  certificate  of  sponsorship.   The  appellant
    appealed  against  that  decision.   That   appeal   was   subsequently
    withdrawn.  The appellant's employers  then  made  a  number  of  other
    applications which were unsuccessful - it appears that they were  given
    incorrect advice by a company  called  ICS  Limited  who  had  prepared
    applications for the appellant  and  her  employers.   The  appellant's
    employers have now been able to fulfil all the  requirements  necessary
    for an application to succeed.

4.   When the appeal came before Judge  Afako  he  correctly  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules  on  the  basis  that  the  relevant
    evidence was not before the respondent when the decision was made.   He
    also dismissed an appeal on human rights  grounds.   Neither  of  those
    decisions were challenged.  Judge Afako however, noting that a  Section
    47 decision had been made considered, that he could  allow  the  appeal
    against that decision.  His decision to allow the appeal on that  basis
    was then appealed by the respondent.

5.   In the grounds of appeal it was pointed out that Section 82(2)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  listed  the  decisions
    against which an appeal could be brought and Section  84  of  that  Act
    sets out the grounds on which  an  appeal  could  be  argued.   It  was
    pointed out that Judge Afako had considered  that  he  could  allow  an
    appeal under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality  Act
    2006 on the basis that the Secretary of State  had  discretion  not  to
    remove under that section.

6.   The grounds of appeal before me  pointed  out  that  the  reference  to
    "discretion" presumably referred to an appeal  under  Section  84(1)(f)
    which referred to a discretion conferred under  the  Immigration  Rules
    but that there  was  no  indication  how  there  could  have  been  any
    discretion to allow this appeal under those Rules.

7.   At the hearing of the appeal before me Mr O' Callaghan  very  helpfully
    took me through the arguments which had been placed before Judge  Afako
    and correctly accepted that the judge had erred  in  his  decision  and
    that there was no basis on which he could have allowed the appeal under
    Section 47.

8.   He was entirely right to do so.  The reality is  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal are correct and the judge was not entitled to allow  the  appeal
    on that basis.

9.   Accordingly I set aside  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    insofar as he appeared to allow the appeal under Section 47 of the 2006
    Act and substitute for his decision my decision that the appeal is also
    dismissed in respect of that decision.

10.  Mr O'Callaghan referred to the fact that  this  appellant  was  in  the
    process of taking steps to bring her former advisors to account for the
    ways in which they had negligently  advised  her  with  regard  to  her
    application for an extension of stay.

11.  It is clear from the determination that the judge who heard the  appeal
    had very considerable sympathy with this appellant.  It is  also  clear
    from the papers that she is a much needed member of her staff  who  has
    much to contribute to the work of her employer.  I trust therefore that
    the   respondent   will   consider,   sympathetically,   the    further
    representations made.



Signed        Date 19 December 2014

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

