
IAC-CH- CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50490/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 28th January 2015                 |On 18th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MISS PRISCILLA NOLUTHANDO LUBELWANA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. In this appeal I will refer to the parties in the style in which  they
      appeared before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a female citizen of South Africa,  born  3  September
      1956.  She applied for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom as Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  Her application was  refused  by
      the respondent on 18  November  2013.   The  appellant  appealed  that
      decision and the matter came before Judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Powell sitting at Newport on 18 August 2014.  In summary Judge  Powell
      found that the appellant could not succeed in  her  appeal  under  the
      rules, but he allowed her appeal by reference to Article 8  ECHR.   In
      dismissing the appeal  under  the  rules  the  judge  found  that  the
      appellant's salary was  not  sufficient  to  meet  the  annual  income
      required as set out in the Immigration Rules.

   3. The appellant did not  seek  to  challenge  the  judge's  decision  in
      respect of her appeal under the rules, but  the  respondent  did  seek
      leave to appeal in respect of the decision made  by  Judge  Powell  in
      allowing the appeal under Article 8.

   4. The grounds seeking leave allege that the judge made a material  error
      of law in respect of his assessment of the  family  life  and  private
      life of the appellant.  It is also suggested that the judge had  erred
      by applying a "near miss" view in respect of the  appellant's  salary.
      The grounds refer to the reported case of Nasim & Others  (Article  8)
      [2014] UKUT 0025 (IAC).

   5. In granting leave to appeal another judge of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      found an arguable error of law in the way the judge  dealt  with  both
      family life and private life, again by reference to the case of Nasim.

   6. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

   7. The appellant had been legally represented before  Judge  Powell,  but
      has decided to represent  herself  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Her
      previous advisors had produced a bundle of documentation.

   8. At the start of the hearing I explained the procedure in detail to the
      appellant.  She clearly understood the proceedings.

   9. Mr Richards then drew my attention to the application for leave.  That
      application had clearly been lodged out of time,  the  judge  granting
      leave had not dealt with  that  issue.   Mr  Richards  invited  me  to
      consider sitting as a  First-Tier  Tribunal  judge  to  consider  that
      aspect of the application and to deal with it before moving  onto  the
      substance of the application.  I expressed my gratitude to Mr Richards
      for very fairly raising this point.  I endeavoured to explain this  to
      the appellant.  Miss Lubelwana raised no objection.

  10. In sitting in the First-Tier I noted that the  application  for  leave
      contained an  explanation  of  illness  preventing  the  Secretary  of
      State's representative returning the application in time.  I  consider
      that it would be appropriate to accept that explanation  and  that  it
      would be unjust not to extend time, and that time would  therefore  be
      extended.

  11. In his submission regarding an error of law Mr  Richards  relied  upon
      the grounds seeking leave.  With regard to family life the  judge  was
      wrong to find that the appellant had a family life with her  daughter.
      There was no emotional ties beyond the norm.

  12. As to the issue of private life, Mr Richards submitted that the  judge
      had contradicted himself at paragraph  45  of  the  determination  and
      viewed with his findings at paragraphs 55 to 57.  The judge had failed
      to properly consider Nasim.  That case  had  found  that  the  use  of
      Article 8 had very limited use for private life cases  which  did  not
      interfere with a person's moral and physical integrity.  The judge had
      been over influenced by the appellant's employment and had  adopted  a
      "near miss" consideration.

  13. In her response the appellant referred in  detail  to  a  relationship
      with her grandson and her daughter.  The daughter was  dependent  upon
      her for reason of her mental illness.

  14. At the end of the hearing I announced that I found no  material  error
      of  law  and  that  the  appeal  of  the  respondent  was  accordingly
      dismissed.

  15. It is necessary for me to explain my reasoning.

  16. The decision of Judge Powell in respect of the appellant's substantive
      appeal under the rules is not challenged by the appellant.   He  found
      at paragraph 32 that the appeal was bound to fail.

  17. Dealing with the challenges made by the respondent as advanced  by  Mr
      Richards.  I do not consider  that  the  judge  contradicted  himself.
      Paragraph 45 is merely a statement of  fact.   One  that  was  not  in
      issue.  This does not conflict with paragraph 55, as in this paragraph
      the judge  was  merely  dealing  with  an  argument  advanced  by  the
      Presenting Officer who appeared before him.  Clearly the  respondent's
      initial decision refusing the application was a  legitimate  decision.
      Had it not been so the matter would have ended there.

  18. I do not consider that the judge came to an eventual decision  on  the
      "near miss" principle.  When read as a whole, the decision was clearly
      not taken as a consolation prize.  In weighing  up  the  evidence  the
      judge clearly considered that the appellant had  sufficient  financial
      means so as not to be a burden on  the  state  whether  by  reason  of
      income or accommodation.

  19. It is not the respondent's case that  Judge  Powell  should  not  have
      considered a stand alone Article 8 appeal.  The  argument  is  how  he
      dealt with that aspect and it is  alleged  that  he  erred  both  with
      regard to his assessment of family life and private life.

  20. Had Judge Powell based his decision entirely on private life,  it  may
      well be that he ran foul of the views expressed  in  Nasim.   However,
      the judge clearly based his decision with regard  to  the  appellant's
      family life.

  21.  The  evidence  accepted  by  the  judge  related  to  the  appellants
      relationship,  both  with  her  adult  daughter  and  with  her  adult
      daughters son.  The judge did not  specifically  consider  Kugathas  v
      Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31.
      However, that decision was clearly in his mind because he has detailed
      the daughter's mental condition and clearly has found  that  something
      more exists than normal emotional ties.  The appellant's evidence  was
      that in times of crisis the daughter  turned  to  her.   Judge  Powell
      clearly took the  view  that  this  relationship  went  beyond  normal
      emotional ties.  He was entitled to reach that conclusion.

  22. As to the grandchild, Judge Powell quite properly explained the effect
      of the adoption order, but did note that the adoption was by a  family
      member and for all practical purposes  the  relationship  between  the
      appellant and the child remained the same.

  23. Judge Powell, at paragraphs 37 onward, sets out the  evidence  and  he
      had made clear findings from that evidence based  on  the  appellant's
      family life.  I note that at paragraph 40 he expresses the  view  that
      the relationship with the grandson could not be classed as family life
      because of the adoption, but he seeks at paragraph 41  to  argue  that
      this amounts to private life.  I am not sure  the  judge  is  correct,
      however he has come to clear views with  regard  to  the  relationship
      between the appellant and the child, and I consider  that  to  be  the
      important aspect rather  than  entering  into  a  artificial  argument
      between what amounts to private life and what amounts to family  life.
      However that does not alter the overall outcome of the appeal.

  24. The judge has undertaken a balancing exercise and in  doing  so  noted
      the income of the appellant following his review of the effect of  the
      Immigration Act 2014, as set out in paragraph 47 of the determination.

  25. For these reasons, I consider that Judge Powell was entitled to  reach
      the conclusions that he did.  The grounds advanced by  the  respondent
      amount to nothing more than disagreement  with  the  judges  findings.
      There is no material error of law contained within the determination.

Decision

  26. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of Judge
      Powell must stand.



Signed        Date 18th February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

