
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/50691/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 July 2016                     |On 19 July 2016                   |
|                                    |                                  |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                         MANISHABEN LAXMANRAO NAGNE
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr C Talacchi (counsel,) instructed by New Era
Immigration Services Ltd
For the Respondent: Mr K Norton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Khawar promulgated on 20 August  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 29 May 1974 and is a national of India.

4. On 1st October 2014 the Appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  UK
on article 8 ECHR grounds.  On  2  December  2014  the  Secretary  of  State
refused the Appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Khawar ("the Judge") dismissed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 20 June 2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Bruce  gave permission to appeal stating

      It is arguable that the Tribunal erred in declining to  make  findings
      (bar the obiter remarks at 28) on the  protection  grounds  raised  on
      appeal. The fact that the Appellant had not made an asylum  claim  did
      not obviate the Tribunal's duty to deal with grounds of  appeal  which
      were clearly raised before it. It is further arguable that  in  making
      its findings on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) the  Tribunal  has  failed  to
      have regard to the Appellant's evidence  about  her  circumstances  in
      India.

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Talacchi, counsel for the appellant, moved the grounds of  appeal.
He acknowledged that, notwithstanding the terms of the grant  of  permission
to appeal, the appellant has  not  and  still  does  not  claim  asylum.  He
conceded that the original grounds of appeal proceeded  on  article  8  ECHR
grounds only. He told me that the appellant's  history  of  maltreatment  by
male relatives creates very significant obstacles to  return  to  India,  so
that the appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of  the
rules.

(b) Mr Talacchi told me that  this  case  turns  entirely  on  private  life
within the meaning  of  article  8,  and  argued  that  the  proportionality
exercise carried out between [23] & [25] of the decision is flawed. He  told
me that there is an entire absence of credibility findings in the  decision,
and insufficient findings  of  fact  relating  to  the  component  parts  of
private life. He told me that those gaps in the decision indicates that  the
proportionality exercise  is  inadequate.  He  said  that  the  decision  is
tainted by an absence of findings of fact leading to inadequate reasoning.

(c) Mr Talacchi directed me to [19] and [20] of the  decision  and  told  me
that there is a paucity of fact-finding  because  the  Judge  did  not  deal
evidence of treatment the appellant received at the hands of her own  family
in India. He told me that that  evidence  goes  to  the  very  core  of  the
appellant's claim and,  as  the  Judge  neither  records  the  evidence  nor
discusses it, there is a failure to give weight to a  material  matter  &  a
failure to give adequate reasons. He told me that those are material  errors
of law and urged me to set the Judge's decision aside.

8. For the respondent, Mr Norton told me that the decision does not  contain
any errors of law, material or  otherwise.  He  asked  me  to  dismiss  this
appeal and allow the Judge's decision to stand.

Analysis

9. I am grateful to Mr Talacchi for  emphasising  that  the  focus  in  this
appeal is  on  paragraph  276  ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  rules.  The  appellant's
argument is that there are  very  significant  obstacles  to  re-integration
into India.

10. The Judge commences his findings of fact at [15]  of  the  decision.  At
[19] the Judge focuses on paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the  rules,  and  finds
that there  are  no  significant  obstacles  to  the  appellant  return  and
reintegration into Indian society. The reason for that findings set  out  at
[19] the decision. The Judge's findings are brief but  there  is  sufficient
set out there to support the  Judge's  finding  that  the  appellant  cannot
fulfil the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the rules.

11. The argument that is advanced is that the appellant is a  single  woman,
entirely without family support in India. It is argued  that  the  treatment
that she will receive on return to India as a lone woman amounts to  a  very
significant obstacle to reintegration. That is only discussed by  the  Judge
at [28} of his decision. The basis of the appellant's claim can be found  in
her witness statement dated 30 September 2014. There the appellant  recounts
a harsh life with her father and brother and the decision to live  alone  in
a one-bedroom flat, only to find society frowned on  an  independent  single
woman.

12. In R (on the application of Patel) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
Department [2010] EWHC 1087  (Admin)  the  Claimant  and  her  husband  were
citizens of India. Whilst living in India, the Claimant underwent  fertility
treatment as she had been unable to conceive a child.  She  suffered  taunts
from her husband's family about her infertility and  also  experienced  some
exclusion from her community.  This  culminated  in  an  incident  when  the
Claimant's mother-in-law doused her in petrol and attempted to set  fire  to
her. The incident was reported  but  the  police  took  no  further  action.
Frances Patterson QC, sitting as a Deputy High Court  Judge  said  that  the
Claimant had to show that a  particular  social  group  of  childless  women
existed in India independently of the alleged persecution,  and  that  their
ill-treatment met the high threshold  to  amount  to  persecution.  In  this
case, the evidence did not meet the high threshold to demonstrate a lack  of
state protection (paras 23 - 24 and 27).

13. In RS  (India),  Petition  for  Judicial  Review  of  decisions  by  the
Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2011]  CSOH  6  Lord  Malcolm
upheld certification of a case of domestic violence  in  which  the  husband
alleged there would be insufficient protection in India.

14. Even taking the appellant's claim at its highest, she might have had  an
unhappy  time  in  India  prior  to  coming  to  the  UK  but  her   claimed
difficulties in establishing life as a single woman safely in India  is  not
supported by the background materials nor by the case-law. On  the  evidence
that was placed before the Judge, there was no support for  the  appellant's
claim that the circumstances she lived in  India  form  the  basis  of  very
significant obstacles to re-integration on return from the UK.

15. It would have been helpful if the Judge had engaged  with  that  passage
of the  appellant's  evidence  and  explained  why  that  evidence  made  no
difference to his decision. The absence of that discussion  in  the  Judge's
decision might be an error of law, but it is not a  material  error  of  law
because it makes no difference to the decision  that  the  Judge  ultimately
reached.

16. None of the other grounds of appeal were argued  before  me  by  counsel
for the appellant, however the grounds  of  appeal  challenged  the  Judge's
overall  proportionality  assessment  and  are  critical  of   the   Judge's
treatment of section 117B of the 2002  act,  essentially  arguing  that  the
appellant has not been given credit for her ability  to  speak  English  and
her financial independence.

17. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal held  that  an
appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave to  remain  from
either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in English,  or
the  strength  of  his  financial   resources.   In   Forman   (ss   117A-C
considerations) [2015] UKUT  00412  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the  public
interest in firm immigration control is not diluted  by  the  consideration
that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at no time  been  a
financial burden on the state or is self-sufficient or is likely to  remain
so indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is that where they  are
not present the public interest is fortified.

18.  The decision does not contain material errors of law.  The  grounds  of
appeal amount to an expression of dissatisfaction with the  conclusion  that
the Judge reached,  but  on  the  evidence  placed  before  the  Judge,  his
decision is one which falls well within the range of conclusions  reasonably
open to the Judge.

19. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

20.  In reality the  appellant's  appeal  amounts  to  little  more  than  a
disagreement with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he  found  them
to be. The appellant does not like the conclusion that the  Judge  has  come
to, but that conclusion  is  the  result  of  the  correctly  applied  legal
equation. The Judge's fact finding exercise is adequate.  The  correct  test
in law has been applied. The decision does not contain a material  error  of
law.

21.   The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

22.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

23.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed                                                              Date 18
July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

