
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50163/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th April 2014                            |On 8th May 2014              |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                          SOLOMON IzY AKHUEMONKHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Richard Ugoh, Liberty & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born 26 May 1972.   In  November
      2013 the appellant made an application for a  residence  card.   In  a
      letter dated 20 November 2013 the respondent refused  the  application
      as it was not accepted that the appellants family member  was  an  EEA
      national exercising treaty rights at  the  time  of  the  application.
      Full reasons were set out in the above mentioned letter.
   2. The appellant appealed that decision and in doing  so  requested  that
      the appeal be dealt with "on the papers" without an oral hearing.   As
      a consequence the matter was considered by  Judge  of  the  First-Tier
      Tribunal Nixon in February 2014.  In a determination dated 28 February
      the judge dismissed the appellants appeal on all grounds.  In doing so
      the judge noted that the respondent had made enquiries as a result  of
      the application, but had found that the appellants family  member  was
      no longer employed as set out in the  application.   The  judge  noted
      that there  was  evidence  of  fresh  employment,  but  there  was  no
      acceptable evidence that  the  appellants  family  member  was  indeed
      working at the relevant time (the date of hearing).  The judge came to
      the conclusion that an attempt to deceive had been made in respect  of
      the work details set out in the application.

   3. At paragraph 12 of the determination the judge makes reference to  the
      request that the case be dealt with "on the papers"  and  indicated  a
      view that the additional evidence with regard to  new  employment  had
      not been disclosed to the respondent.

   4. The appellant sought leave to appeal on a number grounds.   The  first
      ground alleges that the judge  failed  to  appreciate  the  evidential
      burden of proof and in particular the judge had  failed  to  correctly
      consider the provisions of the EEA (Immigration) Regulations 2006.

   5.  The  second  error  refers  to  the  judge's  view  that   misleading
      information had been given in the application and that the  judge  had
      failed  to  consider  whether  or  not  the  appellant's  wife  was  a
      "qualified person" under the EEA Regulation.

   6. Thirdly the judge is criticised for the comment  made  regarding  non-
      disclosure of additional evidence to respondent.  It is submitted that
      the appellant's solicitors had produced a bundle to the respondent  in
      furtherance of directions.

   7. Finally it is alleged that the judge  had  not  properly  applied  the
      proportionally test in respect of Article 8, ECHR.

   8. The application for leave came before another Judge of the  First-Tier
      Tribunal who, on 21 March 2014, granted leave primarily with regard to
      the comments made by the judge regarding  the  service  of  additional
      documentation upon the respondent and the assumption made by the judge
      that such documentation had not been served.  In  granting  leave  the
      judge also indicated that all grounds "may be argued".

   9. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

  10. Mr Ugoh referred  to  the  grounds  seeking  leave.   In  addition  he
      indicated that the respondent had not  provided  evidence  before  the
      judge regarding full details of the telephone call made to the  stated
      employer of the appellant's wife.  As a result the judge may have come
      to the wrong conclusion on the evidence.  Even if  the  wife  was  not
      employed, she could still be a qualified person under the regulations.
       Mr Ugoh said that at the date of the call the  appellant's  wife  was
      still in employment.  Mr Ugoh emphasised that the full bundle had been
      served upon the respondent in advance  of  the  date  of  the  judge's
      determination, it was wrong for the judge to say what he did  at  line
      7, paragraph 12 of the determination.  Mr Ugoh  said  that  it  was  a
      conscious decision on the part of the appellant to have the case dealt
      with on the papers.  He had satisfied the requirements.

  11. Mr Ugoh then referred me to the  guidance  notes  in  respect  of  the
      original application.  There was no requirement for bank statements or
      any other information.  Mr Ugoh took the view that once  the  deadline
      for filing documentation had been passed the appellant was  not  in  a
      position to seek to lodge any further documents.

  12. Mr Bramble in response emphasised that it was a "paper  case"  at  the
      request of the appellant.  The question  of  misleading  evidence  had
      been raised in the refusal letter, but there was still no  explanation
      before the judge.  It had been  open  to  the  appellant  to  make  an
      explanation.  Both the appellant and the sponsor would have been aware
      of the issue to be decided, but had failed to address that issue.   Mr
      Bramble acknowledged that  the  appellant's  wife  could  still  be  a
      qualified person even if she were not working but no evidence had been
      provided by the appellant or sponsor to enable the judge to make  such
      a finding.  Mr Bramble indicated that there was nothing wrong  in  the
      statement made by the judge regarding service of the bundle  as  there
      was nothing of any relevance contained  in  that  bundle.   The  judge
      found that he was not satisfied and there was no  problem  with  those
      findings.  The determination was properly reasoned.

  13. In response Mr Ugoh indicated that he had proof that  the  bundle  had
      been served upon the respondent.

  14. Following the submissions I indicated that I was  not  satisfied  that
      there was a material error of law contained within  the  determination
      and the appeal would be dismissed and I now give my reasons.

  15. The main thrust of the grounds seeking leave to appeal (and the  grant
      of leave) revolved around the comments made by the judge at  paragraph
      12 of  the  determination  that  "I  first  note  that  none  of  this
      information has been shown to the respondent, the appellant requesting
      that his case is dealt with on the papers".   Those  representing  the
      appellant insist that the appellants bundle placed  before  the  judge
      had been copied to the respondent  in  furtherance  of  the  Tribunals
      directions.  I have no reason to doubt that  and  upon  that  basis  I
      accept that the comment made by the judge was incorrect.  However,  is
      this an error of law and if so, is it material?  It  may  well  be  an
      error of law, but it certainly is not material when the  determination
      is read as a whole.

  16. It must be accepted that the judge  had  very  little  information  or
      evidence before him.  It was a conscious  decision  of  the  appellant
      (who was represented throughout) not to have an oral hearing.  One  of
      the issues before the judge was  the  information  received  from  the
      respondent and set out in the decision notice that information  showed
      that  the  appellant's  wife  was  not  employed  as  stated  in   the
      application.  Little  or  no  explanation  was  forthcoming  from  the
      appellant or sponsor.  The judge mentions bank statements.  I  readily
      accept that there is no specific requirement but such statements might
      have assisted the judge in  identifying  the  precise  periods  during
      which the appellant's wife was employed and who was employing her.

  17. However, details of employment are not all the information that  would
      be necessary for the appellant would be entitled to a residence  card.
      It is common ground that under the 2006 Regulations a person can be  a
      "qualified person"  even  though  not  in  actual  employment  at  the
      relevant date.  No evidence or information has been  forthcoming  from
      the appellant that would have enabled the judge  to  make  a  positive
      finding in the appellants favour.  In addition, nothing  is  contained
      within the appellant's bundle that  would  have  direct  relevance  to
      issues before the judge.

  18. Because of this paucity of evidence the judge could have  come  to  no
      other conclusion. Despite making an error in whether or not the bundle
      would have reached the respondent,  it  would  have  had  no  material
      effect on the outcome of the appeal and therefore cannot be a material
      error of law.

  19. Reference is made in the grounds (but not directly argued  before  me)
      regarding Article 8.  I am satisfied that paragraphs 13 to 15  of  the
      judges determinations quite  clearly  show  that  the  judge  properly
      directed himself with regard to "human rights" and  again  I  find  no
      error of law in the determination.

  20. In these circumstances the appellants appeal is dismissed.   There  is
      no material error of law and the decision of the  First-Tier  Tribunal
      Judge must stand in all respects.

  21. No anonymity order was previously made and there  was  no  application
      before me in respect thereof.


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


