
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50285/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2014                                 |On 18th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                linda wilson
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson, who, in a determination  decided  on
    the papers on 25 February 2014 and promulgated on 4 March 2014  allowed
    the appeal of the Respondent (hereinafter  called  the  "claimant"),  a
    citizen of Ghana born on 16 July 1971,  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 14 November 2013 to refuse to issue her with a
    residence card as a family member of an EEA national exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom.

2.   The claimant had provided a Ghanaian passport issued in London dated  4
    May 2012, but there was no evidence as to  how  or  when  the  claimant
    entered the United Kingdom.  The claimant claimed to have  married  her
    Sponsor, Cedric Marius Landre, (who claimed to  be  a  French  national
    born on 19 January 1981) by proxy on 16 March 2012 and she applied  for
    a residence card on 17 January 2013.

3.   In his determination, the First-tier Judge noted  that  the  claimant's
    application was refused because  inter  alia,  she  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Regulation 17 of the 2006 EEA Regulations that requires
    the Secretary of State to inter alia,  issue  a  residence  card  to  a
    person who is not an EEA national and is a family member of a qualified
    person or of an EEA national with a permanent right of residence  under
    Regulation 15 on application and production of  a  valid  passport  and
    proof that the applicant is such a family member.

4.   The Secretary of State in her  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  dated  14
    November 2013 noted that the claimant had provided a Ghanaian customary
    marriage certificate dated  18  June  2012  that  showed  her  date  of
    marriage as 16 March 2012 with  the  marriage  having  taken  place  in
    Ghana.  It was apparent that the marriage took place by proxy.

5.   Reference was made in the refusal letter to relevant case law  guidance
    as it stood  in  relation  to  the  validity  of  proxy  marriages  for
    immigration purposes at the time of the refusal letter.  This  included
    the ruling in CB (validity of marriage: proxy marriage)  Brazil  [2008]
    UKAIT 00080 that held that  the  United  Kingdom  would  recognise  the
    validity of a proxy marriage for immigration  purposes,  provided  that
    the proxy marriage was legal in that country and which further set  out
    three pre-requisites of proxy marriage to be accepted as valid  in  the
    UK for immigration purposes namely: that the type of marriage  must  be
    recognised in the country in which it took  place;  the  marriage  must
    have been properly executed as to satisfy the requirements of  the  law
    of the country in which it took place; and, there must  be  nothing  in
    the law of either party's  country  of  domicile  that  restricted  the
    freedom to enter into the marriage.

6.   The refusal letter pointed out that for the purposes  of  Regulation  7
    of the 2006 EEA Regulations, for the claimant to be considered  as  the
    spouse of an EEA national the  Secretary  of  State  would  expect  the
    claimant to provide a validly registered marriage certificate  for  the
    comprehensive reasons that she set out in the refusal letter and  which
    led her to conclude that she could not be so satisfied.

7.   Indeed  the  First-tier  Judge  summarised  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position in that  regard  as  reflected  in  her  refusal  letter  over
    paragraphs 6 to 11 of his determination as follows:

         "6.  In the instant case the Respondent notes  that  the  Appellant
             has provided a  Ghanaian  passport  as  evidence  of  his  own
             nationality but none that his spouse is of Ghanaian origin.


         7.   In addition, the Respondent does not accept that the  marriage
             is properly registered because the statutory declaration  does
             not include where the parties to the marriage were  living  at
             the time of the marriage, nor does it state the marital status
             of the parties.  The statutory declaration  is  defective  and
             therefore the couple are not validly married.


         8.    The  statutory  declaration  states  that  the  parties  were
             represented by their respective fathers  but  no  evidence  of
             that relationship has been provided and  the  Respondent  does
             not accept they are related as claimed.  This invalidates  the
             marriage.


         9.   The Appellant has submitted a letter from  the  Ghanaian  High
             Commission which purports to  confirm  that  the  marriage  is
             properly registered.  However, the  reference  number  on  the
             letter does not match the marriage certificate.  The telephone
             number for the High Commission on this letter went  unanswered
             and is not the number of the Ghanaian  High  Commission.   The
             Respondent contends that the letter is not genuine.


         10.   The  Respondent  has  considered,  in  the  alternative,  the
             position of the couple as unmarried  partners  in  a  'durable
             relationship'.  The Appellant  has  provided  no  evidence  of
             cohabitation and so the application was refused on this  basis
             also.


         11.  The case was not considered under Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
             276ADE of the Immigration Rules because the Appellant has  not
             made a separate application."

8.   The First-tier Judge concluded that (notwithstanding the reasons  cited
    by the Secretary of State as to why, for example, the  registration  of
    the claimant's marriage had not been properly made and as  to  why  she
    had concluded that the marriage was therefore not valid) that:

         "16. The fact remains however that the application to register  the
             marriage was accepted by the Ghanaian authorities because they
             were prepared to register it and to  issue  a  certificate  to
             that effect.  If the Ghanaian authorities were satisfied  that
             there has been a valid marriage it is not for me to go  behind
             that finding.  The Respondent has provided  no  evidence  that
             marriage by proxy is not permitted  unless  both  parties  are
             Ghanaian.  The decision maker relies on expert evidence  given
             to the Tribunal in the case of NA.  This is evidence, no more.
              It is not authority."

9.   I pause there, because as was rightly contended  by  the  Secretary  of
    State in her  letter  of  refusal,  when  referring  to  NA  (customary
    marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana ]2009] UKAIT 00009 it  was  held
    that in considering whether the Tribunal  could  be  satisfied  that  a
    proxy marriage was contracted under Ghanaian customary law and was thus
    legal, that inter alia:

         "5.  The most common form of marriage in  Ghana  is  the  customary
             marriage.  It is a  type  of  marriage  contracted  under  the
             particular tradition and customary practices  of  a  group  of
             people...  A valid customary  marriage  can  only  be  validly
             contracted between two Ghanaian citizens and both parties must
             have capacity to marry.  This means that there  should  be  no
             violation of any rule of  tribal  relationship.   These  rules
             differ from tribe to tribe."

10.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge continued:

         "17. My conclusion that the authorities  in  Ghana  were  happy  to
             register the marriage assumes  of  course  that  the  marriage
             certificate is genuine.  The Respondent does not go so far  as
             to allege it is forged but  implies  that  it  should  not  be
             relied on.  The decision maker points out that  the  signature
             of the wife on the marriage certificate does not match that on
             her passport.  This is a marriage by proxy.  The wife was  not
             in Ghana at the time so could not  possibly  have  signed  the
             marriage certificate.  The decision maker makes reference to a
             reference on the marriage certificate not matching that on the
             letter from the Ghanaian High Commission.  The decision  maker
             has provided no evidence that there should  be  such  a  match
             and, in any event, I can see  no  reference  on  the  marriage
             certificate at all.


         18.  The  decision  maker  says  that  the  letter  from  the  High
             Commission is not genuine because the phone  number  does  not
             match the actual number of the High Commission and it was  not
             answered when the decision maker called it.  Again this  is  a
             bare assertion, not supported by  any  evidence.   Information
             from the embassy website, from which this conclusion was made,
             has not been provided."

11.  In  conclusion  therefore,  the  First-tier  Judge  was  satisfied  the
    Ghanaian marriage certificate was genuine and  that  the  claimant  had
    established a valid marriage and that the appeal should be allowed.

12.  The Secretary of State was granted permission to appeal  that  decision
    and it would be as well therefore to  set  out  below  the  grounds  in
    support of that successful application:

         "Ground one:  Making a material misdirection of law


         The Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 14 November 2013 ('the Refusal
         Letter') disputes that the Appellant's Ghanaian customary  marriage
         certificate was lawfully issued and  constitutes  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's relationship with an EEA  national.   Accordingly,  the
         application was refused with  reference  to  Regulation  7  of  the
         Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006;


         On 16 January 2014 the determination in Kareem (Proxy  marriages  -
         EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024  (IAC)  was  promulgated  which  provides
         important guidance as to how the Tribunal should determine  whether
         a marriage has been properly contracted;


         At paragraph 68(d) of Kareem it is stated that -


             'In appeals where there is no  such  marriage  certificate  or
             where there is doubt that  a  marriage  certificate  has  been
             issued by a competent authority, then the marital relationship
             may be proved  by  other  evidence.   This  will  require  the
             Tribunal to determine whether a marriage was contracted'."

         In this case there was doubt that the marriage certificate had been
         issued by a competent authority.  Consequently, it was the task  of
         the  Immigration  Judge  to  determine  whether  the  marriage  was
         contracted.

         At paragraph 16 of Kareem it was found that -

             '...we start from the fact that the rights  of  free  movement
             and residence stem directly from Union citizenship.  According
             to the Treaties, a person having the nationality of  a  Member
             State is a Union citizen.  It follows  from  these  provisions
             that a Union citizen's rights of free movement  and  residence
             are intrinsically linked to that  person's  nationality  of  a
             Member State.  Judgments of the CJEU indicate that where there
             are issues of EU law that  involve  the  nationality  laws  of
             Member States, then the law that applies will be  the  law  of
             the Member State  of  nationality  and  not  the  host  Member
             State...  This  is  because  nationality  remains  within  the
             competence of the individual Member States'.


         Accordingly, in determining whether the  marriage  was  contracted,
         the Immigration Judge ought to have turned to the law of the Member
         State of nationality and not the host Member State.  In  this  case
         the relevant Member State is  France  as  the  Appellant's  claimed
         family member is a French national.

         In the current case the determination does not make  any  reference
         to the law of France.  It is submitted that in failing to  consider
         the law of the Member State of nationality, the  Immigration  Judge
         has erred in the consideration of this case.


         Kareem further notes that -


             'A lack of evidence of relevant foreign law will normally mean
             that the party with the burden of proving it will fail'. [14]


         In this case no finding was made that any evidence of the  relevant
         foreign law  was  provided  by  the  Appellant.   It  is  therefore
         submitted the Appellant did not  satisfy  the  required  burden  of
         proof.


         For these reasons it is considered that the Immigration  Judge  has
         made a material misdirection of law  in  failing  to  consider  the
         approach set out in Kareem."


13.  Thus the appeal came before me on 9 May 2014 when my first task was  to
    decide whether the determination of the First-tier Judge  disclosed  an
    error or errors on a point of law such as may have materially  affected
    the outcome of the appeal.

14.  Regrettably it was apparent to me at the outset  of  the  hearing  that
    there was no appearance on the part  of  the  claimant  and/or  by  her
    claimed spouse/partner.  There was no explanation  for  the  claimant's
    absence and no request for an adjournment.  I was satisfied that notice
    of hearing had been served upon the claimant's last known address and I
    therefore acceded to Ms Isherwood's request to proceed with the hearing
    of the appeal in the absence of the claimant  in  accordance  with  the
    provisions of Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 as I was indeed of the view  that  it  was  in  the  interests  of
    justice in those circumstances to proceed with the hearing.

15.  In that regard I further noted that at paragraph 1  of  the  directions
    to the parties that accompanied the notice of hearing  dated  17  April
    2014, it was made clear that any response the claimant  to  the  appeal
    wished to make under Rule 24 of the 2008 Tribunal Procedure  Rules  had
    to be sent or delivered to the Tribunal so  that  it  was  received  no
    later than fourteen days after the claimant was sent notice of  hearing
    and the fact that permission to appeal had been granted.

16.  I noted with further concern that no such Rule  24  response  had  been
    made.  There was therefore no indication either prior to or at the time
    of the hearing before me as to whether inter alia, the claimant opposed
    the appeal on the grounds upon which the  Secretary  of  State  relied.
    Further there was no written request for an extension of time in  order
    to seek to provide such a response in accordance with the provisions of
    Rule 24(4).

17.  Ms Isherwood informed me that she relied  on  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal was granted to which she added that there  was  no
    evidence as to whether the Sponsor was previously a Ghanaian citizen or
    any direct descendant of a Ghanaian  citizen  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance at paragraph 5 of NA (above).

18.  She  asked  me  in  the  circumstances  to  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision for error of law not least because for the  reasons
    stated in the grounds, the determination of the First-tier  Judge  was,
    she submitted, wholly and inadequately reasoned and that I should  then
    proceed to make a fresh decision on the evidence before me  to  dismiss
    the appeal.

Assessment

19.  I have had no difficulty in concluding that the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Judge discloses errors of law such as  may  have  materially
    affected the outcome of the appeal.

20.  Whilst it was perfectly understandable  as  to  why  the  Secretary  of
    State's Refusal Letter made no reference  to  the  decision  in  Kareem
    (above) because its promulgation  on  16  January  2014  postdated  her
    letter, the same regrettably cannot be said for  the  First-tier  Judge
    who determined the appeal almost six weeks after its promulgation.

21.  Judges interpret existing  legal  principles.   They  reveal  the  law.
    They do not do so prospectively.  Therefore, if for example the  First-
    tier Judge misunderstands those legal principles, then  notwithstanding
    the legal case on the issue postdates the determination, it will  still
    amount to a material error of law and so I find in  the  present  case,
    not least for the comprehensive reasons identified within ground  1  in
    support  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  successful  application   for
    permission to appeal.

22.  Further, whilst I recognise  that  cases  emanating  whether  from  the
    former Immigration Appeal Tribunal or from the present  Upper  Tribunal
    are not binding upon the First-tier Tribunal, significant weight should
    nonetheless be attached to the Tribunal's important guidance.  In  such
    circumstances, I consider it to have been highly regrettable  that  the
    First-tier Judge should have been so dismissive of the guidance of  the
    Tribunal in NA and failed to heed the guidance of the Upper Tribunal in
    the recent reported decision in  Kareem.   As  the  former  Immigration
    Appeal Tribunal (IAT) made clear in the past, it was always unfortunate
    when an Immigration Judge  appeared  to  operate  in  a  vacuum  as  if
    reported decisions of the Tribunal  did  not  exist  for  guidance  and
    consideration.

23.  I would observe that paragraph 5 of the Secretary  of  State's  grounds
    indeed reflected paragraph (d) of the head note to that  case  and  for
    the sake of completeness it would be as well off  to  set  out  belowin
    full, paragraphs (d) to (g) of that head note:

        "(d) In appeals where there is  no  such  marriage  certificate  or
             where there is doubt  that  a  marriage  certificate  has  been
             issued by a competent authority, then the marital  relationship
             may be proved by other evidence. This will require the Tribunal
             to determine whether a marriage was contracted.


        (e)  In such an appeal,  the  starting  point  will  be  to  decide
             whether the marriage was contracted between the  Appellant  and
             the qualified person according to the national law of  the  EEA
             country of the qualified person's nationality.


        (f)  In all such  situations,  when  resolving  issues  that  arise
             because of conflicts of law, proper respect must  be  given  to
             the qualified person's  rights  as  provided  by  the  European
             Treaties, including the right to marry and the rights  of  free
             movement and residence.


        (g)  It should be assumed that, without  independent  and  reliable
             evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws
             of the EEA country and/or the country where the  marriage  took
             place, the Tribunal  is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that
             sufficient evidence has been provided to discharge  the  burden
             of proof. Mere production  of  legal  materials  from  the  EEA
             country or country  where  the  marriage  took  place  will  be
             insufficient evidence because they will rarely  show  how  such
             law  is  understood  or  applied  in  those   countries.   Mere
             assertions as to the effect of  such  laws  will,  for  similar
             reasons, carry no weight."

24.  This was a case where the Secretary  of  State  had  expressed  serious
    doubt, indeed had concluded, that the claimant's  marriage  certificate
    had not been issued by the Ghanaian authorities as claimed.  Indeed the
    Secretary of State had pointed out in support  of  that  contention  as
    follows:

         "Ghanaian High Commission Letter


         As supplementary evidence that your marriage has been registered in
         accordance with Ghanaian law, you have submitted a letter from  the
         Ghanaian High Commission in London dated  27th  December  2012  and
         signed by Bernard K.B.  Quantson.   This  letter  states  that  the
         marriage was registered in  accordance  with  Ghanaian  Law.   Each
         letter from the Ghanaian High  Commission  has  its  own  reference
         number, unique to that marriage certificate and participants of the
         marriage.  It is noted that the reference number on the letter  you
         have provided does not match the marriage certificate that you have
         provided.


         When the Home Office telephoned the Ghanaian High Commission on  13
         December 2013 using the phone number provided on  the  letter  0208
         342 7558/7559 there was no answer.   When  this  number  was  cross
         checked with the Ghanaian High Commission in London website it  was
         found that this number did not exist.  For that reason  we  do  not
         accept that this is a genuine letter issued from the Ghanaian  High
         Commission in London.


         On the basis of  the  above,  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  be
         satisfied that  your  claimed  proxy  marriage  has  been  properly
         executed as to satisfy the requirements of the law of  the  country
         in which it took place.  Your application is refused with reference
         to Regulation 7 of the EEA Regulations 2006 as amended."

25.  I find that contrary to the First-tier  Judge's  conclusion  that  this
    was no more than a "bare assertion" on the part  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, that this was in fact compelling evidence as  reflected  in  the
    efforts made by the Secretary of State to determine whether the  letter
    from the Ghanaian High Commission was genuine.

26.  I further find that the First-tier Judge  appears  to  have  failed  to
    appreciate that, not least mindful of the guidance in Kareem to which I
    have above referred, that it was for the claimant  to  demonstrate  the
    reliability of the documentation upon which she relied.

27.  Indeed, in Tanveer Ahmed* [2002] UKAIT 439, a starred decision  of  the
    Immigration Appeal Tribunal, it was  held  inter  alia,  there  was  no
    obligation on the Secretary of State to make detailed  enquiries  about
    documents produced by applicants and it was not for  the  Secretary  of
    State to authenticate  the  Appellant's  documents.   It  was  for  the
    Appellant to show that the documents produced by him/her were  reliable
    in the overall context to the requisite standard of proof.

28.  It is apparent  that  in  granting  permission  to  appeal,  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth  in  effect  concluded,  that  there  was
    inadequate reasoning as to the findings  of  the  First-tier  Judge  as
    regards the validity of the claimant's  marriage  that  in  consequence
    disclosed an arguable  error  of  law  within  the  First-tier  Judge's
    determination.  For the reasons that I have identified  above  I  would
    wholly agree.

29.  Mindful of the guidance of the Court of Appeal in R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982, the First-tier Judge's reasoning does not in the circumstances
    satisfactorily disclose the thought processes of the  First-tier  Judge
    in reaching his decision.   Indeed  the  Judge's  reasoning  not  least
    overlooking relevant case law guidance was on the face of the  evidence
    before him perverse and inadequate and therefore unsustainable.

30.  As held inter alia  in  Shizad  (sufficiency  of  reasons:  set  aside)
    [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC) although a decision might contain an  error  of
    law where the requirements to give adequate reasons were not  met,  the
    Upper Tribunal would not normally set aside the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal where there had been no misdirection of law and the fact-
    finding process could not be criticised  unless,  the  conclusions  the
    Judge drew from the primary data was not reasonably open to him or her.
     For the reasons that I have above identified it is apparent to me that
    the Judge's reasoning was inadequate and that in  consequence  of  that
    inadequacy the conclusion that  he  drew  from  the  evidence  was  not
    reasonably open to him.

31.  Ms Isherwood urged me in the circumstances and for the reasons  that  I
    have above identified, to make a fresh decision  and  to  dismiss  this
    appeal and for the above reasons I do so.  Quite apart from the matters
    that  I  have  identified  above  that  the  First-tier  Judge   simply
    overlooked, there was for example, no evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Judge that the Sponsor was as claimed a French national and/or that  he
    was exercising treaty rights.  There was no evidence that  the  Sponsor
    had formerly been or still was  a  Ghanaian  citizen  or  that  he  was
    descended from Ghanaian citizens.   There  was  indeed  little  if  any
    evidence that met the guidance as set out comprehensively by the  Upper
    Tribunal in Kareem.

32.  As I have made clear above, the enquiries by the Secretary of State  as
    to the reliability of a letter from the Ghanaian  High  Commission  can
    hardly be described as amounting to a bare assertion.  Those  enquiries
    represent compelling evidence and so I find that the  letter  from  the
    Ghanaian High Commission stating that the marriage  was  registered  in
    accordance with Ghanaian law cannot be regarded as reliable.

33.  I also cannot ignore the  fact  that  despite  the  importance  of  the
    claimant's appeal she in the first instance and before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to take  the  opportunity  to  give  oral  evidence  in
    support of her appeal before that Tribunal nor was there any attendance
    on the part of the Sponsor for that purpose.

34.  My concern in that regard has been reinforced  by  the  fact  that  the
    claimant has failed to attend the hearing  of  the  appeal  before  the
    Upper Tribunal in order to resist the Secretary of  State's  contention
    that the decision in her appeal should be set aside and reversed.

Decision

35.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

36.  I set aside the decision.

37.  I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed                                  Date 17 June 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

