

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50311/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18th July 2014                             |On 24th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               FATMIR MURATAJ
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

Appellant:        Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
Respondent:   Mr J Neville (of Counsel), instructed by Obiter Legal
                  Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision dated 15 November 2013 made on behalf of the Secretary of
    State for the Home Department (the "Secretary of State") the  Appellant
    herein, the application of the Respondent, Fatmir Murataj, of  Albanian
    nationality and aged 24 years,  for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis  of  his  relationship  with  a  UK  national  was
    refused.  The ensuing appeal was allowed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (the "FtT").

 2. In granting permission to appeal, the Judge considered it arguable that
    the FtT's Article 8 ECHR analysis was "inadequate".  The grounds of the
    Secretary of State's  appeal,  which  are  two  fold,  were  considered
    arguable.  The first contends that the  FtT  Judge  "....   misdirected
    himself in law by  failing  to  consider  whether  there  existed  good
    grounds  to  find  that  there   are   compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the new Rules to  require  the  grant  of
    such leave."   The second ground embodies a complaint  that  the  Judge
    did not identify the public interest in firm immigration  control  and,
    further, did not conduct a so-called "macro level" assessment.

 3. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I  gave  an  ex  tempore  judgment
    dismissing the Secretary of State's appeal, for the following  reasons,
    in summary:

    (a)  The specific complaint articulated in the first ground  of  appeal
         is that the Judge failed to  consider  what  is  described  as  the
         "test" in Nagre - v - SOSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin), at [29], which
         purports to impose the requirement of "an arguable case" in  favour
         of granting permission to remain outside the  Rules  in  Article  8
         cases at the intermediate stage of having ruled that the particular
         case does not satisfy the Rules and  then  deciding  whether  there
         exist sufficiently compelling circumstances for  an  "extra  Rules"
         Article 8 case to succeed.  In MM - v - Secretary of State for  the
         Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ. 985, the Court of Appeal at [128],
         confirmed the view consistently expressed  by  this  Tribunal  that
         this intermediate step, or exercise, is not required, in a  context
         where the process is a simple two stage  one.  Aitkens  LJ,  having
         referred to the statement in Nagre that  "  ...   if  a  particular
         person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to  demonstrate,  as  a
         preliminary to a consideration outside the Rule,  that  he  has  an
         arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting leave  to
         remain outside the Rules", stated:


             "I  cannot  see  much  utility  in  imposing   this   further,
             intermediary test.  If the applicant cannot satisfy the  Rule,
             then there either is or there  is  not  a  further  Article  8
             claim.  That will  have  to  be  determined  by  the  relevant
             decision maker."


     This disposes of the first ground of appeal.


    (b)  I would add that insofar as there is a further discrete  complaint
         that the FtT failed to identify sufficiently compelling factors,  I
         consider this to have no merit.  The Judge made  a  value  judgment
         which in my view was open to him on the evidence  adduced  and  the
         findings made that the impact of the impugned decision would,  from
         the relevant perspectives of the likely consequential scenarios, be
         "extremely harsh" and "unduly harsh": [9].  The determination  must
         be read as a whole and I refer to, in  their  totality,  [6],  [7],
         [8],  [9]  and  [10].  The  question  of  whether  this   Tribunal,
         exercising an error of law appellate jurisdiction, would have  made
         the same decision is legally irrelevant. I conclude that the  Judge
         did not lapse into any identifiable error of law  in  the  exercise
         performed.

    (c)  The centrepiece of the second ground of  appeal  is  an  assertion
         that "at no point in the determination did the Judge refer  to  the
         public interest in firm immigration control".   This is  erroneous.
         The  Judge  specifically  identified  the   legitimate   aim/public
         interest in [4] and [5] of the Determination.  Having done  so,  he
         embarked upon the balancing exercise.  I consider that the decision
         in Shahzad [2014] UKUT 85 does not promote this ground  of  appeal.
         As appears from [105]  of  the  decision  in  that  case,  properly
         analysed, the Upper Tribunal considered that  the  factors  in  the
         "balance  sheet"  in  favour  of  the  immigrant  were   manifestly
         insufficient  to  satisfy  the   compelling   circumstances   case.
         Furthermore, the finding in Shahzad that the  FtT  failed  to  take
         into account the "macro" level is  a  case  specific  one  which  I
         consider does not arise in the present instance as I  am  satisfied
         from a consideration of the Determination as a whole that the Judge
         was not guilty of a similar failure.  Having correctly plotted  the
         co-ordinates, the question of weight and balance was  one  for  the
         FtT and  not  this  appellate  tribunal,  particularly  absent  any
         complaint of irrationality, unsurprising in the context of  a  well
         reasoned determination.

DECISION

 4. For the reasons elaborated above, I dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's
    appeal.





                                                                       [pic]


                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Dated:  19 July 2014
