
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50906/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20th August 2014                           |On 28th August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                       MISS NICKEISHA TRUDY-ANN CLARKE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr F Bajwa (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (Seniior Home Office Presenting Officer)



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant's appeal against a decision to remove her to Jamaica  was
    dismissed by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard  ("the  judge")  in  a
    determination promulgated on 19 May 2014.   The  appellant's  case  was
    advanced in reliance upon Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention,  in
    the light of family and private life ties established here.

2.   It was accepted before the judge that the appellant could not meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM or paragraph  276ADE  of  the  rules.   The
    judge found that there were arguably good grounds for making an Article
    8 assessment outside the rules.  He took into account  the  appellant's
    family circumstances and, in particular, her two daughters, born in the
    United Kingdom in May 2008 and May 2012.  Neither is a British citizen.
     The judge also took into account the presence here of other  relatives
    and the extent of the appellant's ties to Jamaica.  He  concluded  that
    the appellant could not succeed under Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention and dismissed the appeal.

3.   An application was made for permission to appeal.  Attention was  drawn
    to the appellant's presence in the United  Kingdom  since  her  arrival
    here in 2001 and  to  the  fact  that  she  has  sole  custody  of  her
    daughters, who are described as being 5 years old and 1 year old.   Her
    mother is in the United Kingdom and she has cousins and other relatives
    who gave statements in support.  The author of the grounds states  that
    the appellant has no family in  Jamaica  to  return  to  with  her  two
    children, one of whom is at school. It is contended that it  "would  be
    contrary to private life to return the appellant to Jamaica", and  that
    it is highly unlikely that both children would be able to adapt to life
    in Jamaica or want to live there.  The judge did not give  reasons  why
    he felt it was safe for her to return "in the light  of  current  civil
    unrest".  The decision is described in the grounds as being contrary to
    Razgar [2007] UKHL 27 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted on 24 June 2014.  The  judge  granting
    permission noted that the judge made  mention  of  section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 at paragraph  28  of  the
    determination.   This  is  described  as  the  extent  of  the  judge's
    reference to this statutory provision.  Permission was granted  on  the
    basis that it was unclear how the judge reached an  evaluation  of  the
    best interests  of  the  children  without  specifically  referring  to
    factors in this context.

5.   There was no Rule 24 response from the Secretary of State.

Submissions on Error of Law

6.   Mr Bajwa said that the issue of the children had not been  dealt  with,
    or at least not dealt with comprehensively.  The judge  described  them
    as being both young.  One child was of school age.

7.   Mr Walker made a response on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State.   At
    paragraph 14, the judge directed   himself  in  the  light  of  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 640.  He then went on to make an Article 8  assessment  and
    considered the salient facts.  He found  that  the  appellant  and  her
    daughters enjoyed family life  here.   He  reached  his  conclusion  at
    paragraph 28 of the determination and had, by then, considered the best
    interests of the children. It was clear that the judge  considered  all
    of the evidence.   The  Secretary  of  State  proposed  to  remove  the
    appellant with her daughters, as a family  unit.   The  judge  accepted
    that this would have an impact  on  the  children's  relationship  with
    their grandmother here.  Overall, the judge had taken into account  the
    best interests of the children in his assessment and did not  make  any
    material error in reaching his conclusions.

8.   In a brief response, Mr Bajwa said that the  judge  had  not  explained
    how he came to the conclusion that it was in the best interests of  the
    children that they should be removed with their  mother.   He  had  not
    referred to particular factors.   The  whereabouts  of  the  children's
    fathers appeared to be unknown.  The oldest child had  started  school.
    The judge's assessment was brief and it  appeared  that  he  fleetingly
    mentioned relevant factors and then  stated  his  conclusion.   It  was
    clear that he put  emphasis  at  paragraph  22  and  elsewhere  on  the
    prospect of visits by family members to Jamaica.

9.   Mr Bajwa also said that on the  last  page  of  the  determination  the
    judge mentioned two men in Jamaica whose whereabouts the appellant said
    that she did not know.  The judge did not identify who these men  were.
    It was clear that both children had been born in  the  United  Kingdom.
    On this last point (made by Mr Bajwa after the formal conclusion of the
    hearing but without objection) Mr Walker responded  that  paragraph  24
    showed that the judge had in mind the appellant's own  father  and  the
    father of her oldest child.  These two men were Jamaican nationals  and
    the reference by the judge in paragraph 26, on the  last  page  of  the
    determination, was a reference to them and not to  the  father  of  the
    youngest child, who was a Ghanaian national.

Conclusion on Error of Law

10.  The grounds in support of the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    sought to rehearse aspects  of  the  appellant's  case,  including  the
    extent of her ties here and in Jamaica.  Mention is  made  of  the  two
    children and their ages and the  fact  that  the  oldest  of  them  has
    started attending school.  The judge granting permission drew attention
    to  the  brief  mention  of  section  55  of  the  2009  Act   in   the
    determination.

11.  Paragraph 28 does indeed include the only express  mention  of  section
    55.  However, it is readily apparent from that paragraph that the judge
    took into account the provision "in reaching" his conclusion  that  the
    appellant could not  succeed  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  As Mr Walker submitted, the reasoning of the judge in fact
    appears at paragraphs 14 to 28.  No case was advanced by the  appellant
    that the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE were met.  The judge properly found that an assessment
    was required outside the rules,  having  taken  into  account  guidance
    given  in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640.

12.  In paragraph 16 and  those  which  followed,  the  judge  set  out  all
    salient features of the appellant's case.   He  did  not  overlook  any
    relevant or material  matter.   He  accepted  that  the  appellant  has
    established family life in the United Kingdom, since her  arrival  here
    in April 2001.   He took into  account  letters  of  support  from  her
    mother and several cousins, all adults.  He properly took into  account
    as a significant factor the birth of the appellant's two daughters,  in
    May 2008 and May 2012.   The  father  of  the  younger  is  a  Ghanaian
    national but he did not attend the  hearing  and  did  not  submit  any
    written statement or  letter  supporting  the  appellant's  case.   The
    appellant's evidence was that she did not want to marry this man before
    resolving her immigration status.   So far as the father of  the  older
    child is concerned, the appellant gave evidence that he is  a  Jamaican
    national, from Kingston, and that she is unaware  of  his  whereabouts.
    Similarly, she is unaware of the whereabouts of her own father, also  a
    Jamaican national.

13.  The judge took into account the  appellant's  claim  that  she  has  no
    relatives in Jamaica but concluded, in  paragraph  26,  that  the  true
    picture had not been revealed.  He made mention of two men  in  Jamaica
    about whom she knew little.  It is apparent that he had  in  mind  here
    the appellant's own father and the father of her older child.

14.  So far as the appellant's children are concerned, the judge  also  took
    into  account  their  regular  contact  with  their  grandmother   (the
    appellant's mother) and aunts and the fact that  the  older  child  had
    started school.   He noted that the two children  have  a  relationship
    with the father of the younger but, again, there was no  evidence  from
    this person and nothing to show his status here.

15.  The  judge  properly  found  that  the  appellant's  removal  with  her
    daughters would constitute an interference with family and private life
    ties established here.  The children are very young and  the  education
    enjoyed by the older was only recently established.  He was entitled to
    find that a change in this context would not be detrimental.    He  was
    also entitled to find that all the important members of the appellant's
    family would be able to visit her and the children in Jamaica.  He  did
    not err in taking into account the fact that the appellant was educated
    exclusively in Jamaica and was as well equipped as her  peers  to  find
    accommodation and employment there.

16.  No material matter concerning  the  children  has  been  identified  as
    having been  overlooked by the judge.  He was entitled to place  weight
    on their young ages and to the Secretary of State's proposal to  remove
    them with their mother.  In  the  light  of  the  paucity  of  evidence
    regarding the circumstances of the children's fathers,  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the disruption to such relationships as  were
    established here would be relatively modest and that visits to  Jamaica
    would be one means whereby they could be maintained from  abroad.   The
    judge clearly took his findings  regarding  the  circumstances  of  the
    children into account in making his Article 8 assessment,  which  built
    upon his findings of fact.  His approach is, I  find,  consistent  with
    the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in AJ (India) [2011] EWCA Civ
    1191.  Paragraph 28 of the determination, which contains brief  mention
    of section 55 of the 2009 Act, is manifestly  not  the  extent  of  the
    judge's consideration of the best interests of the children.   Although
    it might have been more appropriate to refer to the section earlier  in
    the determination, no material error  of  law  is  shown  by  the  late
    mention of it, after the  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children and the overall Article 8 assessment.

17.  Mr Bajwa made no particular submission in the light of  the  contention
    in the grounds that the judge failed to give reasons why  "he  felt  it
    was safe to return to Jamaica in the light of the current civil unrest"
    but  there  is  no  merit  here  at  all.   Paragraph  24  records  the
    appellant's own evidence that the reason why she could  not  return  to
    Jamaica was "no family" but the judge was entitled to take into account
    here his adverse finding regarding  the  true  extent  of  family  ties
    there.

18.  Overall, I conclude that no material  error  of  law  has  been  shown.
    The judge was entitled to conclude as he  did,  in  the  light  of  the
    evidence before him.  The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand.

DECISION

19.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


