
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50286/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                 Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                           |
|On 26 November 2015                    |                 On 22 December 2015  |
|                                       |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                                 L. M. S. A.
                         (anonymity directioN made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Smith, Counsel, instructed by Danielle Cohen
                    Immigration Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lagunju which was promulgated on 8 June 2015.
2.   The background facts can be shortly stated. The appellant  entered  the
    United Kingdom on 23 March 2014 with valid leave  to  remain  until  23
    September of that year and made an application for further leave on the
    basis of her family and private life.  The matter was considered  under
    the terms of the Immigration Rules  and  was  rejected  and  the  judge
    rejected the appellant's alternative case under Article 8.

3.   The appellant now appeals to the Upper Tribunal pursuant to  the  leave
    of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Saffer  dated  19  August  2015.   The
    substantive ground of appeal advanced before me today is that the judge
    either made a material mistake of  fact  or  failed  to  take  material
    evidence  into  account.    This   concerns   principally   the   three
    grandchildren of the appellant and in particular health issues,  namely
    autism, from which one particular grandson, A, suffers. That ground was
    developed before me and it was  argued  that  throughout  the  judgment
    reference is made either to the expression "grandchild" in the singular
    or to the expression "grandson" and nowhere in  the  decision  does  it
    appear to be acknowledged that there were in fact  three  grandchildren
    concerned.

4.   I might have come to the view that any dissonance between the  singular
    and the plural may not have been material because the focus of both the
    evidence and the submissions before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  were
    to one particular  grandchild  and  to  his  health  issues.  In  those
    circumstances the judge might have been forgiven for using the singular
    as a type of judicial shorthand, or for focusing attention on  the  one
    grandchild most affected, on the basis that what applied to  him  would
    apply equally to the others.

5.   However, on the facts of this particular case, I  cannot  be  satisfied
    that that was the intention of the judge.  The  reason  being  that  if
    limiting  the  discussion  to  grandchild  singular   as   opposed   to
    grandchildren plural, was a means of focusing  on  A,  one  would  have
    expected the decision to condescend to some level of detail  about  A's
    health condition.

6.   There was before the judge  a  significant  volume  of  evidence  which
    dealt with these health issues, none of which is  considered  addressed
    in the decision. I have been taken to a letter from Mr Jon Hewitt dated
    10 March 2015 which appears at page 1 of the  appellant's  supplemental
    bundle before the judge which contains relevant and cogent material.

7.   The content of that letter (which  was  before  the  judge  though  not
    referred to in the decision) reads as follows:

         "A relies very heavily on close relationships with specific people.
          A cannot make neurotypical relationships with people  due  to  his
         autism and therefore has a much greater reliance on those who  work
         with him and his close family.  His grandmother  has  a  particular
         link with A and  this  is  extremely  positive  for  him.   He  has
         developed appropriate attachments  to  his  grandmother,  something
         that  A  finds  incredibly   challenging.    This   very   positive
         relationship he has  with  his  grandmother  helps  to  reduce  A's
         anxiety.


         I would be very concerned if A's grandmother was not around to help
         support him and the family.  I believe that A's  anxiety  would  be
         heighted greatly with her absence. With increased  anxiety  A  will
         present  with  the  behaviours  mentioned  above  which  will   put
         increased stress on A's family and will also impact  negatively  on
         his development and progress."

8.   Those significant issues might suggest that there was  a  bond  and  an
    affinity between grandmother and grandchild which was more than usually
    close and factual findings on that evidence by the judge might have fed
    into  the  proportionality  analysis  under  Article  8  adopting   the
    progressive approach commended in the case of Razgar.   The  difficulty
    is that although on two occasions in the decision (both in paragraph 43
    and in paragraph 46), the judge  makes  reference  to  "the  close  and
    loving  relationship"   and   "a   stable   and   loving   environment"
    respectively,  the  judge  does  not  address  the  specifity  of   the
    particular medical matters which appear from Mr  Hewitt's  letter,  nor
    does  the  judge  consider  whether  the  nature  of  this   particular
    relationship between grandmother and grandchild might  be  relevant  in
    the Article 8 proportionality assessment and might lead to a  different
    conclusion being reached.

9.   Because of the silence of the judge on these matters and  the  lack  of
    any factual findings on clearly relevant material, I am left  with  the
    clear impression that this case did not receive  the  anxious  scrutiny
    which it ought properly to have been given and  that  omission,  in  my
    judgment, is an error of  law.  In  those  circumstances  the  decision
    demonstrates must be revisited.

11.  It is argued on the  appellant's  behalf  that  the  matter  should  be
    remitted to a First-tier Tribunal rather than being remade here in  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The Presenting Officer  for  the  Secretary  of  State
    takes a neutral view on which is the more appropriate disposal.  In  my
    judgment, mindful that the matters on which the  factual  findings  are
    lacking are fundamental to the Article 8 balancing exercise,  it  seems
    to me that the more appropriate course is for the matter to be remitted
    to a First-tier Tribunal and in those circumstances  it  would  not  be
    appropriate for me to give any  view  or  indication  as  to  how  that
    Article 8 proportionality test might fall to be determined.

12.  In those circumstances this appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds  and
    will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  redetermination.   I
    do not anticipate that the issue of Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE, will
    be an issue before the First-tier Tribunal because that  has  not  been
    the subject of any challenge in this Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed. Matter remitted for redetermination by First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     11 December 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
