
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50765/2013
                                                              Oral judgement

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 June 2014                               |On 2 July 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                Samuel Obeng

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah, Counsel instructed by Kilic & Kilic
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of  Ghana  and  his  date  of  birth  is  30
    September 1969.  He made an  application  on  21  October  2011  for  a
    residence card on  the  basis  of  his  marriage  to  an  EEA  national
    exercising free movement rights pursuant to the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred to as  the  "2006
    Regulations").

2.   The appellant's application was based on his marriage to a  citizen  of
    the Netherlands, Peace Osei.  He produced a marriage certificate  dated
    4 October 2011 purporting to establish that he  and  the  EEA  national
    married by proxy in Ghana on 12 August 2011.

3.   The application was refused by the Secretary of State in a decision  of
    19 November 2013.  The reasons for the decision are that the  appellant
    had not established that the marriage is recognised in Ghanaian law and
    it was not  accepted  by  the  respondent  that  the  relationship  was
    durable.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and the appeal was dismissed by Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  D
    Dickinson, following a hearing, in a determination that was promulgated
    on 3 April 2014. The appeal was dismissed use  because  the  First-tier
    Tribunal found that the marriage was not recognised in Ghanaian law and
    that the relationship was not durable.  The Judge  made  the  following
    findings at paragraphs 21 to 23:

         "21. Having  regard  to  Regulation  8  of  the  Immigration  (EEA)
             Regulations 2006 and in particular Regulation 8(5)  I  am  not
             satisfied that the appellant  is  by  definition  an  extended
             family member and I reach that conclusion  for  the  following
             reasons.


         22.  I am not satisfied that the appellant  and  the  EEA  national
             were residing together as a couple at the same  address  prior
             to the date of the customary marriage  certificate.   This  is
             because the only documentary evidence produced to support such
             a claim that they were residing as  a  couple,  comes  in  the
             format of one page of a  copy  tenancy  agreement  (page  44).
             However after having examined  the  said  document  I  am  not
             satisfied that it either demonstrates that  the  parties  were
             living together or were in fact party to  such  an  agreement.
             This is because the tenancy agreement document  has  not  been
             signed by the  EEA  national,  whilst  the  signature  of  the
             appellant  does  appear  to  differ  significantly  from   his
             signature on later correspondence (29  March  2012).   Further
             without any other documents to corroborate the claim that  the
             parties have been in a relationship I am  not  satisfied  that
             the parties either knew each other or had even met each  other
             prior to the date of the customary marriage certificate  being
             issued.


         23.  Further, I am not satisfied that the parties have been  living
             together, in a durable relationship, since  the  date  of  the
             customary marriage certificate was issued.  This is because no
             documents have been produced to satisfy me otherwise  of  this
             fact."

5.   Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant on  14  May  2014  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison.  The grounds  seeking
    leave to appeal argue that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  take  into
    account a letter dated 14 January 2014 from the Ghana  High  Commission
    relating to the recognition of the marriage in  Ghanaian  law.   It  is
    also argued that  the  Judge,  in  reaching  his  conclusion  that  the
    appellant and the EEA sponsor were not living together at the  time  of
    the marriage, applied the wrong test.  In addition it is argued that he
    failed to take into account material evidence linking Peace Osei to the
    address where she resided with the appellant.

Submissions

6.   Ms Appiah accepted that the appellant  was  in  some  difficulty  since
    Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24  but  she  was
    not instructed to withdraw the ground of appeal relating to this  issue
    but would leave the matter to the Upper Tribunal.

7.   In relation to the durability of the marriage  Ms  Appiah  argued  that
    the Judge made a material error of law.  She referred  me  specifically
    to [22] and [23] of the determination (see above).  She referred me  to
    a number of documents that had not been specifically referred to by the
    First-tier Tribunal.  These documents are in the respondent's  and  the
    appellant's bundle and include the EEA sponsor's employment contract, a
    letter from her employer and utility bills.  In addition  there  was  a
    letter from the EEA sponsor which was submitted  with  the  application
    that the First-tier Tribunal, according to Ms Appiah, did not take into
    account.

8.   Mr Whitwell made oral submissions.  In his view, there was no error  of
    law.  The only evidence produced by the appellant establishing that  he
    and the EEA  sponsor  lived  together  as  a  couple  was  the  tenancy
    agreement which was referred to by the First-tier Tribunal.   The  rest
    of the evidence was evidence that the appellant  and  the  EEA  sponsor
    were living at the same address but this was  not  evidence  that  they
    were in a durable relationship.

Conclusions

9.   In my view the Judge did  not  err  in  law.   The  appeal  had  to  be
    dismissed under Regulation  7  of  the  2006  Regulations  because  the
    appellant had not established that the marriage was recognised  in  the
    Netherlands (Kareem  (Proxy  marraiges  -  EU  Law)).  In  relation  to
    durability the Judge I do not accept that the Judge did not  take  into
    account the evidence before him relating to the sponsor living  at  the
    same address as the appellant.   The  point  that  the  Judge  made  in
    relation to the tenancy agreement was correct. It is the only  document
    on which the appellant and the  EEA  sponsor's  names  are  shown.  The
    Judge's finding about the reliability of this piece of evidence is  not
    challenged (it was not signed  by  the  sponsor).   The  Judge  is  not
    obliged to make findings on each and every piece  of  evidence.  It  is
    clear why the Judge reached the conclusion he did. There is no error of
    law.

10.  It was open to the Judge to find that there was no persuasive  evidence
    that the appellant and the EEA sponsor were in a  durable  relationship
    on the evidence before him.     He did not apply the wrong test. It  is
    clear from [22] and [23] that the Judge was  not  satisfied  that  they
    were living together in a durable relationship at any time.  There  was
    no oral evidence from the EEA sponsor and there was  no  evidence  from
    friends and family relating to the durability of the relationship.

11.  In my view the grounds  do  not  disclose  an  error  of  law  and  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal under Regulations 7 and 8  of  the  2006
    Regulations stands.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 1 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

