
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50059/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 September 2016                       |On 03 October 2016               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                 adnan jamal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The appellant in person
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is  a  national  of  Pakistan.   He  has  a  Postgraduate
    Diploma in Business Administration dated 30 October 2014  from  Glynd?r
    University.  He came to the United Kingdom as a  student  and  received
    extensions until 28 June 2014.  On  the  same  day  he  applied  for  a
    further extension but this  was  refused  on  27  November  2014.   The
    appellant's appeal came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Petherbridge
    who in a decision sent on 15 January 2016 dismissed it.

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal were essentially  twofold:  that  the
    judge was wrong to refuse to adjourn; and by failing to appreciate that
    the appellant had a strong case "as I have provided the Home Office CAS
    letter on basis the Home Office should grant me further leave to remain
    under Tier 4 (General)".

3.   At the  hearing  before  me  the  appellant  was  not  represented  but
    appeared in person.  I allowed him to make submissions and  to  respond
    to all points raised.  I also heard from Mr Bramble.

4.   The first ground of appeal has  no  arguable  merit.   The  judge  gave
    careful consideration to the application made  to  him  in  writing  to
    adjourn the appeal.  At paras 9-14 the judge wrote:

         "9.  The Hearing was attended by a  friend  of  the  Appellant  who
             introduced himself as Mr Kamran of [Ilford].   Mr  Kamran  had
             spoken to the Presenting Officer earlier in the  day  and  had
             said that the Appellant would be unable to attend the  Hearing
             today for the purposes of making  an  adjournment  application
             because he had overnight fallen  downstairs  and  twisted  his
             ankle.  The Presenting Officer had told  Mr  Kamran  that  the
             Court would require medical evidence that the  Appellant  was,
             in fact, unable to attend the Hearing of his appeal.


         10.  No medical evidence has been produced that the  Appellant  is,
             in fact, unable to attend his Hearing  of  his  appeal  today,
             even if it had been just to formally apply for an  adjournment
             on account of his solicitors having closed down.


         11.  I was very much aware of the overriding consideration that had
             to be given to the Appellant being allowed a fair  Hearing  of
             his appeal and with this in mind I considered the appeal  file
             carefully.


         12.  I noted that  the  Appellant  had  been  notified  of  today's
             Hearing date on the 09 September 2015, as had  his  solicitors
             at the time.  I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  would  have
             been aware of the Hearing to take place today.  He would  have
             been aware of the need  to  have  been  prepared  for  today's
             Hearing that would have required him  to  have  contacted  his
             solicitors in advance when he would have found  out  that  the
             firm had been closed down.  That  he  left  it  until  the  04
             January 2016 for a Hearing to take place  on  the  06  January
             2016 to make enquiries with regard to his Hearing makes little
             sense in that his appeal bundle would have  been  required  to
             have been served at least 5 days before the Hearing date.   In
             fairness to  the  Appellant  he  would  not  have  been  aware
             necessarily of the procedural requirements, but to  have  left
             making any enquiry, which  would  have  revealed  to  him  the
             closing down of the solicitors he had instructed until just  2
             days before the Hearing date amounts to crass foolishness.


         13.  As stated, the Appellant has been unable to attend the Hearing
             today to explain what steps he had taken  in  advance  of  the
             Hearing because it is  claimed  on  his  behalf  that  he  has
             twisted his ankle overnight and is unable to attend.  However,
             he has not produced any medical evidence to show that  he  has
             had a medical injury or  that  that  medical  injury  actually
             prevents him from attending the Hearing.


         14.   The Appellant's application for an adjournment was opposed by
             Ms Martin on behalf of the Respondent who submitted  that  the
             appeal should  be  dismissed  relying  upon  the  Respondent's
             reasons for  refusal  contained  in  a  letter  dated  the  27
             November 2014."


5.   As the appellant acknowledged at the  hearing  before  me,  it  remains
    today the case  that  he  has  not  been  able  to  produce  a  medical
    certificate to confirm his medical inability to attend the hearing on 6
    January.  Nor has he sought to dispute that he had left until two  days
    before the hearing to check what was happening with his solicitors  and
    as a result could not rely on the fact that his  solicitors'  firm  had
    been closed down by the SRA.  In addition, there had  already  been  on
    adjournment of the appeal,  from  June  2015  in  order  to  allow  the
    appellant to instruct new solicitors.  The first  ground  is  not  made
    out.

6.   From the appellant's submissions before me it is clear  that  the  main
    reason why the appellant wanted his hearing adjourned was in any  event
    so he could have more time to produce a CAS.  He accepted that  he  had
    not produced a CAS when he applied for an extension of  student  leave.
    The appellant's efforts to delay evidence  a  misunderstanding  of  the
    legal position.  Unless an applicant for student leave produces a valid
    CAS at the date of application, he cannot meet the requirements of para
    116(a) of Appendix A to the Rules.  Indeed from what the appellant told
    me it does not appear that he has been able,  even  now,  to  obtain  a
    valid CAS. That is what the judge found  and  the  judge  was  entirely
    right about this point.  The  only  basis  on  which  the  judge  might
    nonetheless have  allowed  the  appeal  was  n  Article  8  grounds  or
    unfairness grounds.  As  regards  Article  8,the  judge  addressed  the
    appellant's Article 8 circumstance in  his  determination  and  on  the
    evidence he was entirely justified in  concluding  that  the  appellant
    could not succeed.

7.   The appellant's  grounds  do  not  raise  an  issue  of  fairness  but,
    particularly given that he has not had recent legal assistance and is a
    litigant in person, I have considered this issue  on  a  de  bene  esse
    basis.  The factual difficulty for the appellant in seeking to  benefit
    from the established case law on fairness is that he has not been  able
    to show that he notified the respondent of his problems in obtaining  a
    CAS prior to applying in June 2014.  In the absence of any notice being
    given to the respondent making clear why more time was needed for valid
    reasons to obtain a CAS, it cannot be maintained  that  the  respondent
    failed to take due account of such difficulties.

8.   The appellant produced to me correspondence to show the efforts he  has
    made to obtain a place on an MBA course.  I  have  no  jurisdiction  to
    take account of his educational progress since he made  his  June  2014
    application and received a negative decision on it  in  November  2014.
    Whether his request to be able to stay longer to complete an MBA in the
    UK will be considered further is entirely a matter for the  respondent.
    This appeal, however, cannot succeed.

     For the above reasons:

     The judge did not materially err in law.
     His decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal is upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                 [pic]            Date: 30 September 2016


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


