
IAC-AH-KRL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50195/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st January 2015                          |On 2nd February 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                            Salome Ekama Onwumelu
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Ikechukwa of Almond Legals
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Moore (the judge) promulgated on 10th December 2012.  The
    Appellant had appealed against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
    issue a residence card.

 2. The refusal was dated 15th November 2013, and the reasons  for  refusal
    was that the Appellant had applied for a residence card as the extended
    family member of an EEA  national  pursuant  to  regulation  8  of  The
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    Regulations).  The application was refused with reference to regulation
    8(2)(a) and (c).  The  Respondent  contended  that  the  Appellant  had
    failed to provide sufficient evidence that he  was  dependent  upon  or
    residing with an EEA national prior to entering the United Kingdom, and
    had failed to provide evidence that since entering the  United  Kingdom
    he had continued  to  be  dependent  upon,  or  residing  with  an  EEA
    national.

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal, finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    proved that she was dependent upon an EEA national prior to  coming  to
    the United Kingdom and therefore regulation 8(2)(a) was not  satisfied.



 4. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    contending  that  the  judge  was  wrong  in  law  to  have  considered
    regulation 8 of  the  2006  Regulations,  and  should  have  considered
    regulation 7 as the Appellant was the family member of an EEA national,
    and not an extended family member.  The  judge  had  erred  in  law  by
    considering the wrong regulation.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Chambers, and on 2nd October 2014  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 indicating that the application for permission to appeal  was  not
    opposed, as both the judge, and the original decision maker  had  erred
    in law in considering regulation 8, when it was clear  that  regulation
    7(c) of the 2006 Regulations applied.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Mills accepted that the judge had erred  in
    law as contended in the  grounds,  and  as  accepted  in  the  rule  24
    response and suggested that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    should be set aside, and remitted to be considered afresh by the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 7. Mr Ikechukwa did not oppose this suggestion.

 8. I agreed that an error had been made  both  by  the  original  decision
    maker and  by  the  judge  in  considering  regulation  8  rather  than
    regulation 7 of the 2006 Regulations and  therefore  I  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  No findings are preserved.

 9. In deciding whether to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal  I  considered
    paragraph  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statements  which
    provides as follows;

    7.1  Where under section 12(1) of the 2007 Act (proceedings  on  appeal
         to the Upper Tribunal) the Upper Tribunal finds that the making  of
         the decision concerned involved the making of an error on  a  point
         of law, the Upper Tribunal may set aside the decision  and,  if  it
         does so, must either remit the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         under section 12(2)(b)(i) or proceed (in accordance  with  relevant
         Practice  Directions)  to  re-make  the  decision   under   section
         12(2)(b)(ii).

    7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed  to
         re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that;

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision and the appeal to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

    7.3  Re-making rather than remitting will nevertheless  constitute  the
         normal approach to determining appeals where an  error  of  law  is
         found, even if some further fact-finding is necessary.

10. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(a) and  (b)  are  met,  in
    that the First-tier Tribunal has not considered  the  Appellant's  case
    under the correct regulation, and  initial  fact-finding  needs  to  be
    carried out.

11. Therefore with the consent of both parties, the appeal is  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal so that it may be decided afresh.

12. The parties will be advised in due course of  the  hearing  date.   The
    appeal will be heard at Sheldon  Court,  Birmingham,  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than  Judge  Moore.   It  is  understood  that  no
    interpreter will be required at the hearing.  If this is not  the  case
    the Appellant's representative must notify the Tribunal immediately.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

There was no order for anonymity made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   There
has been no request for anonymity and the Upper Tribunal makes no  anonymity
order.



Signed        Date 21st January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The fee award will need  to  be
considered again when the First-tier Tribunal has heard this appeal.



Signed        Date 21st January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
