
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50409/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 July 2014                                 |On 5 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                              MRs Nighat hafeez
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the Secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Usman of International Immigration Advisory
Services
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mrs Nighat Hafeez date of birth 1  January  1955,  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.

 2. I have considered whether any of the parties to the present proceedings
    requires the protection of an anonymity direction.  Taking account  all
    of the circumstances  I  do  not  consider  it  necessary  to  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 3. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Laws promulgated on the 11th April 2014.  The judge
    dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decisions   of   the
    respondent to refuse her further leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    and thereupon to remove the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom  under
    section 47 of the 2006 Act.

 4. By decision taken on 15 May 2014 leave to appeal  was  granted.  It  is
    indicated in the leave to appeal that the judge has failed to  consider
    paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules, specifically  276ADE  (vi),
    and whether or not the  appellant,  who  allegedly  has  no  family  or
    accommodation in Pakistan, therefore had "no ties" within Pakistan.

 5. The grounds of appeal otherwise appear to raise generally article 8  of
    the ECHR, asserting that  the  judge's  assessment  of  article  8  was
    flawed. The leave granted was not limited to any specific ground.

 6. The appellant has challenged the decision on the basis that  the  judge
    has failed to take account of the fact that the appellant had  no  ties
    to Pakistan and  therefore  could  rely  upon  paragraph  276ADE  (vi).
    Paragraph 276 ADE provides:-



      Requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain on the
      grounds of private life

      276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to remain
      on the
      grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date of application,
      the applicant:

      (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
      LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix FM; and

      (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the grounds
      of private life in the UK; and

      (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
      (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

      (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in the UK
      for at least 7 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) and it
      would not be reasonable to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

      (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent at
      least half of his life living continuously in the UK (discounting any
      period of imprisonment); or

      (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for
      less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no
      ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country to which
      he would have to go if required to leave the UK.


 7. In seeking to pursue the appeal under paragraph 276 ADE  it  was  being
    suggested that the appellant had no ties to Pakistan and that therefore
    she satisfied paragraph 276ADE (vi).

 8. Before me in light of  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  lived  the
    majority of her life until 2012 in Pakistan; that she spoke a  language
    spoken in Pakistan; and that she had lived in  the  area  of  Lahore  a
    significant  period  of  time  prior  to  coming   to   the   UK,   the
    representative accepted that it had not been proved that the  appellant
    had  no  cultural  or  social  ties  in   Pakistan.   The   appellant's
    representative had to accept that the appellant had come to the UK as a
    visitor; that spoke Punjabi/Urdu; and had lived for most of her life in
    Pakistan. Whilst there was evidence that she had  no  children  in  her
    home area and that now she had sold or given up her home in that  area,
    the evidence on behalf of the appellant otherwise  did  not  deal  with
    whether she had other social or cultural ties in her home country.

 9. Before the judge it appears to have been accepted  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the  requirements  of  the  rules  as  is  evident  from
    paragraph  18  of  the  determination  where  it  was  noted  that  the
    application was for leave outside the rules.

10. The appellant had come to the United Kingdom on the basis  of  a  visit
    visa in 2012. She had come with her second son, who  was  entering  the
    United Kingdom for the purposes of studying. She had another son in the
    United Kingdom, who she was ostensibly visiting. It was  being  alleged
    that she no longer had any family in Pakistan because the  second  son,
    who was a student, was now studying in America. She was claiming to  be
    entitled to stay because of her medical conditions and because she  had
    no care or accommodation in Pakistan.

11. The judge considered with care the  application  made.  The  judge  has
    commented in paragraph 20 that the appellant's intentions in coming  to
    the United Kingdom were clear, she had no intention of  going  back  to
    her home country and intended to remain here. The appellant stated that
    she intended to settle in evidence. There  was  no  evidence  that  the
    appellant did not have cultural or social ties back in Pakistan. Indeed
    the evidence was silent as to whether  or  not  she  had  other  family
    members, not her immediate children in Pakistan such  as  her  brothers
    and sisters or the  brothers  and  sisters  of  her  husband,  who  was
    deceased. On the basis of the evidence no submissions were made to  the
    judge that the appellant did not have any  ties,  whether  cultural  or
    social to Pakistan.

12. In light of the evidence it was clear that the appellant was not basing
    her case on having no cultural or social ties. There  was  no  evidence
    before the judge and accordingly  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276 ADE, specifically subparagraph(vi). There
    is no material error of law in the way that the judge  has  dealt  with
    the issue.

13. Before me the appellant's representative sought  to  advance  arguments
    based upon Article 8 and the case of MM & others 2014 EWCA Civ 985. The
    representative sought to rely upon paragraph  160  of  MM.    Paragraph
    160:-

        160 If, as  is  suggested  in  the  evidence  of  the  respondents,
        decision makers have not been applying their  minds  to  whether  a
        "proportionality" test has to be used when considering "Exceptional
        circumstances" in individual cases, then that is  not  a  basis  on
        which to challenge the lawfulness of the MIR  themselves.  Such  an
        approach may be a ground for challenging  an  individual  decision;
        but that is not the object of the present litigation.

14. The judgement in MM is dealing with the decision of  Mr  Justice  Blake
    and the challenge to the rules as such being a breach of article 8. The
    judgment of the Court of Appeal is  emphasising  that  the  Immigration
    Rules are article  8  compliant  but  that  there  exists  outside  the
    Immigration Rules rights under Article 8. That  does  not  represent  a
    change in approach to article 8 outside the rules. The cases of Gulshan
    2013 UKUT 640, Nagre 2013 EWHC 720, MF (Nigeria) 2013  EWCA  Civ   1192
    and Haleemudeen 2014 EWCA Civ 558 have all advocated an  approach  that
    recognises that the rules are article  8  compliant  and  in  order  to
    succeed on article 8 grounds outside the rules there have to be factors
    to warrant consideration of the appeal on such  grounds.  Whilst  terms
    such  as  there  have  to  be  exceptional  factors  to  justify   such
    consideration that is not to impose a test of exceptionality but merely
    to note  that  in  the  main  the  Immigration  Rules  will  cover  the
    situations in which individuals should and could succeed on  article  8
    grounds.

15. The paragraph from the judgment relied upon  is  emphasising  that  the
    rules are in the main seeking to give a rational structure to a line of
    cases involving the approach to be taken between the Immigration  Rules
    as they now are and article 8 of the ECHR on the  basis  of  Strasbourg
    jurisprudence and Razgar 2004 UKHL 27 and Huang 2007 UKHL 11.

16. The  case  law  identified  that  in  most  circumstances  the  current
    Immigration Rules will constitute a  complete  code.  Thereafter  there
    have to be factors within a case which justify consideration of article
    8 outside the rules. The mere fact that an individual cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the rules is not itself justification for finding  that
    the rules are not proportionate or that decision in any  specific  case
    is not proportionate.

17. The judge had clearly noted that the appellant's evidence was that  she
    was coming to the United Kingdom to  settle  [see  paragraph  18].  The
    appellant had however not made an application for settlement but rather
    entered on a visit visa and in so doing the judge  was  satisfied  that
    she had done so deliberately to avoid making the  correct  application.
    The judge clearly found that the appellant's intentions in that  regard
    were dishonest. The judge did not find anything  that  was  exceptional
    within the appellant's circumstances. Whilst the appellant had  medical
    conditions the judge was  satisfied  that  such  could  be  treated  in
    Pakistan. The appellant had last lived with her  son  in  the  UK  some
    years previously but was now seeking to enter  on  a  false  basis  and
    establish a family life that had not existed for some years and in  the
    case of his family had never existed. The judge has gone on to consider
    whether there were any factors  which  justify  consideration  of  this
    matter on article 8 grounds and whether or not  the  matter  should  be
    allowed on article 8 grounds. The judge has found that  there  were  no
    factors which warranted consideration on article 8 grounds.

18. The judge was merely looking at whether or not in all the circumstances
    where the  appellant  had  deliberately  sought  to  evade  immigration
    control the present decision was proportionately justified in the light
    of that. The judge has found an all the circumstances that there  would
    be no breach of article 8 rights. Those were findings of fact that  the
    judge was entitled to make on the basis of the evidence presented.

19. Even if the judge  had  failed  to  assess  the  proportionality  issue
    correctly, given all the circumstances especially the circumstances  in
    which the appellant has clearly sought  entry  on  a  false  basis  and
    dishonestly, I would in any event have found that the decision made  is
    proportionately justified.

20. In the circumstances there is no  material  error  of  law  within  the
    determination.

Decision

21. I uphold the decision to dismiss this matter on all grounds





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure


