
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50202/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th June 2014                                |On 26 June 2014            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     VO
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Singh of South Manchester Law Centre

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Anonymity

 1. Although no anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal,  I
    have decided that it is appropriate to make an anonymity  order.   This
    is because this appeal is concerned with the best interests of a child,
    and it would be inappropriate for the  child  to  be  identified.   The
    Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal, and I will refer to her as the Claimant.  She is granted
    anonymity unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise.   No
    report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    Claimant or any member of her family.

Introduction and Background

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against a determination of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Lea promulgated following a hearing on  11th  March
    2014.

 3. The Claimant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom, and her
    application was refused on 7th November 2013.  The reasons for  refusal
    are set out in a letter dated 7th November 2013.

 4. The Secretary of State accepted that the Claimant has a child  born  on
    4th November 2002.  It was accepted that  section  EX  of  Appendix  FM
    should be considered in relation to the  Claimant's  relationship  with
    her child.  It was felt that it would be reasonable to expect the child
    to leave the United Kingdom, and she could  continue  her  family  life
    with her mother in Nigeria and  carry  on  her  education  in  Nigeria.
    Therefore the Secretary of State did not accept that the appeal  should
    be allowed with reference to section EX of Appendix FM.

 5. The Secretary of State also refused the  Claimant's  application  based
    upon her private life, on the basis that the requirements of  paragraph
    276ADE were not satisfied.

 6. The Claimant's appeal was heard by Judge Lea (the judge)  who  recorded
    that the issue to be decided in the appeal is whether or not  it  would
    be reasonable to expect the Claimant's daughter to  return  to  Nigeria
    with her mother.  If it would be unreasonable, then the Claimant  would
    meet the requirements of section EX.1.(a)(ii).   The  judge  concluded,
    having heard evidence from the Claimant, a friend of the Claimant,  and
    the deputy head of the Claimant's daughter's primary  school,  that  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the Claimant's daughter to leave  the
    United Kingdom and the appeal was allowed  with  reference  to  section
    EX.1.

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal contending that
    the judge had failed to take into account material considerations  that
    being the Home Office guidance in relation to  children,  published  in
    January 2014.

 8. It was contended that the judge had  not  taken  into  account  that  a
    return to Nigeria would not risk the child's health, and that she would
    be returning with her mother, and the child had no wider family in  the
    United Kingdom, and  the  Claimant  has  existing  ties  with  Nigeria,
    including contact with her other child, who was living with friends.

 9. It was also contended that the judge had erred in law by giving  weight
    to immaterial matters in that she  had  considered  the  difference  in
    educational quality between the UK and Nigeria which is stated  in  the
    Home Office guidance not to be a relevant consideration.  Reliance  was
    placed upon Holub and it was  submitted  that  education  cannot  be  a
    determinative factor.

10. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parkes, who found the grounds arguable.

11. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

12. The Claimant's representatives lodged a response pursuant to Rule 24 of
    The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 contending that  the
    determination disclosed no error of law and should stand.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

13. On behalf of the Secretary of  State  Mr  Harrison  indicated  that  he
    relied upon the grounds contained within the application for permission
    to appeal.

14. Mr Singh relied upon the Rule 24 response.  In summary I was  asked  to
    note that the Secretary  of  State's  policy  was  never  produced  nor
    referred to at the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing and had still not
    been produced, and the Claimant's representatives had  been  unable  to
    locate the policy either on the Home Office website or generally via an
    internet google search engine.  It was submitted  that  it  is  not  an
    error of law for a judge not to make reference to a policy not  brought
    to his attention, and which is not available in the public domain.

15. With respect to the case of Holub which was referred to in the grounds,
    there was no citation given and Mr Singh believed that it might  relate
    to a Court of Appeal case decided in December 2000, a few months  after
    the Human Rights Act came  into  force,  and  some  nine  years  before
    section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009  came
    into force.  It was submitted  that  this  case  had  no  relevance  to
    current cases involving children.

16. Mr Harrison accepted that he could not assist in relation to the policy
    and could not provide a copy, nor could  he  add  anything  further  in
    relation to the case of Holub.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. In my view the judge did not err in law.  I agree with the  submissions
    made on behalf of the Claimant, in that it is not an error  of  law  to
    fail to take into account Home Office  guidance  that  has  never  been
    produced before either the First-tier Tribunal or the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and the Respondent has failed to prove that this guidance is  available
    in the public domain.

18. The Secretary of State has been unable  to  explain  the  relevance  of
    Holub.

19. The judge took into account all material  matters  and  did  not  place
    weight upon immaterial matters.

20. The judge took into account that the Appellant's child was born on  4th
    November 2002 and had been in  the  United  Kingdom  since  January  or
    February 2003.  Therefore the child  had  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    shortly after her birth, and had remained here for a period  in  excess
    of eleven years.

21. The judge recognised the best  interests  of  a  child  are  a  primary
    consideration, and also took into account that the immigration  history
    of a parent is not the fault of a child.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    place weight upon the evidence given by the deputy head of  the  school
    attended by the Claimant's daughter.

22. The judge had to  decide  whether  it  was  reasonable  to  expect  the
    Claimant's child to leave the United  Kingdom.   The  judge  took  into
    account that the child had spent all her life in  the  United  Kingdom,
    apart from a few months after her birth.  She had been educated in  the
    United Kingdom, and the judge was entitled to conclude on the  evidence
    that it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the United
    Kingdom and it was not in her best interests for her to do so.

23. The judge was therefore entitled to conclude that the appeal  succeeded
    with reference to  section  EX.1  and  gave  adequate  and  sustainable
    reasons for the findings made.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.  The appeal of the Secretary  of  State  is
dismissed  and  the  determination  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   stands.


Anonymity

An anonymity order has been  made  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Signed                              Date 16th June 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made for the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                              Date 16th June 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
