
              [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50518/2013


                                  THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |                  Sent:  |
|On July 30, 2014                 |                  On     |
|                                 |August 4, 2014           |
|                                 |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                         MISS ADAKU UZOAMAKA OHIAGU

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Nartey, Counsel, instructed by Owens
      Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellant, born May 31, 1974, is a citizen of  Nigeria.  She  first
    entered the United Kingdom on a student visa valid from  September  24,
    2003 until December 31, 2004. She lawfully extended her stay  to  study
    until March 31, 2009. On March 4, 2009 she applied to remain as a  Tier
    1 (Highly Skilled Migrant) and this entitled her to remain until  April
    5, 2012., On March 29, 2012 she applied to extend her stay further as a
    Highly Skilled Migrant but the respondent refused this  application  on
    June 22, 2012 because she failed to meet the financial requirements  of
    Appendix C to the Immigration Rules. A section 47 removal decision  was
    also taken. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and the matter came
    before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hanratty, RD on  September  11,
    2012. At that hearing the respondent withdrew the section  47  decision
    and the judge dismissed the application under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    On February 27, 2013 the respondent served the appellant with notice of
    intention to remove.  The  appellant  lodged  an  appeal  against  that
    decision even thought there was no right appeal.  Following  a  consent
    order on October 28, 2013  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  her
    application and having done so refused it on November 19, 2013  and  on
    November 21, 2013 removal directions were given.

 2. On November 28, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. In her notice  of  appeal
    she accepted she did not meet paragraph 276ADE HC 395  but  argued  her
    appeal should be considered under article 8 ECHR.

 3. The matter was listed before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Stokes
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  28,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on May 15, 2014 he dismissed the appeal under
    both the Immigration Rules and human rights.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on May  23,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal White on June 6,
    2014 who found it was arguable the FtTJ had erred because:-

     a. The FtTJ may not have given appropriate weight to  the  appellant's
        health, her length of residence and the respondent's conduct.
     b. The FtTJ may have applied a presumption in favour of removal.


 5. The appellant was in attendance and the representatives outlined  their
    submissions for me.

SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 6. Miss Nartey submitted there were four areas where the FttJ had erred-

     a. Firstly, the FtTJ had implied the appellant was an  overstayer  and
        had approached her case in this light. She was  not  an  overstayer
        and this being the case she submitted the FtTJ  had  erred  in  his
        approach especially as the FtTJ only found she  was  here  lawfully
        until  February  2012.  She  referred  me  to  paragraph  29.5  and
        submitted that this was evidence of his negative  approach  to  the
        appellant.
     b. Secondly, the FtTJ had regard to her medical condition  and  should
        have listed this as a positive factor in her appeal.  The  fact  he
        did not do this and the respondent  had  not  even  considered  her
        medical condition supported her claim that the FtTJ had erred.
     c. Thirdly, when she came in 2003 she had an expectation that  if  she
        stayed here for ten years then she would be entitled to stay  under
        the long residence Rule. By September 24, 2013 she had accrued  ten
        years residence during which time she had  contributed  to  society
        through work and the payment of taxes and  fees.  The  FtTJ  should
        have considered this more highly than he did and by failing  to  do
        so he erred.
     d. Fourthly, he implied there was a presumption in favour  of  removal
        in paragraph [33] of his determination. This approach  tainted  his
        approach  to  proportionality  and  in   particular   the   matters
        highlighted  in  the  previous  grounds  of  appeal.  In  all   the
        circumstances an error should be found.


 7. Mr Tufan relied on the rule 24 letter dated June 23, 2014 and submitted
    there was no error in law. The FtTJ had not found she was an overstayer
    and he submitted-

     a. Firstly, he found, as was accepted,  she  did  not  meet  paragraph
        276ADE HC 395 so she could not stay any longer.
     b. Secondly, whilst it  was  accepted  the  appellant  raised  medical
        issues in these proceedings she had not raised them on her original
        application. In any event the FtTJ considered her medical condition
        and made findings open to him.
     c. Thirdly, the fact there was long residence in place in 2003 did not
        help her because her original visa was granted  on  the  basis  she
        intended to return. She  had  no  expectation  that  she  would  be
        allowed to stay and if that was her intention she would  have  been
        refused her original visa.
     d. Fourthly, with regard to paragraph [33] of  the  determination  the
        FtTJ does not state it is a legal test. The factors  he  took  into
        account are part of the proportionality test  and  are  factors  in
        favour of removal. Overall he did carry out a proportionality  test
        and reached findings open to him.

 8. I stood the matter down briefly and afterwards informed the  parties  I
    was refusing the application and I gave oral reasons. I stated the full
    reasons would be dealt with in a written determination.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


 9. This is an application to overturn the  FtTJ's  decision  in  which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under both the Immigration  Rules  and
    article 8 ECHR. I took submissions from both representatives and I have
    also had regard to the papers before me.

10. Miss Nartey advanced four grounds  of  appeal  but  submitted  that  if
    ground four was made out then this error would taint the FtTJ's overall
    approach to proportionality.

11. I considered the grounds both individually and collectively.

12. The FtTJ set out in some detail the appellant's immigration history and
    in summary she came as a student in 2003 and she switched  in  2009  to
    Tier 1 status as a highly skilled migrant. Her problems began when  she
    took time  off  through  ill-health  and  was  unable  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules when she sought to  extend  her  stay  as  a  Tier  1
    migrant. As she did not meet the Rules her  appeal  was  dismissed  and
    subsequently  she  was  refused  permission  to  stay  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules. It was this appeal the FtTJ had before him.

13. In what was a very detailed and carefully considered determination  the
    FtTJ noted  the  appellant  did  not  satisfy  either  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules but went on to find he  could
    consider the application outside of the Rules. It is findings  on  this
    issue that the appellant seeks to challenge.

14. Miss Nartey submitted the FtTJ did not attach sufficient weight to  the
    fact she had been here lawfully and she argued the FtTJ had implied she
    had overstayed. I am satisfied the FtTJ did not find the appellant  was
    an overstayer at any  stage  in  his  determination.  He  recorded  the
    respondent's submission but he found she neither was an overstayer  nor
    made any negative finding about her  stay.  The  FtTJ  acknowledged  at
    paragraph [28] she had been here lawfully until February  2012  and  at
    paragraph [29.5] he referred to the fact she continued to  remain  here
    following court proceedings and was  given  a  right  of  appeal  under
    article 8 which ultimately led to the decision on November 21, 2013.  I
    therefore reject the submission that in assessing  proportionality  the
    FtTJ found she had been here unlawfully.

15. The appellant claimed that when she  came  here  in  2003  she  had  an
    expectation that she would be allowed to remain permanently  after  ten
    years. I reject that submission because her original visa only gave her
    leave for fourteen months  and  then  she  had  to  seek  a  number  of
    extensions. Mr Tufan's submission "if she said she intended to stay ten
    years she would have been refused" carries some weight in  this  regard
    and in any event laws and rules change and at the date she applied  the
    new Immigration Rules were in place. There was no  positive  factor  on
    this to take into account save that she had been in the country  for  a
    lengthy period during which time she had established  a  private  life.
    The FtTJ acknowledged this in his determination.

16. The FtTJ was fully aware  of  the  appellant's  medical  condition.  He
    considered the evidence and whether she would meet either an article  3
    or an article 8 test. For the reasons he gave in  paragraphs  [30]  and
    [31] he was not persuaded she did. He found there was  no  evidence  to
    suggest medical treatment was unavailable in Nigeria. He considered her
    medical condition and did not find anything that would persuade him  to
    allow the appeal and he gave his reasons. He did not include  it  as  a
    positive factor for the simple reason it was not.

17. As regards proportionality generally at paragraphs [28]  and  [29]  the
    FtTJ considered a large number of factors that ultimately he  concluded
    weighed against the appellant. The decision of Nasim [2014] UKUT  00025
    considered the position facing many  people  who  came  to  the  UK  on
    limited visas and he referred to this in his decision.

18. As regards his approach in paragraph [33]  I  accept  his  wording  was
    clumsy and could have been better  but  ultimately  he  not  only  gave
    reasons for finding removal was  not  disproportionate  but  went  onto
    explain why. Paragraph [33] could  have  been  better  worded  but  the
    determination, like the grounds, must be considered as a whole.  Having
    considered the FtTJ's whole decision I am satisfied that based  on  the
    content and findings of the determination and having regard to the fact
    he referred to the correct standard of proof and test in paragraph  [5]
    there is no material error of law.
    DECISION


19. There is no material error of  law  and  the  original  decision  shall
    stand.

20. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the appeal has failed.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
