
IAC-FH-nl-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50513/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 March 2015                        |On 13 May 2015                      |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                              MR IQBAL HOSSAIN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Shaikh, Counsel instructed by PGA Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  with  leave  from  the  decision  of  Judge  Clarke
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against the refusal of the  Secretary
    of State to grant him leave to remain based upon a Tier  4  application
    to remain as a student.

2.   The appellant had been given leave  to  enter  as  a  student  and  had
    undertaken a course  at  a  college  successfully  and  we  gather  had
    received a diploma.  However he desired to undertake a  further  course
    which would, assuming he was successful, produce a higher level diploma
    which would be of real value to him in what he wanted to  do  with  his
    life in Bangladesh.  Unfortunately he made his application on  28  June
    2013 which was the final day of his leave to remain.  If he left it any
    longer of course he would  have  been  an  overstayer  and  would  have
    deprived himself of any right of  appeal  in-country  if  it  had  been
    refused.  Unfortunately, at that time and there is no doubt about this,
    he did not have a necessary document which was a CAS.  That document is
    one which is required to be provided by paragraph 115A of Appendix A to
    the Rules.  We look at it in its  present  form  because  there  is  no
    material difference between that and what was required at the  relevant
    time because of course these Rules are  amended  relatively  regularly.
    What that provides is that in order to obtain points for a Confirmation
    of Acceptance for Studies  the  applicant  must  provide  a  valid  CAS
    reference number.

3.   One then has to turn to paragraph 116 and that provides:  "A  CAS  will
    only be considered to be valid if (a) it was issued no  more  than  six
    months before the application is made".  That  presupposes  clearly  in
    our view that a valid CAS must be in existence when the application  is
    made because it presupposes that is the situation and merely  indicates
    that it must be not more than six months old.  There would have been of
    course nothing against the appellant arranging for  his  future  before
    and, if necessary,  well  before  the  period  of  his  leave  expired.
    Unfortunately as we say he left it to the last moment and then did  not
    have the CAS in existence.  As it happens  his  application  was  to  a
    particular college for a course due to start in July but it  transpired
    that that was not possible.  We gather that that was cancelled  and  he
    had to submit and did submit a  fresh  CAS  in  relation  to  a  course
    commencing in September 2013 and the complaint that  he  has  made  and
    what has led to leave to appeal was that the Secretary of State  failed
    to consider the service of and the existence of a valid CAS before  the
    decision was made in November 2013.

4.   Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 provides, when  read  with  sub-
    Section 4, that in relation to an  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain the variation of such an application can be made.  Obviously any
    such variation has to be made before the decision in the application is
    reached and one can well see the sense behind that because it would  on
    the face of it not be sensible and not  be  fair  to  refuse  leave  to
    someone who  shows  before  the  decision  is  made  that  actually  he
    qualifies in  all  respects  for  the  particular  decision.   However,
    Parliament in the Rules has decided that  in  a  number  of  situations
    there is a need for particular documentation to be provided  before  or
    at the time such an application is made.  If that requirement is  clear
    from the provision of the Rules, then it has to be  applied.   We  have
    been referred to a decision of the Court of Appeal in Raju &  Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  754.   That
    case concerned appeals which required points to be applied in order  to
    qualify under what was then the Tier 1 (Post-Study) provisions  of  the
    Rules and there was a table, table 10, which Appendix A  contained  and
    one of the requirements to give  the  necessary  points  was  that  the
    applicant made the application for entry clearance or leave  to  remain
    within twelve months of obtaining the relevant qualification.   Now  in
    that case what had happened putting it broadly was that the  applicants
    in question (respondents before the Court of Appeal) had not been  able
    to produce the  relevant  qualification  at  the  time  they  made  the
    application but they said that they were aware that that  qualification
    was going to be given and indeed it was in due  course  given  and  the
    Tribunal accepted that that was sufficient to enable  their  appeal  to
    succeed.   However  the  Court  of  Appeal  decided  that   the   Rules
    requirement meant that it was necessary that the relevant qualification
    existed at the time that the application was made, albeit the basis  of
    the Tribunal's decision under appeal was that  this  was  a  continuing
    application.  The wording of the Rule was in the view of the  Court  of
    Appeal determinative and if the Rule made it clear  that  a  particular
    document had to be produced or had to be in existence at  the  time  of
    the application.  If it  was  not  there  could  not  be  a  subsequent
    production.

5.   We have also been referred to 245AA in the Appendix  which  deals  with
    documents not submitted with applications.   We  do  not  think  it  is
    necessary to go into  that  because  there  are  no  doubt  interesting
    arguments which may have to be considered in subsequent cases but it is
    as we say unnecessary for the purposes of this decision because  it  is
    quite plain in our judgment that the effect of paragraph  116  is  that
    the CAS must exist at the time that the application is  made  and  thus
    this case falls directly within the approach that the Court  of  Appeal
    has considered to be correct in the Raju case.

6.   Accordingly we do not accept the argument which  was  forecast  in  the
    grant of leave to appeal that the application should have been  decided
    on the basis of the new CAS and study at the new college as at the date
    of variation.  Regrettably, and we do  express  regret  because  it  is
    difficult to see that this is essentially a fair approach  to  matters.
    The fact that the appellant had the necessary documentation before  the
    decision was made does not in the circumstances avail him.  Accordingly
    we must dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Dated: 4 March 2015

Mr Justice Collins
