
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/50448/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons promulgated
On 20 November 2014     On 21 November 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                          Muhammad Shahzad Rafique
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. M. Biggs of Counsel instructed by Mayfair
                  Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                     DECISION AND REASONS: ERROR OF LAW

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Majid promulgated on 27 August 2014 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Respondent dated 11 November 2013 to refuse
    to issue him a residence card as confirmation of a right to  reside  in
    the UK.

 2. I am grateful for the helpful  and  realistic  approach  taken  by  the
    representatives before me - and in particular Ms Isherwood who  readily
    acknowledged that there were difficulties in the  written  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal. In such circumstances  I  do  not  propose  to
    rehearse the basis of the Appellant's claim or the  procedural  history
    of the appeal - all of which are a matter of record  on  file  and  are
    known to the parties.

 3. The salient matters are these. The Appellant's application was based on
    his  relationship  with  Ms  Silvija  Kondrataviciute,   a   Lithuanian
    national. The  Respondent  refused  to  issue  a  residence  card  with
    reference to regulations 2 and 6 of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006. Immigration officers attended  the  Appellant's
    address on 16 October 2013, and on the basis of their observations  and
    questions it was concluded that the Appellants  marriage  was  "one  of
    convenience for the sole purpose of [the Appellant] remaining"  in  the
    UK. Accordingly the key issue before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was
    the  genuineness  of  the  claimed  marital  relationship.  The   Judge
    concluded that he was "not persuaded that the Appellant has not entered
    into a marriage to facilitate his stay in this country"  (determination
    at paragraph 16). (I observe in passing that the  Judge's  phrasing  in
    this regard is not a model of clarity in demonstrating  an  appropriate
    understanding of the burden of proof.)

 4. In my judgement the Judge erred in the following material respects:

    (i)    At paragraph 7 of the determination the Judge observed that  the
         Appellant had given oral testimony consistent with  his  assertions
         in the various documents, before commenting "However, his evidence,
         as described below, did not come through  as  very  credible".  The
         Judge did not thereafter supply a description  of  the  Appellant's
         evidence, or otherwise state any findings in respect of it.  It  is
         not possible to discern the Judge's reasons for concluding that the
         Appellant's evidence was not 'very credible'.  This  deficiency  of
         reasoning constitutes an error of law.


    (ii)   In the section of the determination headed 'Dispositive  Reasons
         and Deliberations', the only aspect  of  the  oral  testimony  upon
         which the Judge makes express comment is at paragraph 14, where the
         Judge refers to the manner in which Ms Kondrataviciute answered one
         of his questions. The Judge writes: "I... very clearly  and  slowly
         asked the Appellant's wife (with due apology)  when  she  was  last
         with the Appellant in the same bed?  She  did  not  reply  to  this
         question for a while and I  recorded  in  my  notes  "I  asked  the
         European wife of the Appellant when she was last sleeping with  the
         Appellant, but she was not able  to  answer  that  question  for  a
         while." This clearly gave me the impression that the Appellant  and
         his Lithuanian wife  in  their  statements  were  not  telling  the
         truth." The determination does not inform the reader as to what the
         answer was when it was given; moreover, there is no exploration  or
         consideration of any possible reason for hesitation  in  responding
         to such a direct and personal question - no matter how  sensitively
         put. In  my  judgement  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  does  not
         adequately explain why the delay on the  part  of  the  witness  in
         answering this question gave such an adverse impression  as  to  be
         determinative (as it appears to have been on the limited  reasoning
         offered by the Judge) of the credibility of both  the  witness  and
         the  Appellant.  I  consider   the   Judge's   conclusion   to   be
         unsustainable in so far as it is based on the reason offered, to an
         extent that amounts to an error of law.


    (iii)  The Judge referred to the contents of the report of the visiting
         immigration officers as having stated "that the Appellant  and  his
         wife were sleeping in separate rooms" (paragraph  14).  The  report
         contains no such  statement,  and  indeed  concluded  that  it  was
         "clear... that the couple are living in the same room",  albeit  it
         was considered they were sleeping in  different  beds.  I  consider
         this to be a material misconception of fact amounting to  an  error
         of law.


 5. In all such circumstances I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially erred and I conclude that the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside.

 6.  Both  representatives  acknowledged  that  in  the  circumstances  the
    Appellant had in effect been deprived of a full and fair  hearing,  and
    it would be necessary for his appeal to  be  reheard  afresh  with  all
    issues at large, with the most appropriate forum being  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. I accept this joint position.

 7. I do  not  consider  that  any  specific  Directions  are  required  in
    relisting the appeal, beyond the standard  Directions.  However,  I  do
    consider it appropriate to make the following observations  -  although
    in due course it is a matter for the Appellant as to whether, and if so
    how and to what extent, he wishes to address such matters. The evidence
    filed in support of the appeal, including the witness statements, offer
    no meaningful information as to the Appellant's 'hinterland'. It  is  a
    feature of the case that the Respondent had not been able  to  identify
    any date of entry to the UK, records showing only  that  a  visit  visa
    application had been refused in  October  2006.  The  Appellant  has  a
    Pakistan passport issued in Dublin in October 2011, but the evidence is
    silent as to whether he was in Ireland at that time,  and  if  so,  for
    what period. Similarly, the evidence is silent as to  when  he  entered
    the UK, on what basis, and what he has done here since. In this  latter
    context it is to be noted that there is a tension between  the  answers
    of the Appellant and of Ms Kondrataviciute recorded in the  immigration
    officer's report of the visit of 16 October  2013  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant's employment: a possible  starting  point  for  clarification
    might be evidence of the true position. Nor is there even ay meaningful
    account of the circumstances of the  development  of  the  relationship
    with Ms Kondrataviciute. It is also to  be  noted  that  the  Appellant
    pleaded Article 8 of the ECHR in his Grounds of Appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. In the event that he is unsuccessful in his appeal under
    the EEA regulations and it becomes  necessary  for  him  to  rely  upon
    Article 8  in  the  alternative,  it  will  be  a  likely  obstacle  to
    successful pursuit of such a ground if the Appellant does  not  provide
    any relevant evidence as to his history and circumstances in the UK.


Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained material errors
    of law and is set aside.

 9. The decision in the appeal is  to  be  re-made  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, before any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     21 November 2014
