
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50192/2014
     IA/50198/2014
     IA/50211/2014
     IA/50222/2014
     IA/50225/2014
     IA/50234/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 24th February 2016                 |On 14th March 2016                    |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN



                                   Between

                                yUSIMBOM [S]
                                 NGELAH [S]
                                    [B S]
                                   [J S S]
                                    [C S]
                                   [J E S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss L Longhurst-Woods
For the Respondent:    Miss S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellants in this  case
    of which there are six, a family from the Cameroon who had applied  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds based  on
    their private and family life.  The appeals came before Judge  Amin  at
    Richmond in July 2015 and by a decision promulgated on 5th August  2015
    she dismissed the appeals.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted in relation  to  extraordinarily  long
    grounds by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal in January of this  year.
    When you distil the grounds down and  Miss  Longhurst  summarised  them
    before me, the main problems asserted in relation to the  judgment  and
    which find favour with me are firstly, the way the judge has dealt with
    the independent social worker's report.  The judge has  criticised  the
    report in all probability quite  properly  in  relation  to  irrelevant
    matters that were included about separation of children  from  parents,
    but then does not engage with  the  parts  of  the  report  which  were
    relevant, namely separation from other trusted adults, friends and  all
    that the children have known in the United Kingdom.

 3. The second error that has been identified is the situation with  regard
    to the health of the children. The judge  specifically  refers  to  the
    absence of medical evidence at paragraph 51  when  there  was  in  fact
    medical evidence from a Cameroonian doctor indicating  that  the  child
    [BS] requires  medical  treatment  which  would  not  be  available  in
    Cameroon.

 4. That evidence, however, it has to be said is wholly inadequate for  the
    purposes of an appeal in that it does  not  specify  exactly  what  the
    medical issue is and what treatment  is  required  and  that  would  be
    necessary for a proper consideration of the health issues.

 5. The third error that has  been  identified  was  the  large  amount  of
    objective evidence that had been put into the bundle on the appellants'
    behalf as to the situation that the family would face  in  Cameroon  in
    terms of living conditions, education, employment prospects and so  on,
    and the judge in the judgment has referred to evidence put  in  by  the
    Secretary of State and the COI Reports and other documents  put  in  by
    the respondent from   FAKO  News  Centre  but  ignores  completely  the
    evidence put in by the Appellant.  It may be that the evidence  put  in
    by the Appellant is less impressive but that does not mean  it  can  be
    ignored altogether and it has  to  be  looked  at,  analysed  and  then
    reasons given as to why one set of evidence is preferred over another.

 6. Lastly the judge refers to the case of EV (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ
    874 with regard to there being no obligation on the UK to  educate  the
    entire world at public expense  but  failed  to  consider  at  all  the
    arguments put forward and reliance that was placed by the Appellants on
    another case of R (on the application  of  Zermani)  [2015]  EWHC  1226
    (Admin).  Consideration  should  have  been  given  to  both   parties'
    submissions in assessing proportionality, including the claim that  the
    first Appellant is a considerable asset to the  community  in  the  UK.
    That is not to say they would necessarily succeed on that basis but  it
    is a matter that has to be considered and was  not  considered  by  the
    judge in this case.

 7. The Secretary of  State  sought  to  defend  the  decision  and  it  is
    certainly true that when you read  the  judgment  which  is  a  lengthy
    document, running to some 13 pages and 85 paragraphs, it does appear to
    be a detailed and thorough consideration of the evidence.   However  it
    is only when the evidence that the judge has not taken into account  is
    pointed out that it appears to be a rather one sided assessment  taking
    into account arguments and entry clearance put forward on behalf of the
    Secretary of State while discounting evidence and  submissons  advanced
    on the Appellants behalf.

 8. For that reason I find that the Decision  and  Reasons  is  tainted  by
    several material errors of law and as they  go  to  the  heart  of  the
    proportionality assessment and whether it is reasonable for this family
    to be removed to the Cameroon I set it aside in its entirety.

 9. Given the amount of documents, amount of oral evidence  and  number  of
    issues to be decided it is appropriate, this being the  first  time  it
    has been in the Upper Tribunal, that the case is remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a full rehearing.

Notice of Decision

10. I would direct that  because  of  the  amount  of  evidence  previously
    submitted, the disarray in which the bundle currently finds itself  and
    the fact that there is a  new  supplementary  bundle,  the  Appellants'
    representatives before the new hearing  should  file  one  indexed  and
    paginated bundle containing all of the evidence to be relied upon.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 4th March 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
