
                                    [pic]
St

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  IA/50597/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|on 23rd December 2016              |on 4th January 2017                |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    [T L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Shilliday, Counsel instructed by Sterling and Law
                    Associates.
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a child, having been born on 6 August 2011.


   2. Application was made on his behalf for a residence card as
      confirmation of his right to reside in the United Kingdom as a family
      member of an EU national exercising Treaty rights. The application was
      on the basis his mother, Mrs Nataliya Lazaryeva, a third country
      national, is married to Mr Lukas Kasik, a national of the Czech
      Republic who is exercising Treaty rights.

   3. The application was refused on the basis that the proofs provided did
      not established that Mr Kasik was his father as required by regulation
      17 (1)(b) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) regulations 2006
      (hereinafter referred to as `the 2006 regulations' ). The birth
      certificate supplied did not contain his father's details. With the
      application was a marriage certificate showing his mother married Mr
      Kasik on 4 July 2008.

   4. His appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Raymond on the papers.
      The appeal was dismissed. The judge referred to his mother's passport
      which indicated she had been issued with a residence card valid from
      10 August 2010 to 10 August 2015. Her marriage certificate was before
      the judge. At paragraph 13 the judge concluded that there was no
      evidence to show the appellant was the son of Mr Kasik who was
      exercising Treaty rights. The judge referred to an evidential void
      relating to Mr Kasik and questioned the ongoing entitlement of the
      appellant's mother to her residence card.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on
      the basis First Tier Judge Raymond may have erred in law in the
      application of regulation 7(1)(b) of the 2006 regulations. It was
      arguable there was sufficient evidence to demonstrate the appellant
      was a direct descendant of an EEA national spouse as his birth
      certificate identified his mother and her marriage certificate showed
      she was married to a Czech national.

Consideration

   6. Regulation 7 of the 2006 regulations defines family members.
      Regulation 7(1)(b) refers to the `direct descendant of his, his spouse
      ...'


   7. At hearing, Mr Shilliday for the appellant submitted that the
      respondent had not challenged the evidence that his birth certificate
      identified his mother and her marriage certificate identified her
      husband.

   8. Mr Walker on behalf of the respondent accepted there was a material
      error of law in the decision. He accepted the certificates established
      that the appellant was a child of Mrs Nataliya Lazaryeva and she was
      married to Mr Kasik, a Czech national. It followed from the evidence
      relating to his mother that he was a family member within the meaning
      of regulation 7 (1) (b). Mr Walker confirms that no issue was being
      taken as to whether his father was a qualified person. Mr Shilliday
      confirmed that the appellant's parents had not divorced.

   9. In light of the above I found a material error of law in the decision
      of First Tier Judge Raymond. It would appear that the judge overlooked
      the fact that regulation 7(1) (b) is not confined to the direct
      descendants of the European national but also to their spouse. The
      judge may have been misled by the approach in the refusal letter; the
      point is not raised in the grounds of appeal and the judge did not
      have the benefit of oral submissions. However, the law has been
      incorrectly applied and I remake the decision on the basis of the
      agreed facts. The appellant is entitled to the residence documentation
      sought and I allow the appeal.

Decision.

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Raymond contains a material error
of law and is set aside. The decision is remade allowing the appeal

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.



Fee Order

Mr Shilliday advised that a fee had been paid and sought a fee order on the
basis the appeal has now succeeded on the information which was before the
original decision maker. I reserved on this issue because I wanted to check
a decision I had a recollection of in relation to fee orders in the Upper
Tribunal. Both parties were in agreement with me deciding this issue
without further submissions though I invited Mr Shilliday to address me on
the matter later in the day if he had any further information.

It seems I was thinking of Singh v The Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2014] EWCA Civ 438.  The Upper Tribunal does not have
jurisdiction to consider a challenge to a decision of a First-tier Tribunal
Judge to make, or not to make, a fee award.  A decision on a fee award is
an ancillary decision within the meaning of the Appeals (Excluded
decisions) Order 2009 and is therefore not appealable.  However this is
dealing with a purported appeal in relation to the fee order. In the
present circumstances having dealt with the substantive matter I have
jurisdiction in relation to the fee order also. On the basis the original
decision maker had all the necessary evidence to have made a favourable
decision which I have now made I would also make a full fee order in favour
of the appellant.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly.

