
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50744/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th December 2014                           |On 2nd January 2015        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             mr Tariq Jamil Raja
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge C Newberry  promulgated  on  22nd  September  2014,  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 23rd June 2014.  In the  determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of Tariq Jamil Raja.  The Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied  for,  and  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who was  born  on  15th
    December 1974.  He appealed against the refusal of his application  for
    a grant of a residence card on the basis that he  is  a  third  country
    national, upon whom a  British  citizen  is  dependent  in  the  United
    Kingdom, the decision of the Respondent Secretary of State having  been
    made on 25th November 2013.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is married to a British citizen, Vicki
    Louise Baxter.  They married on 13th November 2011.  His  wife  suffers
    from  epilepsy  and  receives  treatment.   She   also   has   learning
    difficulty.  These conditions were  confirmed  by  a  letter  from  the
    wife's doctors,  namely,  Drs  Oliver,  Brightwell  and  Donnelly,  the
    general practitioners.

 4. The Appellant's wife suffers from fits and seizures.   She  is  not  so
    medically fit as to be able to lead an  independent  life.   She  needs
    daily assistance from the Appellant.  She is not allowed to drive or to
    use a cooker.  However she does go to work.  These were the submissions
    of the Appellant before Judge Newberry.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge considered that the sole issue before  him  was  whether  the
    Appellant is the "primary carer" for the purposes of paragraph  18A  of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006.   He  found
    that the Appellant's wife lived with her parents before she married the
    Appellant.  The parents looked after her.  The Appellant's evidence  of
    the extent and nature of the care he provided was not  challenged.   He
    prepared her food, drove her to work, and accompanied her  to  work  if
    public  transport  was  used.   He  dispensed  her  medication.    This
    controlled her epilepsy.  He sometimes went  shopping  with  her.   The
    judge concluded that,

         "The combination of the learning difficulty  and  epilepsy  in  any
         view is made out and represents a state of affairs which warrants a
         high degree of support.  The fact that  she  is  not  permitted  to
         drive is a clear indication of the seriousness of the condition  as
         is  her  inability  to  cook  because  of  the  attendant  dangers"
         (paragraph 10).

    The judge concluded that he was satisfied that the  Appellant  was  her
    primary carer (paragraph 11).  The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge only had regard to  one
    piece of evidence, and this was from  the  Appellant's  wife's  general
    practitioners.  What the  letter  from  them  suggested  was  that  the
    condition of the Appellant's wife was an improving  one.   The  medical
    evidence established that  she  suffered  from  epilepsy  and  required
    controlled medication.  However, the Appellant's wife did go  to  work,
    and had been working since 2010, for twenty hours a  week  at  Primark.
    In the circumstances, there  was  a  lack  of  analysis  by  the  judge
    supporting  the  conclusion  that  (No.1)  these  factors  alone   were
    sufficient to mean that she required care  as  prescribed  in  the  EEA
    Regulation; and that there was a lack of engagement  with  the  refusal
    letter as to what is required to bring the applicant within  the  scope
    of the judgment in Zambrano.

 7. Permission to appeal was subsequently granted by the Tribunal.

Submissions

 8. Mr Nath, appearing on behalf of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    submitted that this was a case where the Appellant's wife  was  working
    at Primark since 2010 for twenty hours per week.  All the judge had was
    a GP's letter.  It was the only piece of medical  evidence.   This  was
    dated 15th June 2012.  It  confirmed  that  the  Appellant's  wife  had
    health issues.  However, this in no way meant that  her  condition  was
    such that she needed the services of a "primary  carer"  and  that  the
    Appellant was such a "primary carer".  The judge's conclusions in  this
    respect at paragraph 10 were inadequately reasoned with respect to what
    is expected in the EEA Regulation.

 9. For his part, Mr Khan submitted that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude as he did in the light of  the  medical  evidence.   The  wife
    suffers from epilepsy and has learning difficulties.  The judge  was  a
    person who took the evidence on the day of the hearing and concluded in
    a manner that was open to him.  His findings were perfectly adequate.

10. In reply, Mr Nath took me to the refusal letter.  This expressly states
    that,  "we  would  expect  to   see   evidence   from   the   NHS/local
    authority/private care to support this", namely, to support  that  "the
    majority of the care" was provided by the primary carer.  There was  no
    evidence that this was the case from an official body.

Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision and remake the decision
    (see paragraph 12(2) of TCEA 2007).  My reasons are  as  follows.   The
    relevant provision with respect to the requirement of a "primary carer"
    is Regulation 15A(7) of the EEA Regulations.  This states that  "to  be
    regarded as a primary carer" it has to be  shown  that  the  person  in
    question "is  the  person  who  has  primary  responsibility  for  that
    person's care".  This is a question of evidence.

12. The evidence with respect to this comes only from the Appellant and his
    wife, with the general practitioner's letter in  the  background.   The
    refusal letter is  correct  to  say  that,  "in  order  to  demonstrate
    primary/shared responsibility for adults, the majority of the care must
    be provided by the primary carer.  We would, therefore, expect  to  see
    evidence from the NHS/local authority/private care  to  support  this".
    This evidence is missing.  If the Appellant was  providing  the  degree
    and level of care that he maintains, it would be an easy matter for him
    to get local authority confirmation of this.  As things  stand  at  the
    moment the letter of 15th June 2012 only confirms that the condition of
    the Appellant is an improving one.  Given that  she  has  been  working
    since 2010 for twenty hours, the need for such evidence is all the more
    compelling.

13. Secondly, this is underscored by the fact that  Regulation  15A(4A)  in
    referring to  'the primary carer of a  British  citizen'  is  one  also
    which stipulates that  'the relevant British citizen is residing in the
    United Kingdom' and 'would be unable to reside in the UK or in  another
    EEA State if [the person] were required to leave.' The appellant's wife
    was previously looked after by her parents.  There is no reason why, in
    the event of her husband the appellant being removed, she cannot return
    to being looked after by her parents again - should that  be  necessary
    in the circumstances of her improving condition.

14. Accordingly, whereas the judge made the factual  findings  in  the  way
    that he saw fit, their relationship to corroborative  evidence  from  a
    state agency, is not made out.  On the facts of this case, taken  as  a
    whole, such evidence was required.

Remaking the Decision

15. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before him, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the reasons that I have set out
    above.  The Appellant has not furnished evidence from the NHS  or  from
    the local authority to confirm that he is  the  primary  carer  in  the
    sense that he is providing the majority of the care for the  Appellant,
    even if she does suffer  from  epilepsy  and  even  if  she  does  have
    learning difficulties.  It is open to him to make another application.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    dismissed.

17. No anonymity order is made.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st December 2014


