

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/50387/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On  9th July 2014                                  |On 14th July 2014       |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                  Between:

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           FOLASHADE APUKE TELEWA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:          Mr N Klear, instructed by UK Law


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a citizen of Nigeria born  on  12th  December  1949.
      Her appeal against the refusal of leave to remain and the decision  to
      remove her was allowed,  on  Article  8  grounds,  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal in a determination dated 24th March 2014.  The  Secretary  of
      State applied for permission to appeal.

2.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
      on 6th May 2014 on the grounds that it was  arguable  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Fox had failed to follow the correct  approach  as  set
      out in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
      640 (IAC)  and  failed  to  consider  if  there  were  exceptional  or
      compelling circumstances.

3.    Mr Duffy relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that the  Judge
      had failed follow Gulshan and to give sufficient reasons for  why  the
      best  interests  of  the  Appellant's  grandchild,  Jade,   outweighed
      immigration control. The Judge focused on the best interests  of  Jade
      rather than carrying out a proper analysis of the facts, balancing all
      relevant facts. The Judge had erred in law in failing to show why  the
      decision was disproportionate and the error was material  because  the
      Judge had failed to identify the exceptional or compelling factors.

4.    Mr Klear submitted that the determination was well  reasoned  and  the
      Judge had considered the  grounds  of  refusal.  He  had  covered  all
      salient points and clearly followed Gulshan. The Judge was well  aware
      of  the  relevant  law  and  considered  the  rights  of  all  parties
      concerned. He was entitled to rely on the evidence of the head teacher
      of Jade's school; she had been at the  special  needs  school  for  20
      years and knew Jade very well. There was  ample  evidence  before  the
      Judge demonstrating compelling and compassionate  circumstances.  Jade
      had  severe  autism  and  her  mother  could  not  cope  without   the
      Respondent. The Respondent had an impeccable immigration  history  and
      all her children were British citizens.


Findings and conclusions

5.    The Respondent applied for leave to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
      Rules  on  26th  January  2013.  Her  application  was  refused  under
      paragraph 322(1) because  her  application  was  not  covered  by  the
      Immigration Rules. The Appellant considered Appendix FM and  paragraph
      276ADE, refused the  application  and  made  a  decision,  dated  21st
      November 2013, to remove the Respondent.

6.    The Judge directed himself in law  at  paragraphs  11  to  13  of  the
      determination  and  specifically  referred  to  Gulshan.  He  recorded
      submissions from the Home Office Presenting Officer that there were no
      compelling circumstances in this case. The Judge considered section 55
      of the  Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  and  cases
      relevant to the best interests of the child. There was no misdirection
      in law.

7.    The Judge found that in the particular  circumstances  of  this  case,
      the best interests of Jade outweighed the public interest.  In  coming
      to this conclusion  the  Judge  took  into  account  the  Respondent's
      immigration history, her medical needs, her mentally ill son  and  the
      effect of her removal on Jade and Jade's parents. The Judge's  reasons
      set out at paragraph 41 to 45 amounted to compelling circumstances not
      recognised under the Immigration Rules.

8.    Although the Judge did not specifically state the  phrase  "compelling
      circumstances," he clearly identified what they were in this case. The
      Judge's findings were open to him on the evidence before  him  and  he
      gave adequate reasons for his conclusions.

9.    The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  24th
      March 2014 shall stand.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
11th July 2014
