



       [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: ia 50026-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   18.06.2014|
|on    09.06.2013                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |25.06.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                               Hayford BOAKYE
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Neil Garrod  (counsel instructed by Justice & Law)
For the respondent: Mr Ian Jarvis

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Sureta Chana), sitting at Hatton Cross on 13 March,  to
    an EEA appeal by a citizen of Ghana, born 26 March  1980,  and  married
    there by proxy to a citizen of the Netherlands.  The  Home  Office  had
    refused him a residence card, because they were not  satisfied  of  the
    validity of the marriage; but the judge found  that  the  marriage  had
    been valid by the lex loci celebrationis, and allowed the appeal.

 2. There is no dispute but that the marriage was valid  by  Ghanaian  law;
    nor that the lex loci  is the test to be applied under the  common  law
    of England and Wales: it was made clear in CB  (Validity  of  marriage:
    proxy  marriage)  Brazil  [2008]  UKAIT  00080  that  this  applied  in
    immigration cases, just as in others. The point on which permission  to
    appeal was given was on Kareem  (Proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC). That decision was given on 16 January  2014,  and
    it was the duty of both sides (neither of them represented by the  same
    advocate as before me) to bring it to the attention of  the  judge,  if
    she hadn't noticed it herself. It is declaratory of the EU/EEA  law  on
    the point, and it was clearly an error of  law  not  to  apply  it,  if
    relevant.

 3. In those circumstances, I asked Mr Garrod whether  the  judge  had  not
    been wrong not to decide the law in accordance with Kareem  :  to  this
    his reply was that that decision  was  "a  complete  red  herring".  It
    remains to be seen whether this rather cavalier style of  advocacy  was
    to be justified in the outcome, if not in the manner of it. Kareem   is
    a very useful and formidably learned decision, written by deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge John McCarthy,  sitting  with  Mr  CMG  Ockelton,  vice-
    president, and Upper Tribunal Judge Richard McKee. It  is  not  however
    always the simplest of the Tribunal's decisions to  follow;  so  it  is
    best  to  start  by  deconstructing  it:  the  references  are  to  the
    paragraphs in Kareem, so that  anyone  who  wants  to  can  compare  my
    summary with the decision itself. I shall leave  out  those  parts  not
    relevant for present purposes.

 4. I will start by setting  out  the  judicial  head-note,  though  it  is
    important to note that Mr Garrod's argument very much hung on  how  far
    one part of that depended on another.

       a. A person who is the spouse of an EEA national who is  a  qualified
       person in the United Kingdom can derive rights of free  movement  and
       residence if proof of the marital relationship is provided.
       b. The production of a marriage certificate  issued  by  a  competent
       authority (that is, issued according to the registration laws of  the
       country where the marriage took place) will usually be sufficient. If
       not in English (or Welsh in relation  to  proceedings  in  Wales),  a
       certified translation of the marriage certificate will be required.
       c. A document which calls itself  a  marriage  certificate  will  not
       raise a presumption of the marriage it purports to record  unless  it
       has been issued by an authority with legal power to create or confirm
       the facts it attests.
       d. In appeals where there is no such marriage  certificate  or  where
       there is doubt that a marriage  certificate  has  been  issued  by  a
       competent authority, then the marital relationship may be  proved  by
       other evidence. This will require the Tribunal to determine whether a
       marriage was contracted.
       e. In such an appeal, the starting point will be to decide whether  a
       marriage was contracted  between  the  appellant  and  the  qualified
       person according to the national  law  of  the  EEA  country  of  the
       qualified person's nationality.
       f. In all such situations, when resolving issues that  arise  because
       of conflicts of law, proper respect must be given  to  the  qualified
       person's rights as provided by the European Treaties,  including  the
       right to marry and the rights of free movement and residence.
       g. It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
       evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the laws of  the
       EEA country and/or the country where the  marriage  took  place,  the
       Tribunal is likely to be unable to find that sufficient evidence  has
       been provided to discharge the burden of proof.  Mere  production  of
       legal materials from the EEA country or country  where  the  marriage
       took place will be insufficient evidence  because  they  will  rarely
       show how such law is understood or applied in those  countries.  Mere
       assertions as to the effect of such laws will, for  similar  reasons,
       carry no weight.
       h. These remarks apply solely to the question of whether a person  is
       a spouse for the purposes of EU law. It  does  not  relate  to  other
       relationships that might be regarded as similar to marriage, such  as
       civil partnerships or durable relationships.





 5. This, in short, is the reasoning behind that statement of the  law:  an
    EU member state cannot use its own law to  decide,  for  EEA  purposes,
    whether or not a person is validly married to another, and EU law  must
    decide that (6). In EU law the question of whether someone  is  married
    is governed by the national laws of the member states (11). A  marriage
    certificate issued by a competent authority will usually be  sufficient
    evidence that a marriage has been contracted (13). A lack  of  evidence
    of relevant foreign law will normally mean  that  the  party  with  the
    burden of proving it will fail. The law that applies will be the law of
    the member state of the  EU  citizen's  nationality  (16-17).  This  is
    important, so as to avoid a marriage recognized in one member state not
    being recognized in another (18).

 6. Going on to  the  individual  case  in  Kareem,  the  appellant  was  a
    Nigerian,  married  by  proxy,  in  Nigeria,  to  a  citizen   of   the
    Netherlands, with neither of them present; so Dutch law  should  decide
    the validity of the marriage for EEA purposes (23 -24).  Dutch  law  on
    the point is then reviewed and findings made on it: since  the  present
    case too involved a Netherlands citizen, I am prepared  to  take  those
    findings in the appellant's favour, despite what  was  said  in  Kareem
    about the need for evidence.

 7. Dutch law (article 10:31 of the Netherlands Civil Code:  27)  generally
    recognizes marriages valid by the lex loci celebrationis, and  presumes
    them valid if the certificate has been issued by a competent authority.
    However, there is a restriction on this general  rule  (article  10:32:
    28), which withholds recognition "... where such recognition  obviously
    would be incompatible with Dutch  public  order".  While  article  1:66
    permits marriage by  representation  in  certain  circumstances,  which
    suggested that marriage in the absence of one of the parties might  not
    be regarded as contrary to Dutch public order, there  was  no  evidence
    before the panel in Kareem, and none before the hearing judge or me  in
    the present case, as to how Dutch law would regard a marriage where, as
    here, both parties were represented by proxies (29).

 8. Furthermore, the section of the Netherlands Civil Code  which  contains
    articles 10:31-32 is described by article 10:27 as enacted to implement
    the Hague Convention on the Celebration and Recognition of the Validity
    of Marriages. The Netherlands is one  of  the  few  countries  to  have
    ratified that Convention; but it expressly excludes proxy and  informal
    marriages from its scope (30). I can pass over the next part of  Kareem
    (paragraphs 31 - 62), because there is no issue in the present case but
    that this marriage is valid under Nigerian law.

 9. The panel observed in Kareem (63) that they didn't know  whether  Dutch
    law would regard the appellant as having married in England  and  Wales
    or in Nigeria; but, in view  of  their  finding  of  fact  against  its
    validity in Nigeria, this was irrelevant. They pointed out  (64  -  66)
    that their decision on the individual case depended on this finding  of
    fact; but they went on to say (67) that all concerned were  well  aware
    that their decision as a whole "... would seek to give general guidance
    as to how similar appeals - those involving proxy customary marriages -
    might be considered".



10. In those circumstances, I do not see any need for me  to  go  into  the
    question of how far that guidance (68) was part of the  ratio   of  the
    decision, or merely obiter. It was 'reported' for the benefit of judges
    sitting in this field, made by  a  panel  specially  convened  for  the
    purpose, and with the issues of law fully considered. The judge in this
    case should have followed its terms, though not referred to it, as  she
    should have been, thanks to the professional shortcomings of both sides
    before  her,  which  I  hope  represented  nothing  worse  than   gross
    negligence.

11. Mr Garrod's argument was, a good deal more shortly than he put it,  but
    I hope no less effectively for that, to the effect  that  the  guidance
    given in paragraphs e - g  of Kareem  applied only to cases  within  d,
    in other words, those where there is  no  marriage  certificate,  or  a
    doubt as to whether it  has  been  issued  by  a  competent  authority:
    otherwise (see 2 above), the  lex  loci  celebrationis  applies.  While
    there is some elementary syntactic support for that view to be  had  in
    the panel's prefacing e and f  with the words "In such  an appeal  ..."
    and "In all such situations ...", the argument in  its  favour  ignores
    two considerations, at least the second of which,  on  my  analysis  of
    Kareem as a whole, is more important.

12. First, the individual case in Kareem  was within paragraph d; so it was
    not unnatural that the panel, despite what they had said at 67,  should
    have given the impression that their general remarks related  to  those
    circumstances. However, and much more importantly, the suggestion  that
    the guidance in e - g  is limited only to the case of marriages  within
    d, has nothing to do with the panel's own analysis of EU law  (see  5),
    which they held was the overall governing  law  for  all  questions  of
    recognition of marriages for EEA purposes.

13. While Mr Garrod was, as might be  expected,  content  to  rely  on  the
    findings on Dutch law in Kareem to support his own case,  his  argument
    also failed to deal with the salient point in the  panel's  remarks  on
    that (see 7). There was  no  'independent  and  reliable  evidence'  in
    Kareem  as to whether the Netherlands would have  withheld  recognition
    from a double-proxy marriage (as this one was), as  contrary  to  Dutch
    public order. There was and is none in the present case either, and, if
    the judge had followed not only the express terms of  the  guidance  in
    Kareem, but the decision as a whole, as she should have done, then  she
    would inevitably  have  dismissed  the  appeal.  It  follows  that  her
    decision must be reversed.

Home Office appeal
Appellant's appeal against refusal of residence card dismissed

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



