
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50144/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28 May 2014                                  |On 15 July 2014            |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                             Nancy Karen Dadzie
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Spio-Aidoo, R Spio & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Nancy Karen Dadzie, was born on 10 January 1987 and is a
    female citizen of Ghana.  The appellant had made an application  for  a
    residence card as a confirmation of a right to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom as the family member  of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
    rights in this  country  (her  husband,  Samuel  Bimpong  Aba-Ofori,  a
    citizen of  the  Netherlands).   That  application  was  refused  by  a
    decision of the respondent which  was  dated  14  November  2013.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Andrew) which,  in
    a determination promulgated on 11 February 2014, dismissed the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal raise one issue.  In her  determination  at  [8],
    Judge Andrew, considering the  appeal  on  the  papers  and  without  a
    hearing, had regard to the recently promulgated decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC).

 3. Judge Andrew went on at [10] to find that "I have no evidence before me
    to show the parties' claimed proxy marriage would be  recognised  under
    Netherlands law (that is the country  of  the  EEA  national  sponsor's
    nationality)."  She found that the appellant "cannot  cross  the  first
    hurdle in this appeal."

 4. The appellant complains that this  was  not  an  issue  raised  in  the
    refusal notice of the respondent and she submits that the judge  should
    not have gone ahead and determined the appeal  without  giving  her  an
    opportunity to produce evidence (which the  grounds  of  appeal  assert
    exists in the form of a Dutch civil law code) that the  proxy  marriage
    was recognised in the Netherlands as a valid marriage.

 5. Mr Saunders, for the respondent, drew my attention to the fact that the
    appellant had submitted that the appeal  should  be  allowed  outright.
    Judge Andrew had, quite properly, followed the decision in  Kareem  and
    would only have been able to have allowed the appeal if she  found  the
    respondent's decision had not been in accordance with the law.

 6. I agree with Mr Saunders.  Kareem was promulgated  before  the  "paper"
    hearing before Judge Andrew but following the immigration decision.  It
    was promulgated before  the  appellant's  solicitor  submitted  written
    submissions  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appellant  and   her
    representative should have been aware of the need to adduce evidence to
    show that the proxy marriage would be recognised under the law  of  the
    Netherlands.  It is not for the Tribunal to adjourn or delay  decisions
    simply in order to bring  the  established  law  to  the  attention  of
    professional advisers.  The burden of proof in the appeal  was  on  the
    appellant and it was clearly open to the judge to  find  the  appellant
    had failed to discharge that  burden  by  not  adducing  the  necessary
    evidence she refers to at [10].  I find that there  was  no  procedural
    unfairness in this instance.

 7. As I have noted above, there were no other grounds of appeal nor did Ms
    Aidoo advance any other argument at the Upper Tribunal hearing.   There
    was no challenge to the judge's determination of the appeal on  Article
    8 ECHR grounds.  However,  in  granting  permission,  Judge  White  had
    written:

         There was an arguable error of law in that  the  judge  appears  to
         have  regarded  the  respondent's  evidential  requirement   of   a
         relationship to be of a period of at least two years in  order  for
         it to be regarded as 'durable'  as  a  requirement  under  the  EEA
         Regulations themselves (paragraph 12).

 8. The Rule 24 letter from the respondent acknowledges that "the two  year
    consideration is a rule of thumb not a requirement of the Regulations."

 9. It is clear that the appellant pursues this application on the basis of
    her claimed marriage to the sponsor.  On that basis, the appeal against
    the refusal cannot succeed for the  reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I do not find that it is clear that the judge regarded
    the two year period as a formal requirement  but,  in  any  event,  the
    judge was entitled to  observe  that  the  relationship  was  of  short
    duration only and that she did not find that evidence had been  adduced
    to show that the relationship was durable.

10. I find, therefore, that the appeal should be dismissed.  There  is,  of
    course, nothing to prevent the appellant making a  further  application
    supported with the necessary evidence which was found to be lacking  on
    this occasion.  However, that is a matter for her and her advisers.

DECISION

11. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

