
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50282/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 4th July 2014                                |On 21st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               sameer Dodekar
                         (ANONYMITY order NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Malik of Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers      Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Blake promulgated on 24th February 2014.

 2. The Appellant is an Indian citizen born 26th July 1986 who applied  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  1  (General)  Migrant
    under the Points Based System (PBS).

 3. The application was refused  on  15th  November  2013,  the  Respondent
    making a combined decision to refuse to vary leave to  remain,  and  to
    remove the Appellant from the  United  Kingdom.   The  application  for
    leave to remain was refused with reference to paragraph 245CA(c) of the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant had claimed 20  points  for  previous
    earnings, but no points were awarded by the Respondent,  who  contended
    that the required evidence to prove previous  earnings   had  not  been
    submitted.

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, contending  that  he
    should have been  awarded  the  20  points  claimed  and  therefore  he
    satisfied the requirements of the Immigration Rules, and  he  contended
    that the decision breached Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

 5. The appeal was heard by Judge Blake (the judge) on 17th February  2014.
    The Appellant was legally represented, and  the  judge  heard  evidence
    from the Appellant.  The judge found that the Respondent was correct to
    refuse the application  under  the  Immigration  Rules  as  documentary
    evidence to prove previous earnings had not  been  submitted  with  the
    application.

 6. The judge found that paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules had  been
    correctly considered by the  Respondent,  who  had  not  requested  any
    further information from the Appellant before making the decision,  and
    that the documentary evidence submitted after the application  was  not
    admissible by reason of section 85A of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).  The judge did not consider  Article  8
    of the 1950 Convention but dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 7. The judge also found that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  remove  the
    Appellant from the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was  unlawful  as  it  had
    been made at the same time as the decision to refuse to vary leave.

 8. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
    two grounds.  Firstly it was contended that the  judge  had  materially
    erred in law by  failing  to  consider  Article  8.   Secondly  it  was
    contended that the judge had materially erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    admit  documentary  evidence  that  had  been   submitted   after   the
    application for leave to remain had been made.  It was  contended  that
    the judge had erred in his consideration of section  85A  of  the  2002
    Act.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Cox who found the second ground to be misconceived in relation  to  the
    meaning and effect of section 85A of the 2002 Act.  However  Judge  Cox
    found arguable merit  in  the  first  ground,  as  the  judge  had  not
    considered Article 8, which had been raised  as  a  ground  of  appeal.
    Judge Cox noted that  the  judge  had  found  the  section  47  removal
    decision to be unlawful, but he had erred on that, as the decision  was
    made after 8th May 2013 and was therefore lawful.

10. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to Rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 accepting that the judge had erred in failing to consider  Article
    8.  It was not accepted that the judge had erred in excluding  evidence
    pursuant to section 85A of the 2002 Act.  There was no reference to the
    section 47 removal decision.

11. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

12. At the hearing before me Mr Malik accepted that the judge had not erred
    in law in his consideration of section 85A of the 2002 Act, and did not
    pursue that ground.

13. Mr Malik submitted that it was clear that the judge had  erred  in  not
    considering Article 8, and Mr Whitwell agreed.

14. I indicated that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set  aside
    as the judge had erred in failing to consider  Article  8,  as  section
    86(2) of the 2002 Act indicates that the Tribunal  must  determine  any
    matter raised as a ground of appeal.

15. As there was no challenge to the findings made in relation to paragraph
    245 CA, those findings are preserved.

16. In relation to re-making the decision, Mr Malik submitted that  it  was
    appropriate to remit  this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Mr
    Whitwell adopted a neutral stance.

17. I considered  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  7.2  which
    states;

         "7.2          The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier  Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be       put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                  is necessary in order  for the decision in the  appeal  to
                  be  re-made  is  such   that,   having   regard   to   the
                  overriding objective in Rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First- tier Tribunal."

18. I accepted Mr Malik's submission that the Appellant's  Article  8  case
    had not been put to and considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and
    therefore it was appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

19. I observe that Judge Cox was correct to point out that the Respondent's
    removal decision is lawful as it was  made  after  8th  May  2013  when
    section 51 of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 made it lawful to make such
    a decision at the same time as  a  decision  refusing  to  vary  leave.
    However, this was not before me in the Upper Tribunal, as  it  was  not
    raised by either party.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions

The appeal will be heard at the Taylor House Hearing Centre by a  First-tier
Tribunal Judge other than Judge  Blake.   The  purpose  of  the  hearing  is
limited to consideration of Article 8 of  the  1950  Convention  only.   The
findings already made by the First-tier Tribunal in  relation  to  paragraph
245CA are preserved.

The hearing will take place on a date to be advised.  If either party  seeks
to rely on documentary evidence that  has  not  already  been  served,  such
documentary evidence must be served upon the Tribunal  and  other  party  no
later than fourteen clear days before the hearing.

It is understood that no interpreter is required.

Anonymity

There has been no request for anonymity and no anonymity order is made.

Fee Award

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This must be considered by  the
First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date 14th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


