
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50677/2014
     IA/50680/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 June 2016                               |On 22 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                               Mr H J E LATTER
                        (DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)

                                   Between

                                    MSJAC
                                    MSYAC
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel, instructed by Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

An order has been made under rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure  or  publication  of  any
matter likely to lead to the appellants being identified.
1.   This is an appeal by the appellants against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge James) who dismissed  their  appeals  against  the
    respondent's decisions made on 27 November 2014 refusing  them  further
    leave to remain in the UK.

Background

2.   The appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born on [  ]  1999  and  [  ]
    2002 respectively.  They entered the UK on 1 December 2013  with  their
    father as family visitors, following a successful  appeal  against  the
    refusal of entry clearance.  The  original  intention  was  that  their
    mother would travel with them but she was unable to do so  due  to  ill
    health.  It is the appellants' case that their mother died of  a  heart
    attack on 29  December  2013.   Their  father  returned  to  Bangladesh
    leaving the appellants in the care of their uncle with whom  they  were
    staying, saying that he would return to collect them  (para  4  of  the
    uncle's witness statement dated 10 March 2015).  However, he did not do
    so.  He married on 14 February 2014 and  then  lost  contact  with  his
    family.  The appellants have three sisters but they  told  their  uncle
    that they had broken all ties with heir father after his remarriage and
    that they would not be able to look after their brothers as  they  were
    housewives, each living with her husband and extended family.

3.   The appellants have continued to live with their uncle and  his  family
    in this country. In his evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  their
    uncle said that the appellants lived with him with the approval of  the
    local social services.  It also appears from his witness statement that
    they are attending a local high school having secured places  with  the
    help of social services.

4.   The respondent's reasons for refusing leave to remain are  set  out  in
    the decision letters of 27 November 2014.  She did not accept that  the
    appellants could bring themselves within the provisions of para  276ADE
    of the Rules or that there were  exceptional  circumstances  justifying
    the grant of leave under Article 8 outside the Rules.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

5.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it was conceded that  the
    appeal was solely on the basis of Article 8.  It was not being  pursued
    on the basis of the appellants' educational needs as they would be able
    to return to the same schools previously attended in  Bangladesh.   The
    judge heard oral evidence from the appellants' uncle and his  son.   It
    was argued on behalf of the respondent that their evidence was not true
    and that everything had been planned to enable the appellants  to  come
    to the UK for their education without going through the proper  process
    of applying for the appropriate entry clearance.  In  relation  to  the
    s.55 duty, it was argued that if the account given was not truthful, it
    was clear that the best interests of the appellants  was  for  them  to
    return to their father.

6.   On the appellants' behalf it was  submitted  that  the  key  issue  was
    whether the narrative given was credible.  In short, it was argued that
    the witnesses had given an honest account of what they knew and had  it
    been their intention to fabricate a story,  the  narrative  would  have
    been much more detailed.

7.   The judge set out his findings and conclusions at [29] - [38].  He  set
    out the basic facts, noting from the appeal in relation  to  the  visit
    applications that the appellants' father was well set  up  as  a  local
    businessman with two businesses,  one  a  car  business  in  a  village
    outside Sylhet and the other  a  vegetable  business  in  Sylhet.   The
    businesses were  currently  under  the  control  of  a  cousin  of  the
    appellants.  The family owned two residential properties and there  was
    no evidence that either had been sold.  A maid or similar home help was
    used in the home at Sylhet and there was  evidence  that  she  remained
    there after the death of the appellant's mother, possibly without being
    paid [31].  The judge said  that  he  was  asked  to  accept  that  the
    appellants had been abandoned in the UK and that  they  would  have  no
    means of support in Bangladesh.  He did  not  accept  that  contention,
    finding that it was clear  that  the  appellant's  father  was  a  well
    established businessman who was well respected and  well  connected  in
    his community, these facts having been part of the reasons for allowing
    his appeal against the refusal of a visit  visa.  The  judge  found  it
    improbable that he  would  abandon  all  these  connections  and,  more
    importantly, his sources of income and means of supporting a new  wife.



8.   The judge said that if the appellant's father  was  no  longer  running
    the businesses, one of two circumstances arose: either their father was
    in receipt of the profits for the business and was therefore in contact
    with the cousin for that purpose, or he had no contact or  interest  in
    the profits which would, accordingly, be available to the appellants on
    return to Bangladesh.  He was more inclined to the view that the father
    would be receiving the profits of the businesses and as a result  would
    be traceable in Bangladesh.  He was further satisfied that  the  cousin
    who was running the businesses would be able to provide support for the
    appellants.  [32]

9.   The judge noted the suggestion that the appellants' father and his  new
    wife had travelled to India but there was no evidence to  suggest  that
    they intended to remain there [33].  He accepted  that  culturally  the
    appellants might not be able to live with any of their sisters but they
    would still be able to provide support short of providing accommodation
    but, in any event, it would appear that residences  were  available  to
    them [34].   The judge then commented as follows:

         "35.      I  accept  that  the  new  wife  my  not  wish  to   have
             responsibility for the appellants.  It  is  not  the  role  or
             function of the respondent  to  undertake  responsibility  for
             children who are on longer wanted by  their  parent  or  step-
             parent if that parent or step-parent is available to take that
             responsibility."

10.  It was common ground that the appellants did not meet the  requirements
    of the Rules.  When considering the position  outside  the  Rules,  the
    judge said that he rejected the assertion that the  appellants  had  no
    means of support in Bangladesh and said that it was likely  that  their
    father would be traceable.  In relation to s.55 he noted  the  decision
    in Zoumbas v Secretary of State [2013] UKSC 74 and the principles  laid
    down by that decision and in particular that  children  should  not  be
    blamed for matters for which they are not responsible but  he  did  not
    consider that returning to the appellants to Bangladesh would have that
    effect.   In  conclusion,  he  was  not  satisfied  that   there   were
    exceptional circumstances to justify the consideration of  a  grant  of
    leave outside of the Rules, commenting at [37] that

         "... It may be that the appellants' father  now  finds  himself  in
         circumstances  where  he  would   like   to   divest   himself   of
         responsibility for his sons but  I  believe  the  circumstances  in
         Bangladesh are such that he can be  found  and  his  responsibility
         towards his sons can be re-established or continued".

    Accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

11.  The grounds argue, in  summary,  that  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    children had not been abandoned  was  irrational,  there  had  been  no
    proper consideration of s.55, it  was  irrational  to  find  that  they
    should be removed from their present stable family, there had  been  no
    evaluation of the nature and quality  of  their  current  family  life,
    there was a failure to consider  the  provisions  of  s.117A-D  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as  amended  and  finally,
    that there were compelling reasons justifying a full  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

12.  In the respondent's Rule 24 response, it is submitted that the  judge's
    findings were open to him.  It had been conceded that if the appellants
    returned to Bangladesh, they would return  to  their  previous  school.
    Further, it was clear from the decision that the judge did  not  accept
    the evidence concerning the appellants' father and they would therefore
    be returning to him.  The judge had been entitled to find that,  having
    entered the UK as visitors in December 2013, that they would  have  the
    appropriate support on return to Bangladesh.

13.  Mr Muquit adopted his grounds. He submitted that the judge  had  failed
    to  take into account the provisions of s.117B of the 2002  Act.   This
    was not  a case of the judge rejecting the appellants' account.  He had
    accepted that the appellants' mother had died, that  their  father  had
    remarried and that he and his new wife did not now  wish  to  undertake
    responsibility for the appellants.  The judge had found  at  [32]  that
    the appellants had been abandoned in the UK and would have no means  of
    support in Bangladesh but his reasons all related  to  the  appellants'
    means of support and not to their father's intentions.  The question of
    the best interests of the children could not be disposed of  simply  by
    saying  that  it  was  not  the  respondent's  function  to   undertake
    responsibility for children no longer wanted by their parent  or  step-
    parent [35].  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  made  adequate
    findings of fact nor had he properly explored the  issues  relating  to
    proportionality.  There had been no adequate  findings  in  respect  of
    family life nor had the approach to Article 8  as  set  out  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL been followed.

14.  Mr Avery accepted that the judge could perhaps  have  set  matters  out
    more clearly but it was his submission that the judge had not  accepted
    the primary contention made  by  the  appellants  that  they  had  been
    abandoned in the UK.  Some  of  the  judge's  comments  may  have  been
    speculative when he said that  the  new  wife  may  not  wish  to  take
    responsibility for the appellants or that their father  might  like  to
    divest himself of responsibility for his sons.  However, in  the  light
    of the finding that the  children  had  not  been  abandoned  by  their
    father, it followed, particularly  taking  into  account  the  evidence
    submitted in support of the visit appeal about  his  circumstances  and
    financial resources, enjoying a comfortable life style  in  Bangladesh,
    that the reality of the position was that the appellants would be  able
    to return to their family in Bangladesh.

Assessment of the Issues

15.  I must consider is whether the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law  such
    that the decision should be set  aside.   There  was  a  clear  dispute
    between the parties about the circumstances  in  which  the  appellants
    came to remain in the UK after their  father  returned  to  Bangladesh.
    The respondent  submitted  that  this  was  all  planned  so  that  the
    appellants could  complete  their  education  in  the  UK  without  the
    necessity of complying with the Rules and  obtaining  entry  clearance,
    whereas it was argued on behalf of the appellants that after  a  tragic
    turn of events, the death of their mother,  their  father  returned  to
    Bangladesh, remarried and abandoned his previous family.

16.  The judge said at [32] that he was asked to accept that the  appellants
    had been abandoned in the UK and that  they  would  have  no  means  of
    support in Bangladesh.  He said he did not accept that  contention  but
    it is clear  that the rest of [32] deals with the second limb,  whether
    the appellants would have no means of support in Bangladesh. The  judge
    was more inclined to the view the view that the appellants' father  was
    receiving the profits of the  businesses  and  would  be  traceable  in
    Bangladesh and further that he was satisfied that the  cousin  who  was
    running  the  business  would  be  able  to  provide  support  for  the
    appellants.

17.  However, it is unclear whether and to what extent  the  judge  accepted
    that the appellants' father had abandoned  his  responsibilities  as  a
    parent.  The judge said he did not accept that contention in  [32]  but
    in [33] he notes the suggestion that the appellants' father and his new
    wife had travelled to India but said that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest that they intended to remain there.  He  later  commented  that
    the father's new wife might not wish to  have  responsibility  for  the
    appellants [35] and it might  be  that  the  appellants'  father  found
    himself in circumstances where he  would  like  to  divest  himself  of
    responsibility for  his  sons  [38].   As  Mr  Avery  submitted,  these
    comments, at least on their face, appear to be matters  of  speculation
    and do not indicate findings of fact on  a  balance  of  probabilities.
    Further, in [38] the judge said that he believed the  circumstances  in
    Bangladesh were such that the appellants' father could be found and his
    responsibility towards his sons could be re-established  or  continued.
    This appears to follow up the judge's comment in [35] that it  was  not
    the role or function of the respondent to undertake responsibility  for
    children who are no longer wanted by their  parent  or  step-parent  if
    available to take that responsibility.

18.  However, that leaves open the issue, if in fact the  position  is  that
    their father has at the present time abandoned his responsibilities, of
    what family support is available on return until their  father  resumes
    his responsibilities.  It is not the function as such of the respondent
    to undertake responsibility for children  no  longer  wanted  by  their
    parent or step-parent but that does not discharge the  respondent  from
    the duty of considering the best interests of the children when  making
    a decision on an application for leave to remain.  The  judge  referred
    to the seven principles set out in Zoumbas but these principles must be
    considered in the light of the facts relating to each individual child.



19.  I am satisfied that there was no adequate  consideration  of  the  best
    interests  of  the  children  in  the  respondent's  decision  letters,
    although it is entirely clear  how  much  information  was  before  the
    respondent, or that the issue has  been  adequately  addressed  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal in the light of the lack of clarity
    of what facts are accepted in accordance with the appropriate  standard
    of proof.  In Zoumbas, the Supreme Court made it clear  that  the  best
    interests of a child could be outweighed by the  cumulative  effect  of
    other considerations but, nonetheless, their best interests have to  be
    assessed  in  the  light  of  clear   findings   about   their   actual
    circumstances, which in the  present  case  includes  as  a  factor  of
    considerable importance the reception or  family  support  arrangements
    available on return.

20.  The respondent not only refused to vary their leave to enter or  remain
    but also made a decision to remove.  In these circumstances  the  judge
    should have given specific consideration or the provisions of  s.117A-D
    of the 2002 Act.  Finally, I am not satisfied that the judge's findings
    of fact were sufficiently clear to explain how he came to the view that
    there were no exceptional circumstances  or  perhaps  more  accurately,
    compelling reasons, justifying a consideration of Article 8 outside the
    Rules.

21.  For these reasons, I am satisfied that the  judge  erred  in  law  such
    that the decision should be set aside.  In the light  of  the  lack  of
    clarity of the judge's findings of primary fact, I  am  satisfied  that
    this is a case  which  should  be  reheard  afresh  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Decision

22.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside. It is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  full
    rehearing.

23.  In the light of the ages of the appellants and issues  raised  in  this
    appeal, I am satisfied that this is a proper case for an  order  to  be
    made under rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 and I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or  publication  of
    any matter likely to lead to the appellants being identified.





Signed   H J E Latter                            Date: 19 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter

