

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: IA/50347/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester             |         Decision and Reasons        |
|                                |Promulgated                          |
|On April 22, 2016               |           On April 26, 2016         |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                       MR JOSEPH OSCAR IGNATIUS STUART
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Guyana. He entered the United  Kingdom
       on May 15, 2006 with limited  leave  as  a  spouse.  His  leave  was
       subsequently extended enabling him to remain in the  United  Kingdom
       until February 16, 2014. On February 13, 2014  he  applied  on  form
       FLR(O) for leave to remain on the basis of his family life.

    2. The respondent refused his application on November 26, 2014 and took
       a decision to remove him by way of directions under  section  47  of
       the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

    3. The appellant appealed that decision  on  December  12,  2014  under
       section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    4. The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Herwald
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on March 20, 2015  and  in  a
       decision promulgated on March 30, 2015 he refused his appeals  under
       both the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

    5. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on April 13, 2015  submitting
       the First-tier Judge had acted unfairly by refusing to  adjourn  the
       appellant's appeal. Permission to appeal was granted on June 2, 2015
       by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Tiffen. In a  Rule  24  response
       dated June 11, 2015 the respondent opposed the  appeal  arguing  the
       findings made were open to the Judge.

    6. The matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge  Bruce  on  October  14,
       2015 who adjourned the hearing to enable  the  appellant  to  obtain
       representation. The matter was then listed  before  myself  and  the
       appellant was represented as set out above.

    7. I heard submissions from both representatives after which I reserved
       my decision.

    8. The First-tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
       pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make no order.

SUBMISSIONS

    9. Mr Sarwar submitted in refusing to adjourn  the  hearing  the  Judge
       applied an incorrect test. He  referred  to  the  test  set  out  in
       Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)  [2014]  UKUT  00418   (IAC)   and
       submitted that refusing the adjournment because it  was  made  at  a
       very late stage in the proceedings amounted to an error in law.  The
       appellant had been unrepresented and should  have  been  given  some
       leeway especially as one of the reasons for refusing the appellant's
       appeal was due to the lack of evidence from the appellant. A  second
       error, he submitted, as the Judge's approach  to  "suitability"  and
       Section S-LTR 1.5 or 1.6 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules.
       The Judge failed to give reasons for finding his presence  here  was
       not conducive to the public good.

   10. Mr McVeety relied in the Rule 24 response and submitted there was no
       error in law.  He submitted the neither the  grounds  nor  the  oral
       submissions identified what documents would have assisted the  Judge
       in addressing the issue of suitability. The Judge had heard a lot of
       the evidence and concluded an adjournment would not assist  him  and
       ultimately he gave reasons for refusing the  appeal  on  suitability
       grounds. The Judge applied the correct test and there was  no  error
       in law.

   11.  Mr  Sarwar  indicated  documents  from  Alcoholics  Anonymous,  his
       daughter, evidence the restraining order  had  ended  were  all  now
       available. At  paragraph  18(a)  of  his  decision  the  Judge  made
       reference to the appellant's failure to produce the very evidence he
       said was missing.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   12. In considering this application, I have regard to the matters raised
       before me as well as taking into account the history of this matter.



   13. The appellant submitted his own application but having been  refused
       he then sought legal advice. His former solicitors, Broudie  Jackson
       and Cantor, filed his grounds of appeal on December 12, 2014. On the
       day the matter appeared before  the  Judge  the  appellant  appeared
       unrepresented. It is clear from the record of proceedings  that  the
       Judge spent the first part of the hearing discussing this  with  the
       appellant. The following exchange explains the position:

Judge       Why are you unrepresented.
Appellant   I couldn't afford solicitors so they said I should go  to  court
           on my own.
Judge You have not produced a bundle?
Appellant   They gave me the file two days ago.
Judge Any people you want me to see today?
Appellant   No. I am not too good and I am very stressed.
Judge Witnesses today?
Appellant   Wife came with me.

   14. During that exchange the appellant did not  indicate  to  the  Judge
       there were any documents he wished  to  produce  and  of  course  it
       should not be overlooked that the grounds of appeal had been  lodged
       on December 12, 2014 and the appeal hearing was taking  place  three
       months later.

   15. The Judge then asked him questions about his offending behaviour and
       circumstances and it is during this questioning that  the  appellant
       asked for  an  adjournment.  The  record  of  proceedings  does  not
       indicate what it was hoped  an  adjournment  would  achieve  but  it
       seems, from the Judge's  decision,  that  he  was  not  prepared  to
       adjourn the case and he refused the adjournment and  the  record  of
       proceedings indicates that the  hearing  continued  with  the  Judge
       asking him a number of questions about his case  and  in  particular
       why he wished to remain in the country. The Judge then took evidence
       from the appellant's wife before taking submissions  both  from  the
       presenting officer and the appellant.

   16. It is against that background that the appellant lodged  grounds  of
       appeal and the first ground of appeal alleges procedural unfairness.



   17. Rule 4(3)(h) of the 2014 Procedure Rules empowers  the  Tribunal  to
       adjourn a hearing. Rule 2 sets out the overriding  objectives  under
       the Rules which the Tribunal "must seek  to  give  effect  to"  when
       exercising any power under the Rules. It follows that they  are  the
       issues to be considered on an adjournment application as well.

   18. The overriding objective is deal with cases fairly and justly.  This
       is defined as including-

    "(a) dealing with the case in  ways  which  are  proportionate  to  the
    importance of the case, the complexity of the issues,  the  anticipated
    costs and the resources of the parties and of the Tribunal;
    (b) avoiding unnecessary  formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
    proceedings;
    (c) ensuring, so far as is practicable, that the parties  are  able  to
    participate fully in the proceedings;
    (d) using any special expertise of the Tribunal effectively;
    (e) avoiding delay so far as compatible with  proper  consideration  of
    the issues".

   19. In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418  (IAC)  it  was
       held that if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment request,
       such decision could, in principle, be erroneous in  law  in  several
       respects. These include:

   a) a failure to take into account all material considerations;
   b) permitting immaterial considerations to intrude;
   c) denying the party concerned a fair hearing;
   d) failing to apply the correct test; and acting irrationally.

   20. Where an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness  grounds,  it
       is important to recognise that the question for the  Upper  Tribunal
       is not whether the First-tier Tribunal  acted  reasonably.   Rather,
       the test to be applied is that of fairness: namely, "was  there  any
       deprivation of the affected party's right to a fair hearing?"

   21. Mr Sarwar submits that the Judge  acted  unfairly  in  refusing  the
       appellant's adjournment request because he found it was not  in  the
       interests of justice to adjourn the case at the late  stage  of  the
       case. Mr McVeety submits that until today neither the appellant, his
       former solicitors nor the grounds  of  appeal  had  identified  what
       evidence would be called and in any event this appeal was  bound  to
       fail under the Rules and  the  evidence  would  not  have  made  any
       difference.

   22. In considering this appeal,  I  do  have  regard  to  the  fact  the
       appellant was unrepresented but he had been represented up two  days
       before the hearing. The Judge noted he had no bundle of evidence and
       in paragraph 18 of his  decision  he  found  against  the  appellant
       because of that lack of evidence.

   23. Mr McVeety's submissions on the appellant's ability to  satisfy  the
       Rules may well have some merit but the documents being adduced could
       have had some bearing on the article 8 claim.

   24. Mr Sarwar's submissions on procedural fairness carry some weight and
       the fact the appellant's application was made late, in circumstances
       where he was unrepresented at the last minute, meant the  Judge  had
       to consider "fairness" carefully. As the Tribunal  in  Nwaigwe  made
       clear the test for me is not whether the Judge acted fairly but  was
       there any deprivation of  the  affected  party's  right  to  a  fair
       hearing?

   25. The Judge refused  the  appellant's  appeal  having  regard  to  his
       offending  behaviour  finding  that  he  could   not   satisfy   the
       suitability requirements of the Rules and removing him would not  be
       disproportionate.

   26. The fact there are documents that would have assisted  the  Tribunal
       about his alcohol problems, whether he was prevented from seeing his
       family and his response to his probation order were documents that a
       Judge was entitled to expect to see and in  view  of  the  fact  the
       appellant had only recently lost his representation was something he
       should have attached more weight to.

   27. I therefore find that there was  unfairness  and  I  set  aside  the
       Judge's decision under both the Rules and article 8 ECHR.

   28. I raised with both representatives where this appeal should be heard
       in the event there was an error in  law.   Both  indicated  that  if
       there was an error then in light of Part 3, Section 7.1  to  7.3  of
       the Practice Statement the matter should be remitted to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

   29. Mr Sarwar indicated that he now had evidence that he wished to file.
       I direct that any additional evidence must be  served  on  both  the
       Tribunal and other party in accordance with the  current  Procedural
       Rules.

DECISION

   30. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

   31. The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  these
       issues to be addressed hearing under Section 12  of  the  Tribunals,
       Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.

   32. I direct that the matter be listed before any First-tier Judge other
       than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herwald.


Signed:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
