
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50477/2014
                                                               IA/50478/2014
                                                               IA/50479/2014
                                                               IA/50480/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 February 2016                  |On 23 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           IYABODE BASIRAT BUSARI
                                    O Z B
                                     B B
                                     O B
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Hannan, of Corban Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officcer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Mulholland, promulgated on  24  August
2015 which allowed the Appellants' appeals under the Immigration rules.

Background

3.    The First Appellant is the mother of  the  second,  third  and  fourth
appellants. All four appellants are Nigerian citizen.  The  first  appellant
was born on was born on 9 November 1972. The second appellant was born on  4
August 1998. The third appellant was  born  on  16  June  2003.  The  fourth
appellant was born 21 October 2005.

4.    On 28 November 2013 the appellants applied for leave to remain in  the
UK. Those applications were refused by the respondent on 6 March  2014.  The
appellants then started judicial review procedure, which  was  withdrawn  on
20 October 2014 when the respondent agreed to reconsider the decisions.

5.     On  9  December  2014  the   respondent   refused   the   appellants'
applications for leave to remain in the UK.

The Judge's Decision

6.     The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Mulholland ("the Judge")  allowed  the  appeals  against  the
Respondent's decision under the Immigration rules.

7.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 5 November  2015  Judge  Grimmett
gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "It is arguable that the Judge failed to consider Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC
    74, EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and N [2005]  UKHL  31  as  they
    were not referred to in the decision and the Judge's conclusion may not
    have been the same had they been considered.

The Hearing

8.    (a)   Mr Bramble, for the respondent, simply adopted  the  grounds  of
appeal as his submission. There are two grounds of appeal. The first  ground
relates to the second appellant and is critical of the Judge's  findings  at
[57] to [59]. It is argued that the Judge failed  to  take  account  of  the
cases of Zoumbas and EV Philipinnes. It is argued that the Judge's  decision
amounts to a comparison of the quality of education available to the  second
appellant in the UK to that in Nigeria, rather than  applying  the  test  of
whether or not it is reasonable to expect the second appellant to leave  the
UK.

    (b)    The second ground of appeal relates to the fourth appellant  and
is critical of the Judge's findings at [63] to [73]. It is argued  that  the
Judge's findings are dependent upon a comparison of health  care  facilities
in the UK & in Nigeria, rather than the test of whether or not it  would  be
reasonable for the third appellant to return to Nigeria. It is  argued  that
the errors in law affect the findings at [77].

9.    For the appellant, Ms Hannan told me that the  Judge  had  prepared  a
fully reasoned decision and that the correct balance had been drawn  between
the appellants' interests & the public interest in immigration control.  She
urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

10.   In Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC  74  it  was  held  that  there  was  no
"irrationality in  the  conclusion  that  it  was  in  the  children's  best
interests to go with their parents to the Republic of  Congo.  No  doubt  it
would have been possible to have stated that, other things being  equal,  it
was in the best interests of  the  children  that  they  and  their  parents
stayed in the United Kingdom so that they  could  obtain  such  benefits  as
health care and education which the decision-maker recognised might be of  a
higher standard than would be available in the Congo. But other things  were
not equal. They were not British citizens.  They  had  no  right  to  future
education and health care in this country. They were part  of  a  close-knit
family with highly educated parents and were of an age when their  emotional
needs could only be  fully  met  within  the  immediate  family  unit.  Such
integration as had occurred into United  Kingdom  society  would  have  been
predominantly in the context of that family unit.  Most  significantly,  the
decision-maker concluded that they could  be  removed  to  the  Republic  of
Congo in the care of their parents without serious detriment to their  well-
being".  It was also held that there was  no  "substance  in  the  criticism
that the assessment of the children's best interests was flawed  because  it
assumed that their parents would  be  removed  to  the  Republic  of  Congo.
....It was legitimate for the decision-maker to ask  herself  first  whether
it would have been proportionate to  remove  the  parents  if  they  had  no
children and then, in considering the best interests of the children in  the
proportionality  exercise,  ask  whether  their  well-being   altered   that
provisional balance. When one has regard to the age  of  the  children,  the
nature and extent of their integration  into  United  Kingdom  society,  the
close family unit in which they lived and their Congolese  citizenship,  the
matters on which Mr Lindsay relied did not create such  a  strong  case  for
the children that their interest in remaining in the  United  Kingdom  could
have outweighed the considerations on which  the  decision-maker  relied  in
striking the balance in  the  proportionality  exercise  (paras  17  and  18
above). The assessment of the children's best interests must be read in  the
context of the decision letter as a whole."

11.   In EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874 it was  held
that the best interests of the child were to be determined by  reference  to
the child alone without reference to the immigration history  or  status  of
either parent (paras 32 and 33). In then  determining  whether  or  not  the
need for immigration control outweighed the best interests of the  children,
it was necessary to determine the relative strength  of  the  factors  which
made it in their best interests to remain  in  the  UK;  and  also  to  take
account of any factors that pointed the other way. At  paragraph  35  of  EV
(Philippines) and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 874 it was  stated  that  the  best
interests of children will depend on a number  of  factors  including  their
age, the length of time that they have been in the United Kingdom, how  long
they have been in education, the stage that their education has reached,  to
what extent they have been distanced from the country to which they  are  to
be returned, how renewable their connection with it may be, the extent  that
they will have linguistic, medical or  other  difficulties  in  adapting  to
life there and the extent to which the course proposed will  interfere  with
their family life or other rights in this country.   The  longer  the  child
had been in the  UK,  the  more  advanced  or  critical  the  stage  of  his
education, the looser his ties with the country in question,  and  the  more
deleterious the consequences of his return,  the  greater  the  weight  that
fell into one side of the scales. If it was overwhelmingly  in  the  child's
best interests that he should not return, the need to  maintain  immigration
control may well not tip the balance. By contrast if it was in  the  child's
best interests to remain, but only on balance  with  some  factors  pointing
the other way, the result may be the opposite. In the balance on  the  other
side there fell to be taken into account the strong weight to  be  given  to
the need to maintain immigration control in pursuit of  the  economic  well-
being of the country and the fact that, ex hypothesi, the claimants  had  no
entitlement to remain. The immigration history of the parents might also  be
relevant (paras 34 - 37).

12.   In Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting  children;  onward
appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC) the Tribunal held that (i)  The case  law  of
the Upper Tribunal has identified the following principles to assist in  the
determination of  appeals  where  children  are  affected  by  the  appealed
decisions: (a) As a starting point it is in the best interests  of  children
to be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being  removed  from
the  United  Kingdom  then  the  starting  point  suggests  that  so  should
dependent children who  form  part  of  their  household  unless  there  are
reasons to the contrary; (ii) It is generally in the interests  of  children
to have both stability and continuity of social  and  educational  provision
and the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the society to  which
they belong; (iii) Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state  of
origin can lead to development of social cultural and educational ties  that
it would be inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence  of  compelling  reason
to the contrary. What amounts to lengthy residence  is  not  clear  cut  but
past and present policies have identified seven years as a relevant  period;
(iv)  Apart from the terms of published policies  and  rules,  the  Tribunal
notes that seven years from age four is likely to be more significant  to  a
child that the first seven years of life. Very young children  are  focussed
on their parents rather than  their  peers  and  are  adaptable;  (v)  Short
periods of residence, particularly ones  without  leave  or  the  reasonable
expectation  of  leave  to  enter  or  remain,  while  claims  are  promptly
considered, are unlikely to give rise to private life deserving  of  respect
in the absence of exceptional factors.  In  any  event,  protection  of  the
economic well-being of society amply justifies removal in such cases.

13.   The grounds of appeal correctly set  out  that  all  four  appellants'
appeals were allowed under the immigration rules on the basis that it  would
be unreasonable for the second and fourth appellants to return to Nigeria.

14.   Between [42] and [50] the circumstances of  the  first  appellant  are
considered. At [43] the Judge correctly finds the  first  appellant  "...can
only succeed under appendix FM if she  can  demonstrate  that  it  would  be
unreasonable for her children to follow her to  Nigeria."  When  considering
the "reasonableness test" between [51] and [54] the  Judge  reminds  himself
at [53] that this case turns entirely on the question of whether or  not  it
would be unreasonable for the second, third and fourth appellants to  return
with the first appellant to Nigeria.

15.   The second appellant's position is considered between [56]  and  [61].
The respondent's challenge focuses on [57] to [59]. The  grounds  of  appeal
complain that the Judge's reasoning is  based  entirely  on  the  effect  of
taking a 16-year-old girl who has spent (now) more than 10 years in  the  UK
away from her friends and interrupting the good progress that she is  making
education. It is argued that the  ratio  in  Zoumbas  &  EV  Philippines  is
ignored by the Judge, and that his findings amount to  little  more  than  a
comparison of the quality of education and  social  life  available  to  the
second appellant.

16.   At [60] the Judge summarises the factors  he  has  to  balance  &  the
weight he gives to each of those factors, before coming  to  the  conclusion
(at [61]) that it would not be reasonable to expect the second appellant  to
leave the UK.

17.   The Judge does not refer to either Zoumbas or EV Philippines, but  his
decision to cite neither of those cases has no impact on the  decision.  The
circumstances in the case of Zoumbas are distinguishable from the facts  and
circumstances requiring consideration for the second appellant.  In  Zoumbas
there were three children. The youngest was  only  a  few  months  old.  The
oldest was only seven years old and her time in the UK had been  interrupted
by one year out-with the UK. Lord Hodge, in  the  final  paragraphs  of  the
Zoumbas Judgment, stressed the importance of the test given in the  case  of
ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4.

18.   The answer to this case lies in guidance given in both EV  Philippines
and Azimi Moayad. In Azimi Moayad it was held that (iii)  Lengthy  residence
in a country other than the state of  origin  can  lead  to  development  of
social cultural and educational ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate  to
disrupt, in the absence of compelling reason to the contrary.  What  amounts
to lengthy residence is not clear cut but past  and  present  policies  have
identified seven years as a relevant period; (iv)  Apart from the  terms  of
published policies and rules, the Tribunal notes that seven years  from  age
four is likely to be more significant to a child that the first seven  years
of life. Very young children are  focussed  on  their  parents  rather  than
their peers and are adaptable

19.   The second appellant is not a child of primary school age whose  focus
and interests are enshrouded in the family unit. In the case of  the  second
appellant the Judge has carefully and sensitively considered the needs of  a
girl in her mid-teens  at  a  crucial  time  in  her  education.  The  Judge
considers the  second  appellant's  positive  response  to  the  benefit  of
education and the second appellant's social circumstances. He considers  the
impact of return to Nigeria  on  the  second  appellant  and  comes  to  the
conclusion that removing educational opportunities (from  which  the  second
appellant has clearly benefited for more or less a  decade)  and  separating
the appellant from the friends that she has  had  since  primary  school  to
make her start again in a country from which she is completely estranged  is
not reasonable.

20.   It is for the Judge to decide what  is  reasonable  and  what  is  not
reasonable. That is exactly what the Judge has  done.   In  the  grounds  of
appeal,  the  respondent  relies  on  only  two  cases  which  support   the
respondent's position. The respondent does not take a  balanced  approach  &
cite the cases which do not support the respondent's position.

21.   The grounds of appeal move on  to  the  fourth  appellant.  The  Judge
deals with the fourth appellant  between  [63]  and  [73].  For  the  fourth
appellant the focus is almost  entirely  on  his  health  difficulties.  The
fourth appellant suffers from ADHD  and  autism.  He  has  siezures  once  a
month. The Judge considers background  materials  and,  at  [70],  concludes
that it would be difficult to access the necessary health services,  and  at
[71] that it is unlikely that the  fourth  appellant's  special  educational
needs will be met in Nigeria.

22.   The respondent's criticism is that the  Judge  has  done  little  more
than compare the quality of  health  services  and  education.  That  is  an
unfair criticism. What the Judge  has  done  is  consider  the  question  of
whether or not it is reasonable  for  the  fourth  appellant  to  return  to
Nigeria. In doing so, the Judge manifestly applies the correct legal test

23.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

24.   There is no  criticism  of  the  Judge's  fact  finding  exercise.  In
reality the respondent's appeal amounts to little more than  a  disagreement
with the way the Judge has applied the facts as he found them to be  to  the
reasonableness test. It was for the Judge to decide what is  reasonable  and
what is not reasonable. As I have already indicated, that  is  exactly  what
the Judge has done. The respondent might not like the  conclusion  that  the
Judge has come to, but that  conclusion  is  the  result  of  the  correctly
applied legal equation.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the  Judge's  fact
finding exercise. The correct test in law has been applied.  Some  may  view
the conclusion reached by the Judge to be  a  generous  one,  but  it  is  a
conclusion which was well within the range of conclusions available  to  the
Judge.

25.   The decisions in relation to  the  first  and  third  appellants  were
entirely dependent on the decisions in relation to  the  second  and  fourth
appellants. As I find that there is no material error of law in relation  to
the second and fourth appellants, the decisions  for  the  first  and  third
appellants must also stand.

 26.  The Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets  out  findings  that
are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

27.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

28.   The appeals are dismissed. The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 22 February 2016
                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

