
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50229/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th July 2014                               |On 28th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                             mr malik kashif ali
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Makol, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who applied for leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  His appeal  was  allowed  under
    the  Immigration  Rules  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rose   in   a
    determination promulgated on 29th April 2014.  Grounds  of  application
    were lodged.   It  was  noted  that  the  Respondent  had  refused  the
    application on the basis that the Respondent was not satisfied that the
    Appellant met the requirement in paragraph 245ZX(h), namely that:

         "If the course is below degree level the grant of leave  to  remain
         the applicant is seeking must not  lead  to  the  applicant  having
         spent more than 3 years in the UK as a Tier 4 (Migrant)  since  the
         age of 18 studying courses that did not  consist  of  degree  level
         study."

 2. The grounds stated that the judge had simplified the Appellant's period
    of study as a "one year course" and a "two year  course".   The  course
    dates recorded in the CAS which are set by the  sponsoring  institution
    was that the proposed course was two years and four days.  There was no
    "near-miss" principle that said that failing by a few days was anything
    other than an irrelevant consideration.

 3. As such the  judge  should  have  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
    satisfied the Rules and gone on to dismiss the appeal.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fisher
    who noted that the judge accepted  the  Appellant's  unchallenged  oral
    evidence that he actually registered for the first course on  31st  May
    2012 and started it on 4th June 2013.  However it was arguable that the
    judge had erred in law by departing from the dates referred to  in  the
    respective  CAS  documents.   Accordingly,  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted.

 5. Thus the appeal came before me on the above date.

 6. Mr Tufan for the Home Office stated that he was relying on his grounds.
     What was important was the period of grant of leave  as  confirmed  by
    the case of Islam (paragraph 245X(ha): five years' study)  [2013]  UKUT
    00608 (IAC).

 7. For the Appellant Mr Makol said that it was accepted  that  the  second
    course did have a duration of two years and four  days.   As  such  the
    judge had been wrong to hold otherwise but he had been correct to allow
    the appeal because the Appellant had given unchallenged  evidence  that
    he had registered for the course on 31st May 2012 and he started it  on
    4th June 2012.  It was the period of study that mattered  and  not  the
    actual grant of leave.  It was impractical for there to  be  any  other
    way to look at such a case because the grant of leave was always  bound
    to be longer than the actual period of study.  I was asked to  conclude
    there was no error in law  and  to  therefore  uphold  the  Appellant's
    appeal.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. The judge found,  notwithstanding  the  precise  start  and  end  dates
    recorded in the Appellant's CAS details that the course  was  "properly
    to be regarded" for the purposes of sub-paragraph 245ZX (h)  as  a  two
    year course.  It was on that basis that he went on to allow the appeal.
     Mr Makol accepted that the judge had been wrong to allow the appeal on
    this basis and it is clear enough that the judge erred in law in  doing
    so.

10. Mr Makol was quite clear in his submission that it was not the grant or
    period of leave that was in issue, rather it was the actual time  spent
    on the course by the Appellant that had to be taken into  account.   Mr
    Makol indicated that it was  almost  inevitable  that  the  Appellant's
    grant of leave would be for a longer period than the actual time  spent
    on the duration of the course.  He did not argue that there was a near-
    miss principle and did not seek to invoke Article 8 ECHR  because  such
    an argument would not have assisted him.   In  any  event  no  Rule  24
    notice was lodged.  As Mr Makol accepted his argument goes against  the
    terms of the Immigration Rules which refer to the "grant of  leave"  to
    remain that must not lead to an applicant having spent more than  three
    years in the UK as a Tier 4 Migrant.

11. The case of Islam referred to above, a decision of the  Vice-President,
    indicated that it is the period of the leave and not the  actual  study
    which is the measure for calculating the period spent in the UK imposed
    by paragraph 245ZX(ha) -paragraph 11.

12. It was not disputed before me that the Appellant's grant  of  leave  to
    study at CECOS London College was from 28th May  2012  until  28th  May
    2013.  Nor was it disputed that his  grant  for  Stanfords  College  UK
    Limited was from 26th September 2013 until  30th  September  2015  (two
    years, four days).  Given what is said  in  the  Immigration  Rules  it
    therefore seems to me that it does not avail the Appellant to say  that
    he only started studying on 4th June 2012.  As Mr Makol  put  it,  that
    was his unchallenged evidence and there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  it.
    However the fact that the Appellant did start his  course  a  few  days
    after 28th May 2012 does not affect the granting of leave for precisely
    the one year period.

13. Mr Makol accepted that the Immigration Rules were against  him.   There
    is no near-miss principle and I have no discretion to  go  outwith  the
    Rules. It cannot be said that the rules are unfair on the Appellant.

14. It is  clear  that  the  judge  erred  in  his  reasoning  and,  as  it
    transpires, also in the outcome of the appeal.  It was an error in  law
    to find that the course of two years four days was  effectively  a  two
    year course.  It was an error in law not to  apply  the  terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

15. It is therefore necessary to set this decision aside and  substitute  a
    fresh decision dismissing the appeal.











Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

17. I set aside the decision.

18. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


