
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50676/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd July 2014                               |On 08th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                   ms mayada abdelrahim mohamed ali helal
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R De Mello, Counsel instructed by David Tang & Co



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and for ease of reference I refer to the parties as they  were
    known there.

 2. The Respondent  appeals  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Nightingale promulgated on 2nd  May  2014  in  which  she  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal of the Respondent to  issue  her
    with a residence card under the 2006 Immigration (EEA Regulations) with
    specific  reference  to  Regulation  15A,  the  derivative  rights   of
    residence.

 3. The judge found, contrary  to  the  Respondent's  assertion,  that  the
    Appellant is the primary carer of two  British  citizen  children,  the
    eldest born on 14th September 2008,  a  young  girl  with  some  health
    problems, and a boy born on 2nd August 2011  so  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing, 2 and 5 years old.  No challenge to the finding in respect  of
    the primary carer position is made in these grounds.

 4. The crux of the case as it was argued before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was what the impact would be  on  the  British  children  if  the
    Appellant went to Egypt.

 5. The Respondent's challenge is to the findings  relevant  to  Regulation
    15A(4A)(c): that in the event that the Appellant had to leave  the  UK,
    to go in this case to Egypt and make an  application  from  there,  the
    children would be unable to reside here and would necessarily  have  to
    go with her.  The Respondent argues that the fact of the  father  being
    able to remain in the United Kingdom means that the  impact  would  not
    meet the threshold of showing that the  children  would  be  unable  to
    reside in the United Kingdom.

 6. The judge accepted the credibility of the Appellant and her husband  in
    making her assessment of the circumstances of the children and also the
    family in general.  There is no challenge to that finding.

 7. I find that the judge made sustainable findings  of  fact  including  a
    finding that there is a significant degree of  dependence  between  the
    children and the Appellant, accepting that the children's father played
    a very small role in their daily care, not even having changed a nappy.
    The Father instead played a significant financial role  supporting  his
    family through his employment, which involved long hours with  unsocial
    shifts.

 8. The judge considered the arguments put forward in connection  with  the
    position of whether or not the Appellant's husband  would  be  able  to
    afford sufficient childcare to allow the children to enjoy their rights
    of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  but  found  that  in  fact  the
    Appellant's husband would not be able to do so, taking into account his
    particular employment and the particular needs of the children, as  the
    earnings were insufficient to meet  the  anticipated  childcare  costs.
    The judge found that the Appellant's  husband  would  not  be  able  to
    maintain his employment and provide the  daily  care  required  by  the
    children.

 9. In any event, the judge reasoned the best  interests  of  the  children
    were to continue  to  receive  the  daily  care  that  they  need,  and
    currently enjoy, from their  mother,  taking  into  account  the  older
    child's health issues which, whilst not significant in terms  of  being
    life threatening, do require significant additional care,  as  well  as
    the age of the children in particular the youngest, only two.

10. The judge found that as a matter of fact the children would not be able
    to remain in the United Kingdom.

11. Mr Saunders before me reiterates the ground that  the  Judge's  finding
    that the children would be unable to reside here reflects  a  threshold
    which is lower than the word unable would ordinarily imply, so that the
    legal test is flawed.  I disagree with that submission.  It is plain in
    the context of the case of Zambrano that "unable" in the context of  an
    ability to reside here is about the substantive enjoyment of the  right
    of residence. Also in a case to which I have been referred to today,  O
    & Another v Maahanmuuttovirasto Maahanmuuttovirasto v L, (joined  cases
    C-356/11  and  C-357/11)  that  European  jurisprudence  reflects   the
    position of our own domestic jurisprudence to the point that  any  test
    must take account of the respect due to private  and  family  life  and
    hold the best interests of the children as a primary consideration.   I
    am satisfied that the decision of the judge is entirely consistent with
    that jurisprudence, and reveals no material error of law.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


