
  [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50216/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 June 2014                               |On 3 July 2014               |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                               MrS eSTHER OTOO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Spio-Aidoo, Solicitor, from R Spio & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Ghana. She applied for a residence
    card as confirmation of her right to reside in the UK on the basis that
    she was in a durable relationship with Mr Steven Yvon Legrand, a French
    national  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  UK  (the  Sponsor).  Her
    application was refused because she had failed  to  provide  sufficient
    evidence to establish that she  and  the  Sponsor  were  in  a  durable
    relationship. She appealed and her appeal was determined on the  papers
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta (the Judge),  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 26 September 2014. The Judge dismissed  the  Appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.


 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the basis that  the  Judge
    erred in:


              a.  Making  improper  findings  of  fact   and   taking   into
                 consideration matters that were not before her because  she
                 stated  that  the   Appellant   had   made   two   previous
                 applications on the basis of a proxy marriage  between  her
                 and the Sponsor, submitting two  different  proxy  marriage
                 certificates,  neither  certificate  was  accepted  by  the
                 Respondent and both  applications  had  been  refused.  The
                 Judge had erroneously found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
                 appealed either decision. In fact the second  decision  was
                 appealed  and  the  appeal  dismissed;  the  Appellant  had
                 provided at that previous appeal hearing an explanation for
                 why two proxy marriage certificates had been obtained.


              b. Taking into account matters which were not  before  her  in
                 that: (i) the third application, which was the  subject  of
                 the appeal before the Judge, was on the  basis  that  there
                 was a durable relationship between the  Appellant  and  her
                 Sponsor and this had been the basis of refusal. The Judge's
                 view of the evidence was coloured by her  consideration  of
                 the previous applications, when they were not  relevant  to
                 the current application;  and  (ii)  she  referred  to  the
                 letter in the Appellant's  bundle  which  referred  to  the
                 pregnancy of the Appellant but this issue  was  not  before
                 her and it was wrong for her to speculate on the  pregnancy
                 and her 'judgement was blurred by these  factors'  (grounds
                 paragraph 3);


              c. Incorrectly finding, from the payslips of the Sponsor, that
                 that he was living in Walsall. However, the  address  given
                 on the payslip was the address of the  Sponsor's  employer,
                 not the Sponsor's home address;


              d.  Failing  to  make  proper  findings  under  the   Borders,
                 Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and to 'reach a proper
                 decision under Article  8'  because  she  stated  that  the
                 letter from the social worker was silent on  the  issue  of
                 whether the Sponsor was living with the Appellant when  the
                 social worker had  stated  that  the  Appellant's  son  had
                 'grown  up'  with  the  Sponsor,  had  formed  a   positive
                 relationship with him and that the Sponsor was a role model
                 for him.

 3. Permission was granted on the basis that the Judge "...made an arguable
    error of law in coming to the conclusion that  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor were not in a durable  relationship  and  by  failing  to  have
    regard and/or failing to  make  adequate  findings  in  regard  to  the
    evidence produced on behalf  of  the  Appellant  (in  particularly  the
    letter of Islington Specialist Children's Services of 3 June 2013 which
    describes  in  detail  the  relationship  between  the  Appellant,  the
    Appellant's child, and the Sponsor)."


 4. The Respondent submitted a Rule 24 response, opposing the appeal.
Submissions


 5. Ms Spio-Aidoo relied on the grounds of application. When asked  if  the
    decision  letters  in  relation  to  the   Appellant's   two   previous
    applications on the basis of her proxy marriage to the Sponsor were  in
    the Respondent's Bundle, she confirmed that they were.  When  asked  to
    confirm  whether  the  appeal  determination  which  related   to   the
    Appellant's appeal of the second decision was before the Judge, Ms Spio-
    Aidoo referred me to the Appellant's bundle. However, whilst the  Judge
    had  the  previous  Respondent's  decisions  before  her,  the   appeal
    determination was not included in the  Appellant's  bundle.   Ms  Spio-
    Aidoo confirmed that it was not submitted as part  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle although she did have a copy of it.


 6. I said to Ms Spio-Aidoo that as the  letters  refusing  the  first  two
    applications  were  before  the  Judge,  they  would  have  formed  the
    background evidence against  which  she  was  considering  the  current
    appeal  on  the  third  application.  Ms  Spio-Aidoo  stated  that  she
    understood what I was saying but the  Appellant  only  addressed  those
    issues that were raised in the decision letter relating  to  the  third
    application and if the Respondent had wanted to put the previous  proxy
    marriage in issue, it would have been  raised  in  the  third  decision
    letter. She also stated that she  was  not  sure  if  the  Respondent's
    bundle was received by them after the Appellant had filed her bundle of
    evidence.


 7. Ms Spio-Aidoo  continued  that  the  Judge  stated  at  [24]  that  the
    Appellant had failed to  provide  independent  evidence  of  a  durable
    relationship but here was a letter from a social  worker  at  Islington
    Council in the Appellant's bundle and the Judge did  not  give  it  her
    full attention. The Judge had said "Nor  is  there  evidence  that  the
    Sponsor has had any sort of relationship with the Appellant's  son"  at
    [24] but  at  [31]  she  stated  "The  child  may  have  some  form  of
    relationship with the Sponsor but I am not  satisfied  to  standard  of
    proof required that the  Sponsor  is  seen  by  the  child  as  a  step
    father..." She submitted that there was an inconsistency there and both
    statements could not be right; if the Judge had considered  the  letter
    and the documentary evidence that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  were
    residing at the same address, she would have concluded that  they  were
    in a durable relationship.


 8. As to the address on the payslip referred to by the Judge at  [27],  Ms
    Spio-Aidoo stated that no submissions were made by  the  Respondent  in
    relation to this and the Judge erred in  finding  that  he  resided  in
    Walsall  on  the  basis  of  the  payslip.  It  was  unclear  from  the
    documentary evidence before me as to where this information  came  from
    and Ms Spio-Aidoo, who had the bundle of original  documents,  provided
    the original payslips. On the back of these  the  Walsall  address  was
    given as the 'return address' if the payslip was  undelivered  and  the
    address of the Appellant was given as 33B Hawes Street London.


 9. I referred Ms Spio-Aidoo to paragraph 3 of the  grounds  in  which  the
    letter referring to the pregnancy of the Appellant was  mentioned.  She
    stated that the letter was not adduced as evidence that  the  Appellant
    was pregnant but to confirm that the  Appellant  was  residing  at  the
    address to which it was sent.

10. Mr Kandola  relied  on  the  Rule  24  response,  submitting  that  the
    background to the determination was that the Appellant  had  elected  a
    determination on the papers and the letters relating to the Appellant's
    first two applications were  before  the  Judge.  Whilst  there  is  no
    prejudice to an  appellant  when  a  determination  on  the  papers  is
    elected, if it was not the intention of the Appellant  to  attend,  she
    should have considered the  evidence  before  the  Judge  and  met  any
    concerns raised by the documentary evidence. If she was not going to be
    attending, she needed to explain in  her  witness  statement  what  had
    occurred with her previous applications.

11. He also submitted that the Judge gave her findings of  fact  from  [24]
    onwards; it was proper for the Judge to refer to the letter  confirming
    the Appellant's pregnancy and the fact that it was not referred  to  in
    the statements of either the Appellant or the Sponsor,  both  of  which
    were remarkably brief. The Judge did not overlook the letter  from  the
    Key Worker (incorrectly referred  to  in  the  grounds  as  the  Social
    Worker). The Judge referred to it at [27] and the Judge must have  gone
    through the Appellant's bundle of 70 or so pages to get to it. Although
    it is stated within the letter that the Appellant's son had 'grown  up'
    with the Sponsor, there was no evidence as to whether this was  written
    because the Key Worker had visited the home or  because  she  had  been
    told by the Appellant and had simply set down what she had  been  told.
    It was not confirmed within the letter that the matters set out  within
    it were the result of independent  observation.  This  matter  was  not
    addressed in the witness statements of the Appellant and the Sponsor.


12. Mr Kandola submitted that there  may  be  disagreement  now  about  the
    findings of the Judge but she had only the documentary evidence  before
    her and her findings were open to her.


13. In reply, Miss Spio-Aidoo stated that:


              a. The issue raised by the Judge in relation to employment was
                 not  raised  in  the  decision  letter  and  therefore  the
                 Appellant would  not  have  addressed  it  in  the  witness
                 statement;


              b. It was stated in the letter from the Key  Worker  that  she
                 had worked with the  family  for  the  past  6  months  and
                 therefore the contents of the letter could  not  have  been
                 dictated to her; it was written  from  her  experience  and
                 what she made of the situation as a whole; and


              c. The  Appellant's  bundle  had  been  submitted  before  the
                 Respondent's bundle  was  received;  she  stated  that  the
                 Respondent's bundle was date stamped received on 27 January
                 2014, which was the date when the  Appellant's  bundle  had
                 been sent out.  When  asked  if  she  had  a  copy  of  the
                 covering letter, Miss Spio-Aidoo stated that  it  had  been
                 sent on 27 January 2014, but she did not  have  a  covering
                 letter; she was simply going by the date on which the index
                 to the bundle was printed. Mr Kandola stated that there was
                 still time for the Appellant to respond prior to  the  date
                 of hearing.


Decision and reasons


14. Throughout her findings of fact, the Judge was assessing  the  evidence
    before her to try to establish whether sufficient independent  evidence
    (my emphasis) had been adduced to establish that the Appellant and  the
    Sponsor had been in a durable relationship for a substantial period  of
    time [24]. She finds that documentary evidence was provided  that  they
    were residing at the same address but the  "evidence  is  ambiguous  as
    they could have been living in shared accommodation."  She  notes  that
    they did not register for council tax as one household at any time  and
    there was no evidence of joint economic activity in any  sense  of  the
    word. Furthermore despite the lengthy period  during  which  they  were
    said to have been in a durable relationship, the Judge noted that  only
    "....two  photographs,  obviously  taken  at  the  same  time,  without
    evidence of the date or occasion..."  were  submitted.  These  findings
    were not challenged and were open to her on the evidence before her.


15. Ms Spio-Aidoo confirmed that the Respondent's bundle was  date  stamped
    received by her firm on 27 January 2014. She was not able to provide  a
    covering letter to the  Tribunal  sending  the  Appellant's  bundle  in
    accordance with directions. She agreed to send me a copy of the  bundle
    after the hearing. I did, however, subsequently locate the  Appellant's
    bundle that was before the Judge and it appears that this was faxed  to
    the Tribunal on 28 January 2014, a day after  the  Respondent's  bundle
    was received by her. The Appellant would therefore have had  notice  of
    the issues that were raised in the Respondent's bundle and it  was  for
    her, within  her  statement,  to  address  any  issues  raised  by  the
    documentary evidence from which adverse inferences could be drawn.


16. The Judge would not have known that the  Appellant  had  addressed  the
    issues raised in  relation  to  the  two  proxy  marriage  certificates
    previously submitted unless either the appeal determination relating to
    the second decision was provided or it was addressed in the Appellant's
    witness statement. It is extraordinary that  the  appeal  determination
    was not supplied by the Appellant, particularly bearing  in  mind  that
    her representative had a copy of it and bearing in mind the submissions
    made that an  explanation  as  to  the  issue  of  the  proxy  marriage
    certificates had already been supplied during the course of the  appeal
    hearing in relation to the decision on the second application.  Neither
    an explanation nor the appeal determination were before the  Judge  and
    she was entitled to find that no explanation was  provided  by  way  of
    background to her consideration of the Appellant's assertion  that  she
    was in a durable relationship with the Sponsor. It is not arguable that
    the Judge made 'improper findings'  in  relation  to  this  issue;  her
    findings were open to her on the evidence before her. Without a copy of
    the determination, it is not possible to confirm whether or not adverse
    conclusions were drawn by the Judge who heard the appeal.


17. It is also not arguable that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant was working in Walsall at [27]. The address of  the  employer
    on the payslip did not indicate that it was the head office  and  there
    was no evidence before the Judge that it was the  head  office  of  the
    company that the Appellant was working for. It is not arguable that  no
    submissions were made on this issue. It  was  a  determination  on  the
    papers  and  where  inconsistencies  are  noted  within  the  paperwork
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant  and  details  are  not  clarified
    within the statement, the Judge is not wrong to make findings  of  fact
    on the evidence submitted.


18. There is no merit in the submission that  the  Judge  should  not  have
    referred to the documentary evidence as to the Appellant's pregnancy at
    p14 of the Appellant's bundle (because the letter was only submitted to
    establish where the Appellant was residing). The Judge states that  the
    Appellant was pregnant in July 2013. I note that  this  is  within  the
    period of time during which it  is  asserted  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor  were  in  a  durable  relationship.  The  Judge  states,  "The
    Appellant and Sponsor have never  mentioned  the  pregnancy,  birth  or
    possible loss of the pregnancy, though both submitted statements in the
    appeal  dated  23:1:2014.  Had  they  been  in  a  genuinely  committed
    relationship,  there  would  have  been  documentary  evidence  of  the
    pregnancy, that the Sponsor was the father, that he was  noted  on  the
    pregnancy notes as the father. It would not be unreasonable  to  expect
    that they would have mentioned the pregnancy, forthcoming birth or loss
    of pregnancy in their statements had they been in  a  relationship  and
    the Sponsor the father of the child." These findings were open  to  the
    Judge on the evidence before her; they are not irrational  or  perverse
    and are damaging to  the  assertion  that  there  has  been  a  durable
    relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor over  a  substantial
    period of time.


19. The letter from Ms Bethan Leigh-Brown, the  Early  Support  Key  Worker
    from Islington Specialist Children's Service, starts at  p  61  of  the
    Appellant's bundle and is referred to by the Judge at [27].  She  notes
    that the Key Worker only states that the Appellant's son had 'grown  up
    with the Sponsor's support and formed a positive  relationship  because
    he shared responsibility' but did not confirm that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor were living together. It is a fact that the Key Worker does not
    state that the  Sponsor  lives  with  the  Appellant.  Miss  Spio-Aidoo
    submitted that the Key Worker  had  worked  with  the  family  and  her
    observations were from working with the family. However,  this  is  not
    correct. The Key Worker states that she has worked with  "Ms  Otoo  and
    her son" (Appellant's bundle p 61); she does not confirm that  she  has
    worked with the 'family'. There is reference to the Appellant's support
    network at paragraph  4  of  page  62,  and  at  paragraph  5,  to  her
    commitment to her son. The Sponsor is not mentioned until she refers to
    the impact on the Appellant's child of  separation  from  the  Sponsor,
    whom she refers to as his 'step-father'. There is no confirmation  that
    her comments are based on an independent assessment from having  worked
    with the family and witnessed the interaction between  the  Appellant's
    child and the Sponsor. It can be inferred that the Judge  gave  limited
    weight  to  the  evidence  provided  by  the  Key  Worker  as  to   the
    relationship between the Appellant's child and  the  Sponsor  when  she
    found, at [24], there was no evidence that "...the Sponsor has had  any
    sort of relationship with the Appellant's son".


20. Is this finding inconsistent with the statement at [31] that "The child
    may have some form of relationship with the Sponsor..."? I find that it
    is not when [31] is looked at as a whole. The Judge states:


             "The child may have some form of relationship with the Sponsor
             but I am not satisfied to the appropriate  standard  of  proof
             required of an appellant that it has been established that the
             Sponsor is seen by the child as a step father  or  significant
             male  or  what  comprehension,  cognisance,  intellectual   or
             emotional  ability  the  child  has  to  make  attachments  or
             connections with a person other than his mother."

21. Bearing in mind the observations of the Key Worker as to the challenges
    faced by the Appellant's child, which were made on  the  basis  of  the
    work she had done with the Appellant and her child,  this  finding  was
    open to the Judge on the evidence before her.


22. Did the Judge give sufficient consideration to the  best  interests  of
    the child under s 55?


23. Having made her findings as to the lack of a family  life  between  the
    Appellant, the Appellant's child and the Sponsor, the  Judge  considers
    the best interests of the Appellant's child at [30]. There  is  nothing
    within the findings which is perverse, irrational or  unreasonable  and
    the findings were open to her. She correctly finds at [31] that  "There
    is no independent evidence  to  establish  that  the  child  cannot  be
    provided for in Ghana or that  services  are  not  available  there  to
    address his autism and development needs".


24. The Judge confirms that the Appellant would have formed a private  life
    in the UK but that this would have been whilst she was here unlawfully,
    having left behind her children in Ghana, and that she would be able to
    re-establish her life there [29]. She considers the best  interests  of
    her  child  at  [30-31].  Whilst  the  determination  could  have  been
    structured better, the grounds of application are merely a disagreement
    with the findings of the Judge, which findings were open to her on  the
    evidence before her.  The determination, read as a whole,  contains  no
    arguable material errors of law.

Decision

25. The determination of Judge Pirotta contains no material errors  of  law
    and her decision  must  therefore  stand.  The  Appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.


26. I note that an anonymity direction was not made and  on  the  facts  of
    this case, I see no reason why an order should be made pursuant to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                                  Date



Manjinder Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT


No fee was paid or is payable therefore no fee order is made.




Signed                          Dated


M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
