
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50423/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th November 2015                |On 17th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                              mr Zohid Kuchimov
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Uzbekistan born on 26th  September  1987.
    The Appellant first applied for entry clearance as a  student  on  22nd
    August 2007 with an intention of pursuing an eight  week  study  course
    but that application was refused  due  to  doubts  about  his  funding.
    Thereafter he obtained entry clearance as a  student  on  25th  January
    2008 to follow a nine month English course with leave due to expire  on
    31st January 2009.  The  Appellant  subsequently  applied  for  further
    leave to study an intensive English course having apparently  completed
    a Diploma in General English at Brooks  College  and  was  given  leave
    until 28th February 2010.  He next applied for leave to remain to study
    Business English Upper Intermediate at Victoria  English  College  from
    22nd February 2010 to 18th February 2011.   Thereafter  he  applied  on
    18th March 2011 for leave to study for a Business  Information  Systems
    (NQF6) at Victoria English College and was given leave until  1st  June
    2013.  However on 30th December 2011 he submitted a further application
    to study Business Management at NQF  Level  5  at  Shakespeare  College
    London until 14th December 2013 and was given leave  until  14th  April
    2014.

 2. Shakespeare College's licence  was  revoked  a  few  months  after  the
    Appellant supposedly  studied  there  and  the  Appellant  demonstrated
    little knowledge of his current course of study.  Consequently on  19th
    June 2015 the Secretary of State, noting that the Appellant had been in
    the UK as a student for a long period with little evidence that he  had
    a  commensurate  record  of   academic   achievement,   cancelled   the
    Appellant's leave to enter (the Appellant having returned to Uzbekistan
    for his grandmother's funeral).  In making such refusal  the  Secretary
    of State noted that had the Appellant been a genuine student there  was
    nothing to  prevent  his  seeking  new  sponsorship  and  returning  to
    Uzbekistan to apply for further entry clearance.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Quinn sitting at Richmond  on  26th  June  2015.   It  is
    appropriate to cite precisely the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.

         "I allow the appeal as I think the Respondent should have exercised
         her discretion differently.

         I dismiss the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds  as  regards  the
         Appellant's Article 8  claim  thereof.   Paragraph  276ADE  of  the
         Immigration Rules is not satisfied."

 4. On 15th July 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds are of considerable relevance.  They
    note that the judge intended that the Respondent should have  exercised
    his discretion  differently  but  point  out  that  the  leave  of  the
    Appellant had been cancelled by reference to paragraph 321A.  That Rule
    states:

         "321A.   The following grounds for the cancellation of  a  person's
                leave to enter or remain which is in force  on  his  arrival
                in, or whilst he is outside, the United Kingdom apply;

                (1)    there has been such a change in the circumstances  of
                    that person's case since the leave  was  given  that  it
                    should be cancelled or;

                (2)    this Rule is mandatory and contains no discretion;

                (3)     the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  was  made  under
                    paragraph 320(5) which states ...  the  failure  in  the
                    case of a visa national, to produce to  the  Immigration
                    Officer a passport or other identity  document  endorsed
                    with a valid and current United Kingdom entry  clearance
                    issued for the purpose for which entry is sought."

    That Rule is also mandatory and contains no discretion.

 5. On 1st October 2015 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davies  granted
    permission to appeal noting that the judge appeared to have allowed the
    appeal on the basis that  the  Respondent  should  have  exercised  her
    discretion differently and that the grounds  make  it  clear  that  the
    Rules are mandatory and that the Secretary of State had no  discretion.
    Judge Davies noted that the judge had clearly made his findings on  the
    basis therefore of an error and that the grounds disclosed an  arguable
    error of law.

 6. I note that when the matter came before the First-tier  Tribunal  there
    was no representative of the Secretary of  State  in  attendance.   The
    Appellant was legally represented.  The Appellant remained  with  legal
    representation until  26th  November  2015  when  his  then  instructed
    solicitors noted that they wished to withdraw their representation  and
    that all future correspondence be forwarded to  the  Appellant  at  his
    home address.  They did however confirm that  the  Appellant  had  been
    advised to attend the hearing.

 7. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me.  The Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr  Nath.   The
    Appellant does not appear.  I am however satisfied  that  he  has  been
    duly served with notice of the hearing.  His address is fully disclosed
    on that notice and indication that he is aware of the hearing has  been
    confirmed by his previously instructed solicitors.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Nath does little more than refer me to the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and
    further seeks to rely  on  the  authority  of  Ukus  (Discretion:  when
    reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC).  He points out that the  Rules  in
    question are mandatory and that there is no discretion and he therefore
    asked me to find that there is a material error of law in the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge; to set aside  that  decision  and  to
    remake the decision refusing the Appellant's original appeal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

11. I am considerably helped in this matter not just by the submissions  of
    Mr Nath but by the  very  detailed  refusal/cancellation  of  leave  to
    enter/remain report provided by the Secretary of  State  which  I  have
    read in some considerable detail.  However the key to this matter is to
    note that the Appellant of his own volition left the UK  to  return  to
    Uzbekistan to attend his grandmother's funeral.  The Notice of  Refusal
    is dated 19th June 2015.  When interviewed on return the Appellant  had
    stated that he had last attended college on  29th  September  2014  and
    that the college had only granted him two weeks' leave but he could not
    return to the United Kingdom because of health reasons.  The  Appellant
    had stated to the interviewing officer that he had not  spoken  to  the
    college since September 2014 and confirmed that he had missed one whole
    semester.  When interviewed  the  Appellant  had  stated  that  he  had
    started the course in April 2014 but he struggled to recall any of  the
    course content or modules and could not state what ACCA  was.   In  the
    light of that the interviewing officer was  not  immediately  satisfied
    that the Appellant qualified for  leave  and  the  Secretary  of  State
    issued form IS81 thereby suspending his  leave  and  requiring  him  to
    submit to further examination.  The conclusion of that examination  led
    to termination of leave by way of the Notice of Refusal.

12. The crux of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  determination  is  to  be
    found at paragraphs 27 and 28 where he stated  that  he  considered  it
    would have been reasonable to  give  the  Appellant  60  days  to  find
    another Sponsor and that revoking  the  Appellant's  leave  immediately
    when he arrived at Heathrow was unreasonable in the circumstances.  The
    Grounds of Appeal and the submissions of Mr  Nath  make  it  absolutely
    clear that the Grounds for  Refusal  pursuant  to  paragraph  321A  and
    320(5) are mandatory and contain  no  discretion.   I  am  consequently
    satisfied that in indicating that the Secretary of  State  should  have
    exercised discretion the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  law.   Mr
    Nath is correct to refer me to the authority of Ukus but that authority
    of course  addresses  the  situation  when  a  decision  maker  in  the
    purported exercise of discretion vested in him notes his  function  and
    what was required to be done when fulfilling it and  then  proceeds  to
    reach a decision on the basis that decision is a  lawful  one  and  the
    Tribunal cannot intervene in the absence of a statutory power to decide
    that the discretion should have been exercised  differently.   Ukus  is
    clearly good  law  but  addresses  the  situation  where  there  was  a
    discretion applied even in a case where the discretion should have been
    exercised differently.  The Rules are clear that it  is  mandatory  and
    there is no discretion.

13. In such circumstances I am satisfied for all  the  above  reasons  that
    there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge and I set aside that decision and I remake the  decision
    allowing the appeal of the  Secretary  of  State  thus  confirming  the
    position of cancellation of leave to remain issued on 19th June 2015.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material  error  of  law.
That decision is set aside and the decision is remade  allowing  the  appeal
of   the   Secretary   of   State   and   consequently    reinstating    the
refusal/cancellation of leave to enter/remain issued  by  the  Secretary  of
State on 19th June 2015.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
