
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50461/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 February 2016                    |On 12 April 2016                     |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Samuel Oyesola oyedele
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Tampuri, Tamsons Legal Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent is a citizen of Nigeria and his  date  of  birth  is  19
    July 1975.  I shall refer to him as the appellant, as he was before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant made an application for  leave  to  remain  in  May  2012
    which was refused by the Secretary of State on 22  October  2014.   The
    appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain in a decision dated  23  August  2015
    and promulgated on 1 September 2015 following  a  hearing  on  10  July
    2015.  Permission was granted to the Secretary of State by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal J M Holmes on 13 January 2016. Thus the matter came
    before me.

3.   Judge Hussain set out the circumstances of the  appellant's  case.   It
    is accepted that since 2009 the  appellant  has  not  been  in  the  UK
    lawfully.  He has a partner here,  Miss  Oseni,  and  they  have  three
    children here.  The children's dates of birth are 23 July 2007, 28 July
    2009 and 7 May 2011.  The appellant's partner and  the  three  children
    were granted discretionary leave on 27 March 2012 and this  expires  on
    26 March 2017.

4.   According to the Secretary  of  State  (see  page  3  of  the  decision
    letter) this was granted on the basis that  Miss  Oseni  was  a  single
    parent.  This was not challenged by the appellant at the hearing before
    Judge Hussain.  The judge  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant,  Miss
    Oseni, the appellant's brother, Mr Adebayo and Mr Adesua.    The  judge
    considered the appeal under the Immigration Rules and concluded that it
    could not succeed.  There was no counter-challenge to this finding.

5.   At [31] the judge concluded that "the question that I now have  to  ask
    is whether his case is exceptional to merit consideration under Article
    8 conventional  principles"  and  he  went  on  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant is the father of three young children with whom he has family
    life and that he has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    partner.  The judge concluded that the "gravity of consequence  of  the
    appellant's removal from the United Kingdom is such that  there  should
    be consideration under Article 8 principles".  The judge concluded that
    removal was likely to have an impact on the welfare  of  the  children.
    The  judge  at  [34]  considered  Section  117B  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  concluded  that  it  was  in  the
    appellant's favour that he is a fluent English speaker and that he  has
    maintained himself independently and is likely to do in the future. The
    judge also concluded that Ms Oseni  works  and  earns  sufficiently  to
    support the family.

6.   The judge then went on to consider reasonableness  in  the  context  of
    117B(6) and he found as follows:

         "35.  I take into account that the appellant has at least one child
             who has been in the United Kingdom for more than 7  years  and
             the final question is whether it is reasonable to expect  that
             child to leave the United Kingdom. I  find  that  it  is  not;
             firstly because it must surely be a weighty  factor  the  fact
             that not long ago the Secretary of State decided to grant this
             child, her mother, as well as her sibling who  has  been  here
             for less than 7 years, leave to remain.   In  April  2015  the
             Secretary of State decided to grant leave  to  remain  to  the
             youngest of the children. Therefore  there  appears  to  be  a
             recognition of  some  eligibility  of  the  family  (with  the
             exception of the appellant) to remain in  this  country.   The
             appellant's partner who has been here  since  the  age  of  16
             years has not left this country. She is undertaking studies as
             well as working. The  children  have  never  left  the  United
             Kingdom. They are in full-time education here.   There  is  no
             risk of recourse to public funds.  There  is  nothing  in  the
             appellant's history or conduct to suggest that his presence is
             not conducive to public good.  I accept that the appellant has
             no close relatives remaining in Nigeria.  I also  accept  that
             his wife has been an orphan since she was young.   Looking  at
             the totality of the evidence in the round, as I am required to
             do, I find that it is not reasonable to expect  the  appellant
             to rupture his family life with his partner  and  children  in
             the United Kingdom.  I also find that it is not reasonable  to
             expect the appellant's children to uproot themselves from this
             country in favour of a life in Nigeria."


Error of Law

7.   The judge materially erred in law.  The  assessment  of  reasonableness
    pursuant to section 117B (6) of the 2002 Act is inadequately  reasoned.
    There was very little evidence before the judge  relating  specifically
    to the children and their best interests.  The judge attached weight to
    what  he  perceived  to  be  recognition  of  eligibility  because  the
    appellant's partner and children had been granted  discretionary  leave
    to remain, but there was inadequate enquiry made into the basis of this
    leave  which  was  an  issue  raised  by  the  respondent.   There  was
    inadequate assessment made of the eldest child's circumstances and from
    the scant evidence relating specifically to this child it is not  clear
    how the judge reached a conclusion that it would not be  reasonable  to
    expect the child to leave the UK.  Thus the judge made a material error
    of law and I set aside the decision.

8.       It may be that if it is found, after a proper consideration of  the
    evidence, that the appeal should be  allowed  under  section  117B  (6)
    following the decision of Mr Justice McCloskey in  Treebhawon  and  Ors
    (section 117B (6) [2015] UKUT 00674, the  public  interest  in  section
    117B (6) prevails over the public interests in section 117(1) - (3) and
    there would be no need for further consideration of  the  wider  public
    interest.  In any event, the FtT purported to make a  wider  assessment
    considering section 117B generally but in doing so fell into error  for
    the reasons identified  in  the  grounds.  The  judge  did  not  attach
    sufficient weight  to  the  public  interest;  indeed  I  can  find  no
    reference to the public interest in the decision or to  the  fact  that
    the appellant has been here unlawfully since 2009.

9.       Mr Tampuri submitted that the only issue that the judge  needed  to
    consider was the impact of separation on the  family  because  that  in
    reality would be the practical  effect  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision in the light of the  fact  that  the  appellant's  family  has
    lawful status here.  However, this  is  misconceived  and  conveniently
    ignores  the  unchallenged  assertion  by  the  respondent   that   the
    appellant's wife was granted discretionary leave to remain on the basis
    that she was a single parent. In any event, discretionary leave expires
    in 2017.  It was incumbent on the judge to consider Article  8  on  the
    basis that the whole family would be returning  to  Nigeria.  They  are
    indeed all citizens of Nigeria and they are not settled here.

10.  Both parties agreed that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

11.    It is expected that both parties produce a copy  of  the  appellant's
    partner's  application  for  discretionary  leave  to  remain  and  the
    respondent's letter granting discretionary  leave  as  these  documents
    will hopefully shed light on the basis of the grant.  If the  appellant
    now wises to argue that discretionary leave  was  not  granted  on  the
    basis asserted by the respondent, this has not previously  been  raised
    and it is likely that the FtT will take that into  account  and  expect
    corroborative evidence to be produced  by  the  appellant  establishing
    that it was granted for another reason.  This is entirely a matter  for
    the judge deciding the case.

12.  The judge has made limited findings of fact at [35] and  there  it  may
    be that there is no good reason to go behind those, but ultimately that
    is a matter for the First-tier Tribunal who no doubt  will  be  hearing
    evidence afresh.

Notice of Decision

13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside and the matter  is
    remitted to the FtT.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 16 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

