
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)                        Appeal   Numbers:
IA/50258/2014
                                                            IA/50261/2014
                                                            IA/50264/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard  at  Field  House,  London                                Decision   &
Reasons Promulgated
On the 13th  July  2016                                                   On
the 25th July 2016

Before:
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY
Between:
                            MR SOLIARAJ SARAVANAN
                             MS RADHIKA RAGAVAN
                                    [H R]
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants: Ms Akther (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Mr Norton (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Veloso promulgated on the 29th October 2015, when after
      considering the Appellants' appeals on the papers, he dismissed  their
      appeals against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  to  grant  them
      Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of  their  Human
      Rights under Article 8, both under the Immigration Rules  and  outside
      of the Immigration Rules.

   2. Within the Grounds of Appeal, the Appellants  seek  to  argue  that  a
      letter was sent to the Tribunal on the 22nd October  2015,  requesting
      an oral hearing, and containing evidence that the Third Appellant  was
      now naturalised as a British Citizen, but that the Learned  Judge  did
      not have the letter of the 22nd  October  2015  before  him.   It  was
      further argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed  to  consider
      that the Third Appellant was not being removed as a child who was only
      4 or 7 years old, but as a 10-year-old child who had  been  integrated
      into the United Kingdom and that the Respondent's  own  IDI  indicated
      that there would have to be strong reasons for it to be reasonable  to
      expect the child to leave  the  UK  in  such  circumstances.   It  was
      further argued that the Judge had applied too high a threshold  as  to
      what would be deemed unreasonable.  It is said that the  Judge  failed
      to properly consider the best interests of the child.

   3. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Robertson on the 7th June 2016  on  the  basis  that  the  Appellants'
      representatives had written to the Tribunal by means of  a  fax  dated
      the 22nd October 2015, asking that the appeal be heard by means of  an
      oral hearing rather than a written determination, and at the same time
      enclosing a Certificate of Registration of the Third  Appellant  as  a
      British Citizen.  Judge Robertson found  that  it  was  arguable  that
      there were procedural errors in  that  no  decision  was  made  as  to
      whether or not the appeal should proceed on the papers  and  that  the
      additional  evidence  provided  to  the  Tribunal  seemingly  was  not
      forwarded  to  the  Judge  and  that  the  Appellants  were   arguably
      prejudiced as a result of these failings.

   4. At the oral hearing before me, Mr Norton on behalf of  the  Respondent
      agreed that it seemed unlikely that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Veloso
      had the fax from the Appellants' solicitors  dated  the  22nd  October
      2015  before  him.   Mr  Norton  agreed  that  there  was   procedural
      unfairness for the Judge simply to have dealt with  the  case  on  the
      papers, where the Appellants' solicitors had sent in a fax  requesting
      for the appeal to be considered at an  oral  hearing,  despite  having
      previously requested it be dealt with on the papers, and that in  such
      circumstances, the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso should
      be set aside and the case remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for
      a hearing de novo before a different First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   In
      light of that concession quite properly made, I agree and do find that
      there was procedural unfairness, in that  seemingly,  the  Appellants'
      fax dated  the  22nd  October  2015,  indicating  that  they  had  now
      requested the appeal be dealt with by means of an oral hearing, rather
      than a paper hearing, and also which contained evidence regarding  the
      Third Appellant now being naturalised as a British Citizen, either had
      not reached, First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso, on  the  file,  or  for
      whatever reason, was not considered by him,  before  he  produced  his
      decision dated the 29th October 2015.

   5.  There is no reference whatsoever  to  that  fax  requesting  an  oral
      hearing, and, the Judge makes specific reference simply  to  the  fact
      that the Appellants' solicitors had sent a fax to the Tribunal on  the
      7th September 2015 indicating that the First Appellant wished for  the
      appeal to be dealt with on the papers, because he had been  unable  to
      arrange funding for the oral representation at the hearing at [6]  and
      did not make any reference to the subsequent fax.  Further, the  Judge
      also simply stated that the  Third  Appellant  did  not  have  British
      Citizenship, and had clearly therefore not seen the evidence regarding
      the fact that the Third Appellant had, prima facie,  been  naturalised
      as a British Citizen.  In such circumstances,  given  that  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Veloso did not consider the contents of the  fax  dated
      the 22nd October 2015, requesting that the case be dealt with by means
      of an oral hearing, and further, containing further evidence regarding
      the Third  Appellant's  naturalisation,  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Veloso does contain a material error of law and is  set
      aside.  The case should be remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      for an oral hearing de novo,  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso.



Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Veloso  does  contain  a  material
error of law and is set aside;

The appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing as  an
oral hearing de novo, before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-
tier Tribunal Judge Veloso.

Signed
[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  McGinty                                  Dated
16th July 2016
