

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50971/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 8th January 2016                           |On 1st June 2016             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MRS. ARULCHELVI MANGALESWARAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everritt;   Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms K Wass;       Counsel instructed by Sri Kanth &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. This is an appeal against  a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Fowell promulgated on  1st  July  2015  in  which  he
       allowed an appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of  State
       on  2nd  December  2014  to  refuse  an  application  made  by   Mrs
       Magaleswaran for leave to remain in the  UK  on  the  basis  of  her
       family  and  private  life  in  the  UK   with   her   husband,   Mr
       Mangaleswaran.


    2. The appellant before me, is the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department and the respondent to  this  appeal,  is  Mrs  Arulchelvi
       Mangaleswaran.  However for ease of reference, in the course of this
       decision I shall adopt the parties' status  as  it  was  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal.   I  shall  in  this  decision,  refer  to  Mrs
       Mangaleswaran as the appellant and the Secretary  of  State  as  the
       respondent.


    3. The appellant is a Sri Lankan.  The background to the decision of the
       First-tier Tribunal is set out at  paragraphs  [2]  to  [11]  of  the
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  Importantly, at  paragraph  [8]
       of his decision the Judge sets out the relevant passage of a previous
       decision made by  Immigration  Judge  Maciel,  following  a  previous
       refusal by the respondent of an application made by the appellant  in
       February 2012 for a variation of her leave  to  remain.   Immigration
       Judge Maciel  found  that  the  appellant's  husband,  a  Sri  Lankan
       national,  does  not  have  an  objectively  well  founded  fear   of
       persecution upon return to Sri Lanka.  However, he found that even if
       the appellant were removed to Sri Lanka, her husband would not return
       with her. The appellant's husband was  emphatic  that  he  would  not
       return to Sri Lanka.  Immigration Judge Maciel found that this is not
       simply a matter of choice as to where the couple will live, but  that
       the appellant's husband will not return to Sri  Lanka  regardless  of
       whether his wife will have to return  on  her  own,  as  he  holds  a
       subjective fear  of  return.  Immigration  Judge  Maciel  found  that
       refusal to  grant  the  appellant  leave  to  remain  amounts  to  an
       interference in the couple's right to a family life.  Following  that
       decision, the appellant was granted a residence permit on 3rd January
       2014 giving her limited leave to remain until 12th October 2014.


    4. Notwithstanding his evidence before  Immigration  Judge  Maciel,  the
       appellant's husband did return to Sri Lanka  in  May  2014  with  the
       appellant. At paragraphs [12] to [15]  of  his  decision,  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Fowell sets out the evidence heard from the  appellant
       and her husband, and at paragraphs [19] to [24] of the decision,  the
       Judge has set out his findings and conclusions.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell


    5. At paragraphs [19] and [20] of his  decision,  the  Judge  notes  the
       proper approach to previous determinations and records that the  only
       circumstance which has altered from the previous  appeal  hearing  is
       the trip to Sri Lanka that has taken place in May 2014 and  that  was
       referred to in the evidence.  The Judge accepted the submission  made
       on behalf of the appellant that the events that had occurred  in  Sri
       Lanka  during  that  visit  bolstered,  rather  than  weakened,   the
       appellant's case.


    6. The Judge states at paragraphs [21] to [24] of his decision:


           "21.  I accept the evidence  given  by  the  appellant  and  her
           husband and found that they were both credible witnesses.  Their
           accounts were detailed, plausible and  mutually  supportive.   I
           accept their account of the interviews and other events  in  Sri
           Lanka, and I find that Mr Mangalaswaran remains subject  to  the
           same subjective fear of return.


           22.   In reaching that conclusion I note  the  country  guidance
           case of GJ, referred to above. The Upper Tribunal in  that  case
           considered evidence that individuals  had  been  ill-treated  on
           return to Sri Lanka but did not accept therefore [sic] that  all
           Tamils are at risk on return.   They concluded that the focus of
           the Sri Lankan government's concern has changed since the  civil
           war ended in May 2009; the LTTE  is  a  spent  force  and  their
           present objective is to identify Tamil activists in the Diaspora
           who were working for  Tamil  separatism  and  to  undermine  the
           government.  It noted that if a person is detained  by  the  Sri
           Lankan security services  there  remains  a  real  risk  of  ill
           treatment or harm requiring international protection.   This  is
           not to say that Mr Mangaleswaran's fear is objectively justified
           - that is not an issue I need to determine but it does at  least
           lend some colour to his fear, and supports my view  that  it  is
           genuine rather than affected for the purpose of this appeal.


           23.   The appellant's legal position has also changed in that on
           the last occasion her husband had only discretionary  leave  and
           so she could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules,
           even if there were insurmountable obstacles to their  return  to
           Sri Lanka.   Accordingly no finding was made on that that issue.
             Given the above, and the fact that she would  be  required  to
           return alone, I  find  that  this  must  inevitably  act  as  an
           insurmountable obstacle to continuing her  relationship  in  Sri
           Lanka.


           24.   It is not therefore necessary to consider her rights under
           Article  8  ECHR  separately,  and  there  are   no   compelling
           circumstances to suggest  that  the  "insurmountable  obstacles"
           test does not properly reflect their rights under Article 8,  as
           required by Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  v  SS
           (Congo) [20151 EWCA Civ 387. For  completeness  however,  if  it
           were necessary to do so, I can see no basis to depart  from  the
           previous assessment made and quoted above.


 The grounds of appeal and the hearing before me


    7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer
       on 30th October 2015.   The  matter  comes  before  me  to  consider
       whether or not the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fowell
       involved the making of a material error of law, and if  so,  to  re-
       make the decision.


    8. The respondent submits that the Judge appears to  have  allowed  the
       appeal under paragraph EX.1(b) of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
       Rules having found that there are insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
       appellant's partner returning to Sri Lanka on the basis that he  has
       a fear of the Sri  Lankan  authorities.  However,  both  Immigration
       Judge Maciel, at paragraph [18]  of  his  decision,  and  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Fowell, at paragraph [22] of his decision, found that
       the appellant's husband does not have  an  objectively  well-founded
       fear of persecution  upon  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   The  respondent
       submits that with that  in  mind,  the  Judge  has  failed  to  give
       adequate reasons for  his  finding  that  there  are  insurmountable
       obstacles  to  the  appellant  and  her  husband  continuing   their
       relationship together in Sri Lanka.


    9. Mrs Everritt submits that whilst the appellant's husband may have  a
       subjective fear of return to Sri Lanka, the  fact  that  he  may  be
       unwilling to return to Sri Lanka in the absence  of  an  objectively
       well-founded fear  of  persecution,  is  not  enough  to  amount  to
       insurmountable obstacles that prevent the appellant and her  husband
       from continuing their relationship in Sri Lanka.  She  submits  that
       the "insurmountable obstacles" test establishes a high threshold and
       that in this case, there is no evidence that the appellant's husband
       would now be at risk upon return.  She submits that the  appellant's
       husband does not fall within one of the risk  categories  identified
       in the country guidance decision of GJ and others  (post-civil  war:
       returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).  She submits that the
       Judge erred at paragraph [22] of his decision that he did  not  need
       to  determine  whether  Mr  Mangaleswaran's  fear   is   objectively
       justified and that the appellant's husband's claim that he will  not
       return to Sri Lanka with  his  wife,  is  essentially  a  matter  of
       choice.


   10. The appellant has filed a rule 24 response, the content of which was
       adopted by Ms Wass.  She submits that the Judge carefully considered
       the reasons why the appellant's husband would refuse  to  return  to
       Sri Lanka and that it was open to the Judge to find  that  following
       the events of May 2014, the appellant's husband will not  return  to
       Sri Lanka.  She submits that the fact that he will not return to Sri
       Lanka is capable of being an insurmountable obstacle  that  prevents
       the appellant and her husband from continuing their relationship  in
       Sri Lanka.   In  the  alternative,  she  submits  that  if  it  were
       necessary to determine whether the appellant's husband has  a  well-
       founded fear  of  persecution,  I  should  find  that  the  fear  is
       objectively well founded.


 Discussion


   11. The issue for me to decide is whether or not the Judge  was  entitled
       to conclude that there are insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant
       and her husband continuing their relationship in Sri Lanka.


   12. In that respect I follow the guidance of the Court of Appeal in  R  &
       ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court of Appeal held that
       a finding might only be set aside for error of law on the grounds  of
       perversity if it was irrational or  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury
       sense, or one that was wholly unsupported by the evidence.  A finding
       that  is  "perverse"  embraces  findings  that  are   irrational   or
       unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense, and findings of fact  that  are
       wholly unsupported by the evidence.  On appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal
       should not overturn a judgment at first instance,  unless  it  really
       could not understand the original judge's thought process when he was
       making material findings. I apply that guidance to  my  consideration
       of the decision in this appeal.


   13. I have also had regard to the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
       Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT  00085  IAC
       where it was stated in the head note that:


           "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief  explanation  of
           the conclusions on the central issue  on  which  the  appeal  is
           determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the  decision
           as a whole makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted
           by the judge."


   14. It is useful to set out the requirements  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  of
       Appendix FM insofar as it is material to this appeal.


           EX.1. This paragraph applies if


           ....


           (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
           a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in
           the  UK  or  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or  humanitarian
           protection, and there are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family
           life with that partner continuing outside the UK.


           EX.2. For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
           obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would
           be faced by the applicant or their partner in  continuing  their
           family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
           overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
           or their partner.


   15. The phrase "insurmountable obstacles" as used in EX1 of the Rules has
       been described as significantly more demanding than a  mere  test  of
       whether it would be reasonable to expect a couple to  continue  their
       family life outside of the UK. The phrase "used in the Rules"  is  to
       be interpreted in a sensible and practical way rather than an  overly
       literal way and in the decision of Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules  -
       correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  it  was  held  that  the  term
       "insurmountable  obstacles"  in  provisions  such  as  EX1  are   not
       obstacles which are impossible to surmount and that they concern  the
       practical possibilities of relocation (see MF (Article 8 - new Rules)
       Nigeria [2012] UKUT 393 and Izuazu (Article 8  -  new  Rules)  [2013]
       UKUT 45.


   16. There is no doubt  that  the  Judge  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
       appellant and her husband as to  what  happened  to  the  appellant's
       husband when they returned to Sri Lanka in May 2014.  The  Judge,  at
       paragraph [20] accepted that  those  events  bolstered,  rather  than
       weakened, the appellants case and the  close  interest  paid  to  the
       appellant's husband had only served to increase his subjective  fear.




   17. At paragraph [22] the Judge refers to the country  guidance  decision
       of GJ  and  appears  to  accept,  as  did  Immigration  Judge  Maciel
       previously, that the appellant's husband has  a  subjective  fear  of
       return to  Sri  Lanka.   However,  the  Judge  did  not  consider  it
       necessary  to  determine  whether   Mr.   Mangaleswaran's   fear   is
       objectively justified.  In my  judgement,  in  failing  to  determine
       whether    Mr. Mangaleswaran's fear  is  objectively  justified,  the
       Judge erred in law.  The appellant and her  husband  are  Sri  Lankan
       nationals.  Mr. Mangaleswaran has indefinite leave to remain  in  the
       UK.  The entire thrust  of  the  appellant's  claim  that  there  are
       insurmountable obstacles to family life between the appellant and her
       husband continuing outside the UK appears to have been the fear  that
       her husband has of return to Sri Lanka.   Mr.  Mangaleswaran  clearly
       has a subjective fear, but whether there are insurmountable obstacles
       to  the  family  life  continuing  in  Sri  Lanka  would  require  an
       assessment of  whether  that  subjective  fear  is  objectively  well
       founded.


   18. The question for the First-tier Tribunal Judge was therefore  whether
       the subjective fear held by the appellant's husband  was  objectively
       well founded.  Immigration Judge Maciel had previously found,  having
       considered the country  guidance  case  of  GJ  that  the  appellants
       husband does not have an objectively well-founded fear of persecution
       upon return to Sri Lanka.  At paragraph [22] of his decision,  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Fowell appears to proceed upon the basis that the
       matters referred to in GJ provide some support for the account  given
       by the appellant  and  her  husband  of  the  difficulties  that  the
       appellant's husband encountered when they returned to  Sri  Lanka  in
       May 2014.  If the  husband's  fear  of  return  is  objectively  well
       founded that is  plainly  capable  of  establishing  that  there  are
       insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing  outside  the  UK.
       If the husband's fear of return is not objectively well  founded,  in
       my judgement the Judge  has  failed  to  give  any  reasons  for  his
       conclusion that the appellant would be  required  to  return  to  Sri
       Lanka alone, and there are insurmountable obstacles to continuing the
       relationship in Sri Lanka.  The fact  that  the  appellant's  husband
       might again be emphatic that he will not return to Sri Lanka, is  not
       in my  judgement  enough  to  establish  that  there  would  be  very
       significant difficulties faced by the appellant and  her  husband  in
       continuing their family life together outside the UK, and which could
       not be overcome  or  would  entail  very  serious  hardship  for  the
       appellant and her husband, as required under EX.1(b).


   19. For the above reasons, in my judgement the decision of the First-tier
       Tribunal to allow the appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
       That decision is set aside.


Re-making the decision


   20. Directions were issued to the  parties  in  advance  of  the  hearing
       before me requiring the parties to prepare for  the  hearing  on  the
       basis  that,  if  the  Upper  Tribunal  decides  to  set  aside   the
       determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  any  further  evidence,
       including supplementary oral evidence, that the  Upper  Tribunal  may
       need to consider if it decides to re-make the  decision,  can  be  so
       considered at that hearing. No further evidence was  relied  upon  by
       the appellant and there was no  application  made  pursuant  to  rule
       15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


   21. At the hearing before me, Ms Wass submitted that I should  find  that
       the appellant's husband  has  an  objectively  well-founded  fear  of
       return to Sri Lanka such that there are insurmountable  obstacles  to
       the couple continuing their  relationship in Sri Lanka.


   22. In remaking the decision, I have had regard to the evidence  that  is
       set out at paragraphs [13] to [14] of the decision of the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge and his  finding  at  paragraph  [21]  that  both  the
       appellant and her husband are credible witnesses and accepting  their
       account of events in May 2014.


   23. GJ and Others (Post civil war returnees)  has  established  that  the
       focus of the Sri Lankan government's concern has  changed  since  the
       civil war ended  in  May  2009  and  that  the  government's  present
       objective is to identify Tamil activists in  the  diaspora  who  were
       working for Tamil separatism  and  to  destabilise  the  unitary  Sri
       Lankan state. It was also accepted that the risk for  those  in  whom
       the Sri Lankan authorities were interested, existed  not  necessarily
       at the airport but after the arrival in their home area  where  their
       arrival would be verified by the CID  or  police  within  days.  That
       said, the head note of GJ confirms that individuals who are perceived
       to be a threat to the integrity  of  Sri  Lanka  as  a  single  state
       because they are perceived to have a significant role in relation  to
       post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  were  those  who
       would be at risk. The Sri Lankan authorities' approach  is  based  on
       the sophisticated intelligence basis to activities within  Sri  Lanka
       and in the diaspora and they are aware that many Sri  Lankans  travel
       abroad as economic migrants.


   24. The appellant and her husband were interviewed at  the  airport  when
       they returned in May 2014.  The appellant was interviewed  for  about
       15 minutes and her husband for about an hour.  The army had  attended
       the appellant's mother-in-law's house to look for them and her mother-
       in-law had paid a bribe for the soldiers to go away.   The  appellant
       and her husband had travelled to India  with  her  mother-in-law  and
       encountered no problems in leaving, but when they returned a few days
       later, the three of them were  interviewed  again.   The  appellant's
       husband had said that if they called  him  for  interview,  he  would
       attend, and they allowed him to go.   The appellant and  her  husband
       gave the same address as  previously.   They  left  for  the  UK  the
       following day.  At the airport the appellant's husband was  asked  if
       he would be returning, and he  said  yes,  because  of  his  mother's
       illness, and so they let them go.


   25. I have had regard  to  the  risk  categories  identified  in  CG  and
       considered whether there is anything within the  additional  evidence
       arising from the events of  May  2014  that  undermine  the  previous
       finding of Immigration Judge Maciel that the appellant's husband does
       not have an objective fear of persecution upon return to  Sri  Lanka.
       The head note in CG identifies the risk categories:


           (7)  The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real   risk   of
           persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in
           detention or otherwise, are:


                (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat to
                the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single  state  because  they
                are, or are perceived to have a significant role in relation
                to post-  conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora
                and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


                 (b) Journalists (whether in print or other media) or  human
                rights activists, who, in either case, have  criticised  the
                Sri  Lankan  government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
                record, or who are associated with publications critical  of
                the Sri Lankan government.


                (c) Individuals who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
                Learned and Reconciliation Commission  implicating  the  Sri
                Lankan security forces,  armed  forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
                authorities in alleged war crimes. Among those who may  have
                witnessed war crimes during the  conflict,  particularly  in
                the No-Fire Zones in May 2009, only those who  have  already
                identified themselves by giving such evidence would be known
                to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they are at
                real risk of adverse attention or persecution on  return  as
                potential or actual war crimes witnesses.


                (d) A person whose name appears  on  a  computerised  "stop"
                list accessible at the airport, comprising a list  of  those
                against whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                warrant. Individuals whose name appears  on  a  "stop"  list
                will be stopped at  the  airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                appropriate Sri Lankan authorities,  in  pursuance  of  such
                order or warrant.


           (8)  The  Sri  Lankan  authorities'   approach   is   based   on
           sophisticated intelligence, both as  to  activities  within  Sri
           Lanka and in the diaspora. The Sri Lankan authorities know  that
           many Sri Lankan Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and
           also that everyone in the Northern Province had  some  level  of
           involvement with the LTTE during the civil war. In post-conflict
           Sri Lanka, an individual's past history will be relevant only to
           the extent that it is perceived by the Sri Lankan authorities as
           indicating a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state or the
           Sri Lankan Government.


           (9) The authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
           "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch"  list  is
           not reasonably likely to be detained at the airport but will  be
           monitored by the security services after his or her  return.  If
           that monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a  Tamil
           activist working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state  or
           revive the internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question
           is not, in general, reasonably likely  to  be  detained  by  the
           security forces. That will be a question of fact in  each  case,
           dependent on any diaspora activities  carried  out  by  such  an
           individual.


   26. I have noted above the evidence that has been accepted regarding  the
       appellant and her husband.  The events  of  May  2014  post-date  the
       decision of Immigration Judge Maciel and so I am  not  bound  by  his
       finding that the appellant's husband does not have an objective  fear
       of persecution upon  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   Even  so,  and  having
       carefully considered the  applleant  and  her  husband's  account  of
       events in my judgement, there is nothing in the events  of  May  2014
       that brings the appellant's husband into one of the  risk  categories
       identified.


   27. The appellant's husband is not, or is not perceived to be a threat to
       the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  he  is,  or  is
       perceived to have a significant role  in  relation  to  post-conflict
       Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a renewal of  hostilities
       within Sri Lanka.  The appellant's husband is not a person whose name
       appears on a computerised "stop"  list  accessible  at  the  airport,
       comprising a list of those against whom  there  is  an  extant  court
       order or arrest warrant. Whilst he was stopped at the airport, he was
       not handed  over  to  the  appropriate  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  in
       pursuance of such order or warrant.  There is no suggestion  that  he
       is a present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan state or the  Sri  Lankan
       Government


   28. In May 2014 both the appellant and her husband were released  at  the
       airport.  If the appellant's  husband  was  monitored,  there  is  no
       evidence that he is a  Tamil  activist  working  to  destabilise  the
       unitary Sri Lankan state or revive the internal armed  conflict.   In
       my judgement,  given  his  profile  and  background  the  appellant's
       husband is  not  therefore,  in  general,  reasonably  likely  to  be
       detained by the security forces.


   29. It follows that in my judgement, the  appellant's  husband  does  not
       have a well-founded objective fear of  return  to  Sri  Lanka.   What
       remains is his claim that he will not return to Sri  Lanka  with  his
       wife.


   30. The immigration rules embrace a wide spectrum of status in  the  word
       'settled': it includes both British citizens living  in  the  UK  and
       nationals of other countries who have indefinite leave  to  enter  or
       remain here. There can be a world of  difference,  depending  on  the
       particular case, between expecting a  foreign  national,  albeit  now
       settled here, to return with his  family  to  his  country,  and  for
       example expecting a British citizen who has lived  here  all  of  his
       life and has an inalienable right of abode here, to live and work and
       find accommodation in a foreign country or forfeit his marriage.   In
       the absence of a well-founded fear of return to Sri Lanka on the part
       of the appellant's husband, there is nothing to  establish  the  very
       significant difficulties which would be faced by  the  appellant  and
       her husband continuing their family life together outside the UK, and
       which could not be overcome or would entail very serious hardship for
       the appellant or her husband.


   31. Having found that the appellant cannot succeed in her Article 8 claim
       under the immigration rules, I remind myself that the  Tribunal  must
       identify other non-standard and particular features of the case, that
       are of an exceptional nature to justify an assessment of the  Article
       8 claim outwith the rules:  SS (Congo) -v- SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  387.
       In my judgement, there are no compelling or exceptional circumstances
       that  I  have  not  already   considered,   to   suggest   that   the
       "insurmountable  obstacles"  test  does  not  properly  reflect   the
       appellant and her husband's rights under Article 8 ECHR.


   32. Accordingly the appeal is dismissed under the Immigration  Rules  and
       on Article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision


   33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law such that it is set aside.


   34. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on Article  8
       grounds.


   35. No anonymity direction is made.





Signed      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia   Date 1st June 2016





TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


As I have set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  dismissed
the appeal, there can be no fee award


Signed      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

