
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50321/2013
                                                               IA/50327/2013
                                                               IA/50338/2013
                                                               IA/50331/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12th August 2014                           |On 22nd August 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M G K
                                    A M K
                                    G R K
                                    A R K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                       Claimants/Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimants/Respondents:  Mr Khan, Counsel, instructed by Bukhari
Chambers

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The claimants are nationals of Pakistan.  The first is the wife of  the
    second.  There are two  sons  born  on  28th  December  2004  and  13th
    December 2009 respectively.  None have any settled status in the United
    Kingdom.

2.   The first claimant came to the United Kingdom on 7th January 2007 as  a
    student and subsequently the other members of the family came  to  join
    her, with the exception of the fourth claimant, who  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom.

3.   The claimants applied for discretionary leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom on 7th March 2014.  Their  applications  were  refused  on  the
    basis that they could not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and that their situation was not exceptional.

4.   The claimants sought to appeal  against  that  decision,  which  appeal
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Flower on 28th February 2014.

5.   The appeals were allowed.

6.   The central basis of the  claim  as  presented  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was  the  very  complex  medical  needs  of  the  fourth
    claimant and how those needs could not reasonably be effectively met if
    returned to Pakistan.  It was also said of the third claimant  that  he
    had spent much of his time in the United Kingdom and that removal would
    be a significant disruption to his studies and his  life.   Clearly  it
    would not be reasonable to expect the first and the second claimants to
    leave the United Kingdom without their children.

7.   Although it is not entirely clear from the findings of  the  Judge,  it
    is apparent from reading the determination as a whole, that  the  Judge
    considered that the  circumstances  of  the  fourth  claimant  were  so
    compelling as to make it unreasonable and  disproportionate  to  remove
    him from the jurisdiction.  She also found  that  requiring  the  third
    claimant to return to Pakistan at this stage would be disproportionate.
     Clearly therefore all appeals were allowed in line one with the other.

8.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department seeks to appeal  against
    that decision to argue that the Judge failed to follow  the  guidelines
    in Gulshan and in any event made an inconsistent finding  at  paragraph
    44 with that at 45.

9.   Leave to appeal was granted on that basis.

10.  It is to be noted in fairness to the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department, that the inconsistency was not part of the original grounds
    of appeal but seems to have been a matter which was considered  in  the
    grant of permission.  It seems to me that that is a matter that  really
    is entirely attributable to a  typographical  error.   It  is  entirely
    understandable, when reading paragraphs 1 to 43 what  it  is  that  the
    Judge is seeking to say.  The  conclusions  in  paragraph  43  entirely
    reflect the considerations that precede it.  Those  conclusions  in  43
    being as follows:-

         "43. In light of my considerations and findings,  I  conclude  that
             the  immigration  decisions  are   not   proportionate.    The
             circumstances that  would  face  the  appellants  should  they
             return to Pakistan would be unjustifiably harsh.   Moving  the
             fourth appellant could be damaging to his health, and  on  the
             medical evidence provided to me today it could be  potentially
             life-threatening.  The physical integrity  of  such  a  small,
             sick and vulnerable child far outweighs the need  to  maintain
             immigration control.

         44.  "As the appellants have not  succeeded  in  showing  that  the
             immigration decisions are contrary to the Immigration Rules or
             the Human Rights Convention the appeals fail."


         45.  The appeals of all four appellants are allowed."

11.  It is far from clear to me what paragraph 44 means but it  is  entirely
    clear that it is quite inconsistent with the previous reasoning. It may
    be that the Judge was merely recognising that the  appellants  did  not
    meet the Immigration Rules, which was accepted in any event.

12.  There is considerable  Judicial  discussion  around  the  decisions  in
    Gulshan and Nagre as can be seen from the  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985.

13.  The  general  jurisprudence,  however,  would  seem  to  be  relatively
    clearly established, namely that if  the  appellants  cannot  meet  the
    Immigration Rules it will only be  in   compelling  circumstances  that
    they would be able to show that removal was disproportionate  in  terms
    of Article 8 of the ECHR.

14.  What is entirely clear from the determination is  that  the  Judge  had
    formed the assessment, for very good reasons on  the  medical  evidence
    that has been  presented  and  which  is  set  out  in  detail  in  the
    determination that the complex medical needs  of  the  fourth  claimant
    took this case out of  the  normal  and  that  such  was  a  compelling
    circumstance which  rendered  his  removal  disproportionate..   Indeed
    whether it is compelling, exceptional or unduly harsh  perhaps  matters
    little in terms of expression, given the way in  which  the  Judge  has
    expressed the matter in paragraph 43 which I have set out.

15.  Mr Richards noted my concerns but invited me to find that  nevertheless
    there was a material error of law in the approach taken by  the  Judge.
    For my part I find the grounds  to  be  wholly  unrealistic  when  they
    contend that the Immigration Judge has not given any  consideration  as
    to whether there are case-specific  good  grounds  for  granting  leave
    outside the Rules in compelling circumstances not recognised under  the
    Rules.  The Judge has done precisely that and has been careful  in  the
    analysis both  of  the  factual  basis  of  that  concern  and  of  the
    applicability of the law.

16.  It is entirely open to the Judge to have found,  in  the  circumstances
    of this case that the medical condition of the fourth claimant  was  of
    such complexity and of life-threatening nature that  his  removal  from
    the United Kingdom would present a very real threat to his  health  and
    life such that the decision to do so was disproportionate.  Given those
    findings it is  also  entirely  understandable  why  it  would  not  be
    proportionate to expect the other family members to return.

17.  I expressed some concern  to  Mr  Richards  as  to  whether  the  third
    claimant  standing  by  himself  should  succeed  under   the   current
    jurisprudence  but  that  is  perhaps  largely   academic   given   the
    sustainable findings made as to the fourth claimant.

18.  In the circumstances therefore the Secretary of State's  appeal  before
    the Upper Tribunal  is  dismissed.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is upheld, namely that it would be disproportionate to  remove
    the claimants from the jurisdiction, certainly until the health of  the
    fourth claimant would safely permit such removal.

19.  Mr Khan, who represents the claimants, invited me to indicate a  period
    of time in which removal should not take place.  It seems  to  me  that
    that is not my function.  Had I been dealing with  the  matter  as  the
    Judge hearing the merits then it is clearly open to  me  to  specify  a
    minimum period.  It would be  open,  however,  to  the  representatives
    acting on behalf of the claimants to raise those matters directly  with
    the Secretary of State for the Home Department if a  reasonable  period
    of leave can be granted  in  the  initial  stages.   I  indicated  that
    perhaps a medical report indicating a prognosis of improvement would be
    a helpful document to obtain before any request is  made  as  that  may
    helpfully inform what would be a  reasonable  period  of  leave  to  be
    granted at least initially.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  claimants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimants and to the Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

