
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
IA/50861/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 27th May 2016                           |On 1st July 2016           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between


                                MA PAZ BURNS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mrs J Moore, solicitor, Drummond Miller LLP
For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. We have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances and  evidence  We
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.




2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge McGavin, promulgated on 5 August 2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 4 December  1987  and  is  a  national  of  the
Philippines. On 24 September 2014 the appellant applied for leave to  remain
in the UK both as a partner and as a parent.


4. On 3 December  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge McGavin ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 9 December 2015 Judge Frankish  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "3. There is extensive discussion  ([22]  -  [24])  of  the  deception
      allegation the outcome of which appears to be that  it  is  made  out.
      Arguably, however, this is not clearly stated. With a British  Citizen
      husband and two British Citizen children,  it  is  arguable  that  the
      lifting  of  the  presumption  in  s.117B  has   been   insufficiently
      considered."

The Hearing

7. (a) Mrs Moore, solicitor for the appellant, moved the grounds of  appeal.
She told us that although there are four grounds of  appeal  they  all  fall
under the umbrella of one argument, and that is that  the  Judge  failed  to
properly apply section 117B(6) of the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum
Act 2002. She told us that her argument would draw heavily on  the  case  of
Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC.

(b) Mrs Moore told us that the Judge had failed to take  proper  account  of
the  impact  of  separation  between  the  appellant's  children   and   the
appellant. She told us that the question which should  have  been  posed  is
"what will happen to the children if the appellant had to  leave  the  UK?".
She emphasised that the appellant's British citizen spouse cannot  meet  the
financial requirements of appendix FM, and argued that  section  117B(6)  of
the  2002  Act  is  designed  to  protect  British  citizen  children   from
separation in circumstances such as this case.

(c) Mrs Moore told us that the appellant's British citizen husband only  had
restricted  holiday  entitlement  from  his   employment,   and   that   the
appellant's British citizen children are now both in primary school  in  the
UK. She relied heavily on a letter from  the  head-teacher  of  the  primary
school. When pressed, she accepted that the appellant's  two  children  have
dual nationality, and that no evidence was produced of the education  system
in the Philippines, but argued that the decision-maker had failed to take  a
child centred approach to this case. She emphasised  that  this  family  has
never been separated before, and fears separation.

(d) Mrs Moore told us that the decision  contains  material  errors  of  law
because the Judge failed to properly interpret section 117B(6) of  the  2002
Act, and that failure undermines the proportionality  assessment  and  flies
in the face of the ratio in the case of Trebhowan. She emphasised  that,  if
the appellant returns to the Philippines to seek entry clearance,  there  is
the potential of the  separation  for  between  four  and  six  months.  She
referred us to the respondent's IDIs of August 2015, and told us that  there
is nothing in either the IDIs or in statute which  qualifies  the  terms  of
section 117B(6). She stressed the  importance  of  the  public  interest  in
protecting children and argued that that public  interest  is  reflected  in
the wording of section 117 which, she told us, is an absolute.

(e) Mrs Moore reminded us of section EX-1 of appendix  FM,  and  once  again
reminded us of the importance of  taking  the  British  Citizenship  of  the
children as a starting point.  She  explained  that  the  appellant  is  the
principal carer for the children and that their father  worked  long  hours,
traveling to other European countries in the course of his  employment.  She
told us that the impact of the  respondent's  decision  on  the  appellant's
children could not be said to  be  reasonable.  She  urged  us  to  set  the
decision aside and decide the case of new by allowing the appeal.

8. (a) For the respondent, Mr Matthews told us that the  decision  does  not
contain any errors, material or otherwise. He told us that  the  appellant's
children are not required to leave the UK: only the  appellant  is  required
to return to the Philippines to make an application for entry clearance;  in
the meantime the appellant's British  citizen  children  can  be  adequately
cared for in the UK  by  their  British  father.  He  was  critical  of  the
appellant for pleading her case entirely on  a  "worst-case  scenario",  and
told us that a balanced view of this case indicated that  this  family  were
able to live and work in the Philippines before they decided to  uproot  the
children and start life again in Falkirk.

(b) He told us that, even if it is not reasonable to expect the children  to
leave the UK, that is not the only public  interest  factor.  He  emphasised
that other public interest factors do not fall out  of  account  because  of
the reasonableness test found  in  section  117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act.  Mr
Matthews told us that the decision requires only the appellant to leave  the
UK and, at that, only to leave the UK  temporarily.  He  told  us  that  the
temporary absence from the UK does not constitute "leaving  the  UK"  within
the meaning of section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act. He asked us to  dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand.




Analysis

9. Section117B(6) of the 2002 Act provides for the  exceptional  case  where
the public interest does not require the removal of  a  person  who  is  not
liable to deportation in a case where (i) he has a  genuine  and  subsisting
parental relationship with a child who is either a British  citizen  or  has
settled status and (ii) it would not be reasonable to expect  the  child  to
leave the United Kingdom.

10. Paragraph 11.2.3. of the respondent's IDIs on Family Migration  provides
the respondent's decision makers with guidance on  cases  involving  British
children. The August 2015 version  states  that,  save  in  cases  involving
criminality, the decision maker must not take a decision in relation to  the
parent or primary carer of a British Citizen child where the effect of  that
decision would be to force that British child to leave  the  EU,  regardless
of the age of that child. However, it also states that "where a decision  to
refuse the application would require a parent or primary carer to return  to
a country outside the EU, the case must always  be  assessed  on  the  basis
that it would be unreasonable to expect a British  Citizen  child  to  leave
the EU with that parent or primary carer".

11. For the appellant, it is  argued  that  her  two  children  are  British
citizens and that the appellant fulfils the requirements of Appendix  FM  of
the Immigration Rules because the  appellant  has  a  parental  relationship
with a British citizen child.

12. In Treebhawon and others (section 117B(6)) [2015] UKUT 674 (IAC) it  was
held that (i)  Section 117B (6) is a reflection  of  the  distinction  which
Parliament has chosen to make between persons who  are,  and  who  are  not,
liable to deportation.  In  any  case  where  the  conditions  enshrined  in
section 117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  are
satisfied, the section 117B(6) public  interest  prevails  over  the  public
interests identified in section 117B (1)-(3); (ii) Section 117B (4) and  (5)
are not parliamentary prescriptions of the  public  interest.  Rather,  they
operate as instructions to courts and  tribunals  to  be  applied  in  cases
where the balancing exercise  is  being  conducted  in  order  to  determine
proportionality under Article 8 ECHR, in cases where either of  the  factors
which they identify arises.

13. This appeal raises the question of whether or not  the  Judge  addressed
the reasonableness of the potential for a temporary absence from the UK  for
two British citizen children. We do not  agree  with  Mrs  Moore's  argument
that the wording of section 117B is in absolute terms and  so  incapable  of
anything other than rigid interpretation. It is obvious  that  the  test  is
the question of reasonableness. Applying the test  of  reasonableness  calls
for an exercise of common sense. It requires consideration of the facts  and
circumstances pertaining to this family. The simple question to be asked  is
whether  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  temporary  separation  between  the
appellant and her two children.

14. The facts in this case are that the appellant is married  to  a  British
citizen and they have two children of primary school age.  At  the  date  of
hearing the appellant's children were aged 5 and 7 years. In March 2014  the
appellant applied for a visit visa claiming that she wanted to come  to  the
UK for one month. At  or  about  the  same  time,  the  appellant's  British
citizen husband received an offer of employment in  Falkirk.  The  appellant
entered the UK in April 2014 with her husband  and  two  children,  and  has
remained in the UK since then.

15. As the appellant entered the UK  as  a  visitor,  she  cannot  meet  the
requirements of appendix FM  (paragraph  E-LTRP2.1).  The  appellant  has  a
genuine and subsisting relationship with her two British  citizen  children.
The respondent considered paragraph EX-1, and found that it  did  not  apply
because the  appellant  does  not  have  sole  responsibility  for  her  two
children.

16. The effect of the respondent's decision  might  be  that  the  appellant
returns to the Philippines leaving her husband and two children  in  the  UK
while she makes an application for entry clearance to return to the  UK.  At
the worst that  could  mean  separation  for  six  months.  The  appellant's
youngest child is only 5 years of age. Six months  is  a  long  time  for  a
young child; but the evidence in this  case  is  that  the  appellant's  two
children are well settled in primary school in the UK. They  can  live  with
their British citizen father in the  UK.  The  respondent's  decision  would
require this family to  make  certain  decisions  about  working  hours  and
childcare, but that is not unreasonable; that is what many British  citizens
do every day of the working week.

17. If the appellant returns to the Philippines alone,  she  will  not  lose
contact with her husband and her children. The  appellant's  children  enjoy
dual nationality. There is no restriction on  their  ability  to  visit  the
Philippines. The appellant's husband lived and  worked  in  the  Philippines
until April 2014. The appellant's case has always  been  that  she  and  her
children came to the UK for a one-month visit. If that is true,  then  their
friends  &  their  possessions  must  still  be  waiting  for  them  in  the
Philippines.

18. The effect of the respondent's decision might be that the appellant  and
her children return to the Philippines and endure a temporary  absence  from
the UK whilst waiting up to 6 months for entry clearance. The importance  of
the appellant's husband's job has been emphasised. He is a British  citizen;
he can remain in the UK and pursue his career. He can visit  his  family  in
the  Philippines  and  can  maintain  contact  with  them  by  instantaneous
communication.

19. The third option is that every member of  this  family  returns  to  the
Philippines and lives together for  six  months  while  they  wait  for  the
appellant's application  for  entry  clearance  to  be  considered.  If  the
appellant and  her  family  follow  this  third  option,  then  they  remain
together. Their entire case is plead on the basis that they cannot face  any
degree of separation. If that is  their  "worst  case  scenario",  then  the
simple decision that they have to  make  is  that  the  appellant's  husband
gives up the employment that he did not have at the time of application  for
visit visa.

20. The worst that can  happen  to  this  family  is  that  there  might  be
temporary separation. If what is said by the  appellant  is  entirely  true,
then the choice that will be made by this family  is  that  the  appellant's
two British citizen children will return  to  the  Philippines  and  have  a
temporary absence from the  UK  of  perhaps  six  months.  We  have  to  ask
ourselves whether it would not be reasonable for the children to  leave  the
UK for a temporary period.

21. We consider the evidence that was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  We
take account of the supplementary bundle produced at the hearing before  us.
The documentary evidence tells us  that  the  appellant's  husband  travels,
because of his employment, throughout Europe. The appellant's solicitor  was
at pains to point out that the  appellant  is  the  primary  carer  for  the
children. The children have dual nationality and have lived the majority  of
their lives in the Philippines, before being uprooted and introduced to  the
UK education system.

22. What is envisaged is a temporary absence in the company  of  the  parent
who  provides  primary  care.  We  are  asked  to   take   such   a   strict
interpretation of section 117B(6) as to find the temporary absence from  the
UK cannot be reasonable. We cannot attribute that meaning  to  the  ordinary
language of s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act. Such a  strict  interpretation  would
mean that, in years to come, when the appellant's two children  are  offered
school trips to European countries it would not be reasonable  for  them  to
leave the UK because that would involve their temporary absence.

23. The facts in this case tell us that the appellant's  two  children  have
lived most of their young lives in the Philippines. They are  more  familiar
with life there than with life in the UK. Their intention in coming  to  the
UK was a temporary absence from the Philippines.  That  was  not  viewed  as
unreasonable. This family's future may well now lie in Scotland, but  is  it
unreasonable for two young children to have another temporary absence,  this
time from the UK? The only conclusion we can come  to  is  that  it  is  not
unreasonable because the children are not  required  to  leave  the  UK  and
because  if  their  parents  choose  to  take  the  children  back  to   the
Philippines, their absence from the UK will only be for a period of  months.
The wording of the subsection looks at the  reasonableness  of  requiring  a
British citizen child to leave the UK. That wording relates to  leaving  the
UK permanently, not temporarily.

24. Between [16] and [20] of  the  decision,  the  Judge  clearly  considers
section 117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The  Judge
starts [19] by stating "nowhere in the reasons for refusal letter  does  the
respondent stated that she considers that it would be reasonable  to  expect
the appellant's children to leave the UK"

25. The Judge manifestly takes account of section  117B  of  the  2002  act.
There is no error in the Judge's interpretation of section  117B(6)  of  the
2002 Act. It is clear from a fair reading of the decision that the Judge  is
mindful of the entire terms of section 117B of the 2002  Act  when  carrying
out the proportionality balancing exercise required in this case. The  Judge
clearly understood that the realistic alternatives facing  this  family  are
either that the two British Citizen children remain in  the  UK,  and  await
the  appellant's  return,  or  they  leave  the  UK   with   the   appellant
temporarily.

26. In AQ (Nigeria) and Others 2015 EWCA CIV 250 (at paragraph  62)  it  was
recorded that the respondent did not concede  "that  there  would  never  be
circumstances in which it would be  proportionate  to  require  the  British
child of a non EU carer to relocate with that carer  to  a  country  outside
the EU".

27. In AA v Upper Tribunal (Asylum and Immigration Chamber) [2013]  CSIH  88
it was held that a Claimant child's British nationality nationality was  not
a trump card. It was necessary to take account of  the  whole  circumstances
which included the availability to the child of family life with parents  in
one of their countries of origin, and the extent  to  which  the  Claimant's
immigration history involved dishonesty. In AF v SSHD 2013 CSIH  88  it  was
re-iterated that nationality is  not  a  trump  card  and  the  tribunal  is
required to take into account the full circumstances.

28. The Judge takes account of the impact that removal of the  appellant  is
likely to have on this family. She clearly identifies  the  crucial  aspects
of the established family and private life  enjoyed  by  the  appellant  and
carries out a well-reasoned proportionality balancing exercise  informed  by
s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act  and  by  s.55  of  the  Borders  Citizenship  and
Immigration Act 2009.

29. At [47] & [48] the Judge draws those findings of fact  to  a  conclusion
by applying the correct test in law. The Judge has regard to part 5A of  the
Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. That is the  correct  test  in
law. The decision contains  sufficient  findings  of  fact  to  support  the
conclusion that the Judge comes to. The correct test in law  has  manifestly
been applied.

30.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  Judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

31. In this case, there is  no  misdirection  in  law  &  the  fact  finding
exercise is beyond criticism.  The decision is not  tainted  by  a  material
error of law. We find that the Judge's decision, when read as a whole,  sets
out findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed.









CONCLUSION

32. No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

33. The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.

Signed                                                              Date:
1st July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


