
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/50582/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision and Reasons promulgated|
|On 20 November 2014             |On 27 November 2014             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Kamaljeet Kaur Mavi
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                   Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. K. Alim of Counsel instructed by Yaqub & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pedro promulgated on 4 September 2014 allowing Ms Mavi's appeal against
    a decision dated 13 September 2013 to refuse to issue her  a  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of a permanent right to  reside  in  the
    UK.

 2. Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant and Ms  Mavi
    is the respondent, for the sake of  consistency  with  the  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to  Ms  Mavi  as
    the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of India born on 26 January 1974.

 4. A detailed chronology  of  the  Appellant's  personal  and  immigration
    history is to be found at paragraph 10 of the determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre in an earlier appeal (linked with  similar
    appeals made by the Appellant's daughters) promulgated on 5  July  2010
    (refs. IA/15757/2010, IA15761/2010 and IA/15764/2010). This  chronology
    is a matter of record and known to the parties, and accordingly  it  is
    unnecessary to reproduce it here. What is particularly germane is  that
    the previous appeal was against a decision of the  Respondent  dated  3
    November 2009 to refuse to issue residence cards,  and  Judge  Plumptre
    found that the Appellant had demonstrated that she had a retained right
    of residence in the UK pursuant to regulation 10(5) of the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006. It was also observed by  the
    Respondent's representative on that occasion that it would be  open  to
    the Appellant to apply for permanent residence when she  had  lived  in
    the UK continuously for five years.

 5. On 24 July 2013 the Appellant  made  an  application  for  a  permanent
    residence card as confirmation of a permanent right to  reside  in  the
    UK. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application for reasons  set
    out in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 13 September 2013,
    and a Notice of Immigration  Decision  of  the  same  date  was  served
    accordingly.

 6. The Appellant appealed  to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    allowed the appeal for reasons set out in his determination.

 7. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta on 20 October 2014.

 8. The Appellant has filed a Rule 24 response under cover of letter  dated
    5 November 2014 resisting the Respondent's challenge to the decision of
    the First-tier tribunal.

Consideration

 9.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  appropriately  identified  that  the
    Appellant's application for a permanent residence card, and necessarily
    in turn her appeal, fell to be considered pursuant to the provisions of
    regulation 15(1)(f) of the 2006 Regulations.

10. In contrast, the Respondent's RFRL and Notice of  Immigration  Decision
    focused upon regulation 10(5), and the Notice also  made  reference  to
    regulation 15A(2).

11. The Judge observed it to be a "striking feature"  that  the  Respondent
    had made no reference to the determination of Judge Plumptre  in  which
    it had been concluded that  the  Appellant  had  retained  a  right  of
    residence. Judge Pedro, in my judgement  entirely  appropriately,  made
    reference  to  the  decision  in  Devaseelan  and  indicated  that  the
    (unchallenged) determination of Judge Plumptre should be taken  as  his
    starting point.

12. Following some further references to passages in the decision of  Judge
    Plumptre, Judge Pedro observed that the Appellant had  been  living  in
    the UK since August 2007, and accordingly had been  living  in  the  UK
    with a  retained  right  of  residence  in  accordance  with  the  2006
    Regulations  for  a  continuous  period  of   five   years.   In   such
    circumstances  the  Judge  was  satisfied  that   the   Appellant   had
    demonstrated  an  entitlement  to  permanent  residence   pursuant   to
    regulation 15(1)(f), and allowed the appeal accordingly.

13. In my judgement,  in  light  of  the  unchallenged  decision  of  Judge
    Plumptre, this was a straightforward matter - and  indeed  Judge  Pedro
    dealt with it in a straightforward and succinct manner. It  also  seems
    to  me  that  the  case  has  been  unnecessarily  complicated  by  the
    Respondent's decision-maker's oversight in apparently disregarding  the
    decision of Judge Plumptre.

14. The grounds in support of the  application  for  permission  to  appeal
    again have their primary focus on regulation 10(5), and  in  particular
    the condition of 10(6) referenced in 10(5)(c). This is inappropriate in
    light of the earlier unchallenged findings. It is difficult  to  escape
    the inference that the drafter of the grounds was of the view that  the
    circumstances in which the Appellant retained her right of residence at
    the point of divorce from her ex-husband had also to be  continuing  at
    the point at which she completed her five years residence in accordance
    with the Regulations in order for her to be a person who had retained a
    right of residence. I do not read the Regulations in such a manner, and
    indeed to do so would substantially undermine the element of protection
    accorded to the spouses of EEA citizens in the event of divorce -  such
    protection inevitably having its route in the right of free movement of
    EEA nationals themselves.

15. I reject the Respondent's challenge to the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The decision of Judge Pedro contained no errors  of  law  and
    therefore stands.

Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  no  errors  of
    law and stands.

17. Ms Mavi's appeal remains allowed.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     22 November 2014
