
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: IA/50893/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 March 2016                              |On 17 March 2016              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          AUDREY PATRICIA HARRISON
                        (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss. C. Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. B. Adekoya, Atlantic Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Asjad, promulgated on 13 April 2015, in which
    she allowed Miss. Harrison's appeal against the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to remove her from the United Kingdom.


 2. For the purposes of this appeal, I refer to the Secretary of  State  as
    the Respondent, and to Miss.  Harrison  as  the  Appellant,  reflecting
    their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable that the judge  had
    not given proper consideration to the Appellant's immigration  history.
    It was arguable that she had not given sufficient weight to the  public
    interest and the maintenance of immigration control.


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision, which I set out
    below with my reasons.


Submissions


 5. Miss. Johnstone relied on the grounds of appeal.   She  submitted  that
    the judge had allowed the appeal on the basis that the Appellant had  a
    right to family life but she has not identified what that  family  life
    consisted of.


 6. Mr. Adekoya submitted that the judge had considered the  facts  of  the
    case and  the  Appellant's  immigration  history.   She  had  initially
    overstayed but she had  given  reasons  why  she  had  overstayed.   In
    paragraph [29] the judge had set out her findings on family  life.   On
    the facts of the case the Appellant had come to join her family in  the
    United Kingdom.  I was referred to Kugathas [2003] EWCA  Civ  31.   The
    Appellant lived in the  same  household  as  her  family  members.   He
    accepted that the decision did not  elaborate  on  the  nature  of  the
    Appellant's family life, but submitted that it  had  been  put  to  the
    judge that the Appellant did have a family life in the United  Kingdom.
    If the judge had elaborated on her findings,  she  would  have  made  a
    finding that the Appellant  had  family  life  in  the  United  Kingdom
    following Kugathas.


 7. He submitted that the Appellant had enjoyed  a  family  life  with  her
    relations in the United Kingdom prior to joining  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The judge  had  evidence  before  her  that  she  was  mainly
    dependent on them when she was living in  Jamaica  and  she  was  still
    mainly dependent on them.  She had no family in Jamaica.


Error of law


 8.  The  judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis   that   it   was   a
    disproportionate interference with the Appellant's right  to  a  family
    life, but there is no clear finding that the Appellant enjoys a  family
    life with her relations in the United Kingdom.


 9. The judge finds that the Appellant does not meet  the  requirements  of
    either paragraph 276ADE,  or  Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration  rules
    (paragraphs [17]  to  [20]).   She  considers  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules in paragraphs [21] to [31].  In  paragraph  [24]  she
    sets out the step-by-step approach advocated in Razgar [2004] UKHL  27.
    However she has made no finding prior to considering these  steps  that
    the Appellant has a family life sufficient to engage the  operation  of
    Article 8.  Despite the fact that the Appellant is an  adult  and  that
    her relations in the United  Kingdom  are  also  adults,  there  is  no
    assessment of these relationships, and no consideration of whether  the
    bonds that she has with these adult relatives go above and  beyond  the
    bonds normally to be found between such adult relatives.


10. It was incumbent on the judge, prior to considering the steps  set  out
    in Razgar, to make a finding that the Appellant had a family  life  and
    the nature of such family life.  It is not enough that it was submitted
    to her that the Appellant had a family life in the United Kingdom.  She
    needed to make a positive finding of such family life.


11. In paragraph [29] the judge states: "The family life that the Appellant
    now enjoys is very different from that which existed prior to 2005  and
    has grown further and beyond that."  This  statement  is  made  at  the
    proportionality assessment stage, and there is still  no  reference  to
    what family life it is that the Appellant enjoys.  There are  no  clear
    findings as to what family life there was prior  to  2005.   The  judge
    refers to the letters of support  from  the  Appellant's  family.   She
    refers to the Appellant's love and devotion to her family and the  life
    that she now enjoys with them, but there is still no finding  that  the
    bonds that she has go above and beyond the normal bonds to be found  in
    such relationships.


12. Although it was submitted by Mr. Adekoya that the Appellant  is  mainly
    dependent on her  family  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  only  finding
    relating to such dependence is in relation to financial dependence, and
    is made in the context of consideration of Appendix FM, [19].   In  any
    event this refers to her being financially dependent  on  her  "friends
    and family".  It is not a finding  that  she  is  mainly  dependent  on
    family members.


13. In parenthesis in paragraph [19] the judge states "(Indeed the evidence
    suggests the opposite and that the  Appellant  is  the  carer  for  her
    Brother)".  However, once  more  there  is  no  clear  finding  of  any
    dependence above and beyond the normal emotional  ties.   This  comment
    alone is not enough to show that the judge  has  found  that  there  is
    family life between the Appellant and her brother.  In  paragraph  [29]
    she refers to the fact that she has devoted herself  to  looking  after
    other family members and states that she now  cares  for  her  brother.
    However she then finds that this is simply another example of her  love
    and devotion to her family, and gives no detail as  to  the  extent  of
    care that she provides.   It  is  clear  from  the  decision  that  the
    Respondent's representative in the First-tier Tribunal made submissions
    that the Appellant was not her brother's primary carer and that  social
    services could care for him.


14. I find that the failure to make a clear finding as to the nature of any
    family life which the Appellant enjoys  in  the  United  Kingdom  is  a
    material error of law.


15. The proportionality assessment in relation to family life is set out in
    paragraph [29].  The judge states that she does not  accept  that  "the
    Appellant's motive in remaining in the UK was to in  anyway  abuse  the
    immigration system".  As a result of this she does not give  weight  to
    the fact that the Appellant overstayed and failed to  comply  with  the
    immigration rules.  She states that the Appellant felt "obliged to look
    after her mother", and proceeds  to  set  out  what  she  sees  as  her
    "devotion" to her family members.  However there is no consideration of
    the fact that this has been done when  she  had  no  leave  to  remain.
    There is no consideration either  of  the  other  factors  set  out  in
    section 117B, for example it is clear  from  the  evidence  before  the
    judge that the Appellant was not financially independent.  I find  that
    the judge's assessment of proportionality is inadequate.


16. It was not  submitted  by  Mr.  Adekoya  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, and  I  do  not  set  aside  the
    decision in relation to paragraph 276ADE or Appendix FM.


Notice of Decision


17. The decision involves the making of an error of law.  I set  aside  the
    decision relating to Article 8 outside  the  immigration  rules  to  be
    remade.

Directions

18. No later than 7 days before the reconvened hearing  the  parties  shall
    file with the Tribunal, and serve on each other, any witness statements
    and further documents relied upon, to  include  any  new  evidence,  in
    relation to the Appellant's appeal under Article 8.



Signed                                  Date 14 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain



