
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM/DP/bw-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50603/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 7th December 2015 and             |On 17th February 2016                |
|3rd February 2016                    |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                               BALWINDER sINGH
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R de Mello of Counsel
For the Respondent:    7th December 2015:    Mr D Mills,
                                      Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    3rd February 2016:  Mrs R Pettersen,
                                      Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant has appealed against the decision of  Judge  Petherbridge
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 3rd September 2014.



 2. The Appellant is a male Indian citizen born 30th April 1974 who on 27th
    August 2013 applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right  to
    reside in the United Kingdom.

 3. The application was made on the basis that the Appellant married an EEA
    national on 5th April 2004.  The EEA national is Maria  Josepha  Vargis
    Flores to whom I shall refer as Ms Flores.  She is a Spanish citizen.

 4. It was contended that  both  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Flores  had  been
    employed and they  resided  together  until  December  2010  when  they
    separated, and  Ms  Flores  returned  to  Spain.   The  Appellant  then
    instituted divorce proceedings, and relied upon regulation 10(5) of the
    Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the   2006
    regulations) claiming  that  he  had  retained  a  right  of  residence
    following divorce from Ms Flores.

 5. The application was refused on 18th November  2013  with  reference  to
    regulation 10(5) and (6) of the 2006 regulations.   In  giving  reasons
    for refusal the Respondent accepted that the Appellant had been married
    to an EEA national, and that the marriage had been dissolved.   It  was
    not accepted that Ms Flores was exercising treaty rights at the time of
    divorce, therefore the application was refused.

 6. The Appellant appealed, and the appeal was heard by the FTT on 4th July
    2014.  After hearing evidence from the Appellant and  oral  submissions
    from both parties, the FTT reserved its decision and  thereafter  noted
    there had been no reference to either Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552 or Ahmed
    [2013] UKUT 00089 (IAC) and therefore issued  directions  inviting  the
    parties to make written submissions as to whether it  was  agreed  that
    this case law should be followed, and if not, reasons should be  given.



 7. No response was received from the Respondent, but  written  submissions
    were made by Mr de Mello on behalf of  the  Appellant  on  15th  August
    2014.

 8. Having considered those submissions, the  FTT  decided  that  Amos  and
    Ahmed should be followed and made the following  finding  at  paragraph
    33;
         "It therefore follows that I must find that to acquire  a  retained
         right  of  residence  under  both  the  Directive  and  under   the
         Regulations, it is necessary for an  ex-spouse  to  show  that  his
         union citizen (EEA national spouse) was exercising Treaty rights in
         the United Kingdom at the time of the divorce."

 9. Because it was accepted that Ms Flores was in Spain at the time of  the
    divorce, the FTT dismissed the appeal,  notwithstanding  the  arguments
    made on behalf of the Appellant, that it was not necessary for a former
    EEA national spouse to  be  exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom at the time of the divorce.

10. Following the dismissal  of  the  appeal,  the  Appellant  applied  for
    permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  brief  summary  the
    grounds repeated the written submissions dated 15th  August  2014  that
    had been made to the FTT, and placed reliance upon NA  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ  995  which  indicated,
    inter alia, that Amos was not binding  authority  for  the  proposition
    that the  regulations  had  correctly  transposed  the  Directive,  and
    requested a preliminary  ruling  from  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union (the CJEU) on the proper interpretation of Article 13(2)
    of Directive  2004/38/EC  (the  Directive).   The  question  posed  for
    consideration by the CJEU in NA was;
         "Must a third country national ex-spouse of a union citizen be able
         to show that their former spouse was exercising  treaty  rights  in
         the host Member state at the time of  their  divorce  in  order  to
         retain a right  of  residence  under  Article  13(2)  of  Directive
         2004/38/EC?"

11. It was contended that the FTT had erred by not referring two  questions
    to the CJEU, the first of which was the question referred by the  Court
    of Appeal in NA, and the second in the following terms;
         "Can a third country national ex-spouse of a union citizen retain a
         right of  residence  under  Article  13(2)  during  the  period  he
         separates from his ex-spouse and the termination of his marriage on
         the promulgation of the divorce absolute?"

12. It was contended that the FTT had been wrong to follow Amos and  Ahmed,
    and wrong to find that in order to retain a right  of  residence  under
    Article 13 of the Directive, it is necessary for the ex-spouse to be in
    the UK exercising treaty rights at the time of the divorce.

13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin in  the
    following terms:
         "It is arguable as asserted in the grounds that the judge erred  in
         finding that the Appellant needed  to  show  that  his  spouse  was
         exercising Treaty rights at  the  date  of  the  divorce  when  the
         Appellant had acquired a permanent right of  residence  before  the
         marriage broke down."

Error of Law

14. On 27th February 2015 I heard submissions from both parties in relation
    to error of law.  Mr de Mello relied upon the grounds contained  within
    the application for permission to appeal, and it was pointed  out  that
    before the FTT, the Appellant had  relied  upon  both  Article  13  and
    Article 16 of the Directive, which relates to acquisition of  permanent
    residence.  I was asked to  accept  that  the  FTT  had  erred  in  its
    findings at paragraphs 30 and 33 of the decision,  and  had  failed  to
    consider NA, which stated that Amos was not binding.

15. The Respondent was represented by Mr  Smart  who  argued  that  it  was
    incorrect for the grant of permission to refer to the Appellant  having
    acquired a right of permanent residence and the FTT had been correct to
    find that this was not  the  case.   Mr  Smart  pointed  out  that  the
    Appellant's application form indicated that he had been absent from the
    United Kingdom between February 2009 and September 2009, and he had  in
    August 2010 applied for permanent residence,  which  had  been  refused
    because the evidence supplied did not show that the  EEA  national  had
    exercised treaty rights.  Mr Smart submitted a copy of the reasons  for
    refusal letter dated 22nd  December  2010  confirming  the  reason  for
    refusing permanent residence.  Mr Smart had no submissions to  make  in
    relation to the FTT's failure to consider NA.

16. By way of response Mr de Mello submitted that the  points  made  by  Mr
    Smart were relevant to Article 16 of the Directive, but not Article  13
    which related to retained rights of residence, and that failure by  the
    FTT to consider NA was a material error of law.

17. I concluded that the FTT erred in not considering the relevance  of  NA
    which had not been published at the date of hearing before the FTT, but
    was published on 17th July 2014, and  which  was  referred  to  in  the
    written submissions dated 15th August  2014  made  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf.

18. The Court of Appeal in NA considered the issue that was before the FTT,
    and considered an appeal against the Upper Tribunal decision in  Ahmed.
    In my view NA was clearly relevant,  and  in  paragraph  21(3)  it  was
    decided that Amos is not binding authority for the proposition that the
    2006 Regulations have correctly transposed the Directive.

19. Although NA does not overrule the Upper Tribunal decision in Ahmed,  it
    does cast doubt as to whether the findings of the  Upper  Tribunal  are
    correct in law.  The Court of Appeal decided in NA that the  answer  to
    the issue raised in the appeal was not acte clair and  therefore  there
    needed to be a reference to the CJEU.

20. In my view the FTT erred by unequivocally finding that Amos  and  Ahmed
    should be followed, without considering or analysing  the  decision  in
    NA.  There is no reference to NA in the FTT decision, which amounts  to
    a material error of law.

21. The decision of the FTT was therefore set aside.

Re-making the Decision

22. There followed  a  hearing  on  16th  September  2015  before  a  panel
    comprising Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede and Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge
    M A Hall.  It was accepted by Mr de Mello that both questions which the
    Appellant requested be referred to the CJEU had been  resolved  by  the
    decision of the CJEU in Singh and Others [2015] 3WLR 1311.  Accordingly
    it was accepted on behalf of the Appellant that he could not  meet  the
    requirements of regulation 10(5) of the 2006 regulations and  that  the
    only remaining issue in the appeal was in regard to  regulation  15  of
    the 2006 regulations.

23. It was accepted that the Appellant had raised the  issue  of  permanent
    residence before the FTT,  and  he  claimed  that  he  had  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence under regulation  15(1)(b)  prior  to  the
    breakdown of his marriage.  It was accepted by all  parties  that  this
    was not a matter addressed or resolved by the FTT, and  which  remained
    to be determined.

24. Directions were made that the Appellant must file a  skeleton  argument
    setting  out  the  Appellant's  case  as  regards  the  acquisition  of
    permanent residence under regulation 15, and the Respondent  must  file
    an argument in reply.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing 7th December 2015

Preliminary Issues

25. Mr Mills had not received the Appellant's skeleton argument  which  had
    been received by the Tribunal on 11th November 2015, nor had  Mr  Mills
    received the Appellant's second witness statement  dated  7th  December
    2015.  There was therefore no skeleton argument submitted on behalf  of
    the Respondent.  Mr Mills indicated that he had considered the skeleton
    argument and witness statement and was ready to proceed.  Mr  de  Mello
    was also ready to proceed and called the Appellant to give evidence.

The Appellant's Evidence

26. No interpreter had been requested, and Mr de Mello  indicated  that  he
    did not believe an interpreter was needed.  The Appellant  adopted  the
    contents of his witness statement dated 7th December 2015.  He was  not
    asked any further questions by Mr de Mello.

27. The second witness statement may be summarised as follows.

28. The Appellant commenced a relationship with Ms  Flores  in  Spain  some
    time in the middle of 2003.  They lived together in Barcelona  with  Ms
    Flores' family before marriage.  They decided to live and work  in  the
    UK.

29. The Appellant left Ms Flores in Spain and came to the UK in  the  first
    week of February 2014.  He was joined by Ms Flores in the  second  week
    of February and they started living together  on  16th  February  2004.
    The first witness statement made by the Appellant which stated that  Ms
    Flores came to the UK in March or April 2004 was a mistake.

30. In February 2004 Ms Flores was offered a job with R K Foods to commence
    in April 2004 and the Appellant was offered employment  with  the  same
    company.

31. Ms Flores was to work as a cleaner  and  the  Appellant  as  a  factory
    packer and both were to  act  as  caretakers.   R  K  Foods  gave  them
    accommodation above the factory and paid the utility bills.

32. The Appellant and Ms Flores married at Sandwell Register Office on  5th
    April 2004 and in that month both moved to live above the factory.

33. In 2008 the Appellant changed employment and commenced  work  for  Kane
    Foods.  Between February 2004 and  April  2004  Ms  Flores  was  a  job
    seeker.  Between April 2004 and the middle of February  or  March  2009
    both the Appellant and Ms Flores were in employment.

34. At approximately the end of March 2009  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Flores
    decided to go to Spain for two weeks' holiday to see  her  family.   Ms
    Flores had paid leave.  Both intended to return to England and carry on
    work.

35. When in Spain Ms Flores started to have severe  headaches  and  had  to
    stay in Spain and the Appellant stayed with her.  Ms Flores'  employers
    continued to pay her wages  whilst  she  was  in  Spain  and  both  the
    Appellant and Ms Flores returned to the UK in early September 2009.

36. In 2010 Ms Flores went back to Spain for medical treatment but retained
    her employment at R K Foods.   Problems  in  the  marriage  started  in
    December 2010, and the couple started living apart in March  2011.   Ms
    Flores worked at R K Foods until late 2011 and the  Appellant  believes
    that she left the UK permanently at the end of  2011  or  beginning  of
    2012.  He started divorce proceedings after she left the UK.

37. Mr Mills started to ask questions by way of  cross-examination  but  it
    became clear to me that the Appellant did not understand what was being
    asked of him and that  he  did  in  fact  require  an  interpreter.   I
    therefore decided it was necessary to adjourn the  hearing  so  that  a
    Punjabi interpreter could attend.

The Tribunal Hearing 3rd February 2016

Preliminary Issues

38. It was agreed the questions asked by Mr Mills in  cross-examination  at
    the  previous  hearing  would  be  disregarded  because   of   language
    difficulties.   The  hearing  would  therefore  commence  with   cross-
    examination by Mrs Pettersen.  Both representatives indicated that they
    were ready to proceed.

The Appellant's Evidence

39. I established that there was no difficulty in communication between the
    Appellant and interpreter in Punjabi.  Mrs Pettersen pointed  out  that
    the Appellant in his application form had indicated that he left the UK
    between February 2009 and September 2009 because a  family  member  was
    ill.  In his most recent witness statement he had stated  that  at  the
    end of March 2009 he and his wife decided to go to Spain for two weeks'
    holiday to see her family.  He said that  he  had  made  a  mistake  in
    completing his application  form.   The  Appellant  explained  that  Ms
    Flores became ill once they had arrived in  Spain.   She  received  her
    wages while she was in Spain from her employer, and these were paid  in
    cash when she returned to the UK.

40. When asked why the Appellant had referred to a family member being  ill
    when completing his application form, rather than  explaining  that  it
    was his wife, the Appellant stated that  his  wife's  father  had  been
    unwell, and the Appellant became  unwell  after  they  had  arrived  in
    Spain.

The Respondent's Submissions

41. In summary Mrs Pettersen contended that the Appellant  had  become  the
    family member of an EEA national on 5th April 2004 when he  married  Ms
    Flores.  They had not resided together for a continuous period of  five
    years in accordance with the regulations.  The Appellant and Ms  Flores
    were absent from the UK between February and September 2009.  They  had
    not acquired five years' lawful residence before leaving the UK.

42. Mrs Pettersen submitted credibility issues were raised in  relation  to
    Ms Flores being apparently paid in cash while she was in Spain in 2009,
    and there was no mention of Ms Flores being  ill,  when  the  Appellant
    declared his  absence  from  the  UK  in  his  application  form.   Mrs
    Pettersen stated that  it  was  not  accepted  that  Ms  Flores  was  a
    qualified person as defined by regulation 6 for a five-year period.

43. I was asked to note that  there  was  a  discrepancy  as  to  when  the
    Appellant left the UK, as the  skeleton  argument  indicated  that  the
    Appellant believed that he left the UK  in  late  February/early  March
    2009, whereas his witness statement indicated  that  he  left  in  late
    March 2009.

44. Mrs Pettersen's submission was that  the  Appellant  had  not  acquired
    permanent residence when he left the UK in February or March 2009,  and
    because his absence was  in  excess  of  six  months,  the  "clock  had
    stopped".  Mrs Pettersen submitted that the Appellant did  not  satisfy
    regulation 15(1)(b) of the 2006 regulations.

The Appellant's Submissions

45. Mr de Mello relied upon the skeleton argument dated 5th  October  2015.
    As to the time when the Appellant left the UK I was  referred  to  page
    109 of the Appellant's bundle, that being a Nationwide  account,  which
    showed that the Appellant had withdrawn money  on  14th  February  2009
    which indicated that he was still in the UK at that date.

46. Mr de Mello submitted that the Appellant  had  explained  in  his  oral
    evidence that when reference was made in  the  application  form  to  a
    family member being ill, that was Ms  Flores'  father,  and  Ms  Flores
    became ill having arrived in Spain which is why they stayed  in  excess
    of six months.  Both had intended to return to the UK.

47. As to when Ms Flores came to the United Kingdom I was asked  to  accept
    that a tenancy agreement at page 74 in the Appellant's bundle confirmed
    that she and the Appellant started living  together  on  16th  February
    2004.

48. Mr de Mello submitted that the evidence proved that Ms Flores  came  to
    the UK as a job seeker and the clock started running from her  date  of
    entry into the UK.  From February 2004 to 5th April 2004 the  Appellant
    was a family member of Ms Flores as they were in a durable relationship
    prior to marriage.  From 16th February 2004 to 16th February  2009  the
    couple resided legally for a continuous period of five years.   At  the
    point of the Appellant's departure from the UK  in  February  or  early
    March 2009 the Appellant  had  already  acquired  permanent  residence.
    Therefore his absence for six or seven months did not  deprive  him  of
    permanent residence.

49. During this period the Appellant had worked and  supported  Ms  Flores,
    who in turn was self-sufficient on the basis of his earnings.

50. In the alternative Mr de Mello made  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    period between 5th April 2004 and 5th April 2009  contending  that  the
    Appellant  and  Ms  Flores  did  not  intend  to  depart  from  the  UK
    permanently when they left in February or March 2009.   Initially  they
    intended to stay in Spain for two weeks, but remained because Ms Flores
    was diagnosed with a serious illness.  They had still however  retained
    their residence  in  the  UK  and  Ms  Flores  had  retained  her  job.
    Therefore even though the Appellant and Ms Flores  were  in  Spain  for
    part of the period, they acquired permanent  residence  in  April  2009
    because they had retained their residence and occupation in the UK.

51. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.



My Conclusions and Reasons

52. In re-making the decision I have taken  into  account  the  documentary
    evidence supplied to the  Tribunal.   This  includes  the  Respondent's
    bundle with Annexes A-C and the reasons for refusal letter  dated  18th
    November 2013, and the Appellant's bundle comprising 210 pages.  I have
    also taken into account submissions made on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
    dated 15th August 2014, the Appellant's  witness  statement  dated  7th
    December 2015, and the skeleton argument  prepared  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant dated 5th October 2015.

53. I have taken into  account  the  Appellant's  oral  evidence,  and  the
    submissions made by both representatives.

54. The initial application made by the Appellant was for a residence  card
    based upon retained rights  of  residence.   It  was  accepted  on  the
    Appellant's behalf that his appeal could not  succeed  on  that  basis,
    therefore the issue that I have to consider relates to  Article  16  of
    Directive 2004/38/EC (the Directive) and  regulation  15  of  the  2006
    regulations.  For ease of reference I set  out  below  Article  16  the
    Directive;
         1.   Union citizens who  have  resided  legally  for  a  continuous
             period of five years in the host member state shall  have  the
             right of permanent residence there.  This right shall  not  be
             subject to the conditions provided for in Chapter III.
         2.   Paragraph 1 shall apply also to family  members  who  are  not
             nationals of a member state and have legally resided with  the
             Union citizen in the host member state for a continuous period
             of five years.
         3.   Continuity of residence shall not  be  affected  by  temporary
             absences not exceeding a total of six months  a  year,  or  by
             absences of a longer duration for compulsory military service,
             or by one absence of a maximum of  twelve  consecutive  months
             for  important  reasons  such  as  pregnancy  and  childbirth,
             serious illness, study or vocational training, or a posting in
             another member state or a third country.
         4.   Once acquired, the right of permanent residence shall be  lost
             only through absence from the host member state for  a  period
             exceeding two consecutive years.

55. I also set out below regulation 15 in part;
         (1)  The following persons shall acquire the right to reside in the
             United Kingdom permanently -
             (a)  an EEA national who has resided in the United Kingdom  in
                  accordance with these Regulations for a continuous  period
                  of five years;
             (b)  a family member of an EEA national who is not himself  an
                  EEA national but who has resided  in  the  United  Kingdom
                  with the EEA national in accordance with these Regulations
                  for a continuous period of five years;

56. I find as a fact that the Appellant and Ms Flores married in the UK  on
    5th April 2004.  Thereafter they lived together until they  encountered
    problems in  their  marriage  and  these  problems  became  evident  in
    December 2010, and the couple started living separately in March  2011.
    Ms Flores returned to Spain at the end of  2011  or  the  beginning  of
    2012.  The last wage slip in  Ms  Flores'  name  issued  by  R  K  Food
    Products is dated 16th December 2011.

57.  After  Ms  Flores  left  the  UK  the  Appellant   commenced   divorce
    proceedings, in April 2012, and the marriage was dissolved by way of  a
    decree absolute on 3rd July 2013.

58. In order for the Appellant to acquire permanent residence  it  must  be
    proved that Ms Flores was exercising treaty  rights  in  this  country.
    The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the standard is  a  balance
    of probability.

59. It must therefore be proved that Ms Flores was a  qualified  person  as
    defined by regulation 6 of the 2006 regulations, in that she must  have
    been a job seeker, a worker, a self-employed person, a  self-sufficient
    person, or a student.

60. The Appellant made an  application  for  permanent  residence  on  10th
    August 2010, and the application was refused  on  22nd  December  2010,
    because the Respondent  did  not  accept  the  Appellant  had  provided
    evidence to prove that Ms Flores was a qualified person.

61. I do not find that the Appellant has proved that Ms Flores entered  the
    United Kingdom and commenced living with him on 16th February 2004.   I
    note that at page 74 of the  Appellant's  bundle  there  is  a  tenancy
    agreement that relates to 134 High Street, West Bromwich, in the  joint
    names of the Appellant and Ms Flores.  I do not find that this document
    without more proves that they commenced living together on  that  date.
    It is for the Appellant to prove that a document on which he  seeks  to
    rely can be relied upon, and I must consider whether a document is  one
    on which reliance should properly be placed after looking  at  all  the
    evidence in the round.  I have considered the evidence  in  the  round,
    and note that the signature on the tenancy agreement said to be that of
    Ms Flores, differs significantly from  the  signature  on  a  different
    tenancy agreement  at  page  75  of  the  bundle.   The  other  tenancy
    agreement relates to 9 Queens Head Road, Birmingham and is  dated  12th
    April 2004.  I am not a handwriting expert, but take into  account  the
    different signatures, and I also take into account the initial  witness
    statement made by the Appellant dated 13th June 2014, which  he  relied
    upon before the FTT.  In that statement the Appellant confirmed that he
    entered the UK in February 2004 from Spain where he  had  lived  for  a
    period of six months.  He described that after his arrival  in  the  UK
    his relationship with Ms Flores continued and they spoke  regularly  on
    the telephone, and after a couple of months she decided that she wanted
    to come and live with him in the UK.  No satisfactory  explanation  has
    been given by the Appellant as to why he would state that he arrived in
    the UK in February 2004, a couple of months before Ms Flores,  if  that
    was not accurate.

62. I therefore conclude that  Ms  Flores  arrived  in  the  UK  after  the
    Appellant, and shortly after her arrival married.  I am  not  satisfied
    that the couple lived together  in  a  durable  relationship  prior  to
    marriage, and I therefore conclude that the Appellant became the family
    member of an EEA citizen when he married Ms Flores on 5th April 2004.

63. I accept that Ms Flores worked for R K Food and that she commenced that
    employment in April 2004.  The first wage slip produced is  dated  30th
    April 2004 which indicates that Ms Flores began employment in mid-April
    2004.  Further wage slips indicate she  was  employed  until  28th  May
    2004.

64. No further wages slips are produced until 22nd May 2009, and those wage
    slips continue to 24th July 2009.  It  is  the  Appellant's  case  that
    between March 2009 and September 2009 he and Ms Flores were in Spain.

65. I place weight on a letter dated 13th March 2010 from the proprietor of
    R K Food Products Limited which states that Ms Flores  worked  for  his
    company on "an occasional basis  for  over  five  years."   The  letter
    explains that when additional staff were required, Ms Flores  would  be
    asked to work.  The maximum wages she received in any one year in  that
    period was �2,485.  She was paid in cash.

66. No evidence has been submitted to prove that Ms Flores has been granted
    permanent residence in the UK.  There is no evidence to show  that  she
    registered as a job seeker.  She has not contended that she was  either
    a student or self-employed.  It is contended that she was  a  qualified
    person because she was a worker, but I do not find that this  has  been
    proved on a balance of probabilities.  In the period between April 2004
    and February or March 2009 when Ms Flores left the UK for a  period  in
    excess of six months, the only satisfactory evidence of employment  are
    wages slips covering a period of approximately one month in  2004,  and
    two months in 2009, when Ms Vargis was not actually working but was  in
    Spain.  A letter from her  employer  describes  her  as  an  occasional
    worker.

67. No satisfactory information has been produced from HMRC that relates to
    Ms Flores.  There are no P60 tax forms, the only letter  from  HMRC  is
    dated 13th January 2010 stating that she has a tax code.

68. There is reference in the skeleton argument  at  paragraph  12  to  the
    Appellant supporting Ms Flores, and she being self-sufficient.  If  she
    was self-sufficient she  would  need  to  have  comprehensive  sickness
    insurance cover and there is no evidence that any such cover  has  ever
    existed.

69. I therefore conclude that insufficient evidence has  been  provided  to
    prove that Ms Flores has been  a  qualified  person  for  a  continuous
    period of five years, and therefore it has not  been  proved  that  the
    Appellant has resided with her in accordance with the 2006  regulations
    for a continuous period of five years.  The Appellant had not  acquired
    permanent residence when he left the UK in February or March  2009.   I
    do not find the Appellant left the UK in late March 2009  as  contended
    in  his  latest  witness  statement.   The  Appellant  stated  in   his
    application form that he left the UK in February 2009  because  of  the
    illness of a family member.  I accept that he returned  to  the  UK  in
    September 2009, and therefore was outside  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
    period in excess of six months.

70. There is no satisfactory evidence to prove  that  Ms  Flores  commenced
    exercising treaty rights upon her return to the UK in  September  2009.
    There is evidence that she commenced work again for R K  Food  Products
    in September 2011, but that is some considerable time after she and the
    Appellant ceased residing together.

71. Therefore the appeal must be dismissed with reference to the Directive,
    and the 2006 regulations.

72. This is not an appeal where reliance was placed upon Article 8  of  the
    1950 Convention, and as no notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act has
    been served, and no removal decision has been made, Amirteymour  [2015]
    UKUT 00466 (IAC) confirms that  a  human  rights  challenge  cannot  be
    brought in an appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set  aside.   I  substitute  a  fresh  decision.   The
appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no application for anonymity to the Upper Tribunal and  I  see  no  need  to
make an anonymity order.


Signed   Date 8th February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 8th February 2016
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

