
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/50756/2013
                                                               IA/50758/2013
                                                               IA/50757/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24th July 2014                               |On 11th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

              MS yolanda margot ludena marin (first RESPONDENT)
            MR FRANCISCO JAVIER BEDOYA PORRAS (THIRD RESPONDENT)
          MASTER ISAAC ALEXANDER LUDENA FIAGBE (SECOND RESPONDENT)
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr D O'Callaghan, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. For my convenience I have referred to  the  parties  as  they  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. In this case, the Secretary of State appeals a decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hussain) promulgated on 28th May 2014 in which  he
    allowed the appeals of the First  Appellant  Ms  Marin,  a  citizen  of
    Ecuador, her child from an earlier relationship,  the  Third  Appellant
    Master Fiagbe, who takes his estranged Ghanaian father's nationality as
    well as that of Ms Marin's partner, Mr Porras, a national of  Colombia.
    Their applications  for  regularisation  through  leave  to  remain  on
    Article 8 private and family life  grounds  had  been  refused  by  the
    Respondent under the Immigration Rules set out at paragraph 276ADE  and
    Appendix FM.  The Respondent had concluded there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances making the removal of the Appellants disproportionate.

 3. The judge found that the decisions in respect of the Immigration  Rules
    were, as conceded, correct, but proceeded to allow the  appeal  on  the
    grounds that the decisions were nonetheless disproportionate because of
    the weight he accorded the best interests of  the  minor  Appellant  in
    remaining here.

 4. Permission was granted on the basis  of  a  challenge  to  the  judge's
    reasoning as to what it was about the circumstances of the child in the
    family that made the decision disproportionate.

 5. So it was that the matter came before me to decide whether or  not  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is vitiated  by  legal  error
    and if so, what to do about it.

 6. The parties proceeded by way of submissions.

 7. The Respondent relied on the grounds  to  the  point  that  the  recent
    jurisprudence  requires   a   judge   to   identify   with   sufficient
    particularity so that the reasons are discernable to the  parties,  why
    it is that the  circumstances  of  the  Appellants  is  not  adequately
    covered within the Immigration Rules so that a  judicial  determination
    of Article 8 is required and bearing in mind the substantial weight  to
    be given to the position under the Immigration Rules, why circumstances
    which fall outside of them should nonetheless be considered  to  result
    in unduly harsh consequences so that a decision otherwise correct under
    the Rules can be properly construed as being disproportionate. In terms
    of the  removal of the adults to different countries  it  was  open  to
    them at the time of  making removal direction to argue that they should
    be removed to either of the others  countries,  and  to  seek  Judicial
    Review of the directions if merited.

 8. For the Appellants Mr O'Callaghan reminded me of the history  to  these
    proceedings.  The Appellants had  made  this  application  in  February
    2013, it had been refused in April 2013 without  in-country  rights  of
    appeal.  It was only following  the  issue  of  a  pre-action  protocol
    letter that the Respondent agreed to issue  an  appealable  immigration
    decision and on  15  November  2013  issued  removal  directions.   The
    relevance of the delay is that  whilst  the  Third  Appellant  had  not
    accumulated the necessary seven years so  as  to  establish  a  gateway
    under Appendix FM to a consideration of the issue of whether or not his
    being required to leave the country was reasonable, in the  context  of
    his own private life entitlements, as at the date of the application or
    decisions in April and November 2013, by the time of the hearing before
    the First-tier Judge, he had.

 9. Counsel had appeared before the First-tier judge, where the  discussion
    was to the point that the applications fell outside of the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules because of the insufficiency of the length  of
    residence for any of the Appellants in  the  respective  categories  of
    Rule, because the requirement is for the accumulation of  the  relevant
    period as at the date of application, in this case February  2013.   It
    was on that base that it was clear in the  context  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision making, that the Appellants could not  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules.  That was the judge's starting  point.   In  the
    context of the case of  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013]  UKUT  640,  the  requirement  to  consider  the  best
    interests of the child in combination with the  need  to  consider  the
    evidence as at the date of hearing when viewed through the lens of  the
    changed circumstances in terms  of  the  satisfaction  of  the  gateway
    requirement, there could be no issue that there was at least sufficient
    to say that there was an  arguable  case  that  the  matter  should  be
    considered outwith the Rules in light of the Rules' lack of coverage in
    the context of the consideration of the best interests of the child  at
    the relevant date.

10. In the context of the  Article  8  assessment  itself,  Mr  O'Callaghan
    asserted that there was no legal error, the judge  had  properly  taken
    into account the Rules-based refusal but had made his own assessment of
    the best interests of the child and concluded that his  best  interests
    were clearly served by remaining in the United  Kingdom,  he  was  born
    here although entitled to register for Ecuadorian national  he  was  in
    fact a Ghanaian national  by  operation  of  the  law  of  Ghana  where
    nationality followed paternity.  Having spent all of his  life  in  the
    United Kingdom the judge found  that  he  was  fully  integrated.   The
    evidence before the judge was not significantly cross-examined in terms
    of the issue of the child's  best  interests.   There  was  significant
    documentary evidence from the Third Appellant's school  and  the  judge
    had also spoken directly to the child.  It was open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude on the basis of the evidence, to the point  that  it  was  not
    argued to be a perverse conclusion, that the child's best interests lay
    in the United Kingdom.  Whilst that position is  not  determinative  of
    the wider Article 8 exercise, the judge clearly understood that had the
    application been being considered under the Immigration Rules as at the
    date of hearing, the question of the best interests of the child  would
    have been determinative.

11. The challenge to the adequacy  of  reasons  is  formulaic  rather  than
    substantive.  The judge does not set out in detail all of the  evidence
    that was relevant to the assessment.  It  was  evidence  that  was  not
    challenged  and  so  in  the  context  of  resolving   factual   issues
    significant detail is not required.

12. In terms, reading the judge's  decision,  the  Respondent  can  clearly
    understand why the balancing exercise  fell  in  favour  of  the  Third
    Appellant.  It was a judgment call for the judge to  make,  he  reached
    his conclusion after a consideration of all of the  evidence,  and  the
    reasons provided,  while  succinct,  are  not  cursory,  and  following
    correct self-direction are adequate.

My Consideration and Findings

13. There is no issue before me that when Article 8 rights  are  adequately
    covered within the context of the Immigration Rules, it  is  sufficient
    for a judge to frame their consideration in the context of those Rules.
     It is only when the Rules cannot be considered a complete code  or  to
    provide adequate consideration that a  judge  is  required  instead  to
    conduct the balancing exercise in the form of a "traditional" Article 8
    ECHR framework, commonly described as the Razgar question.

14. The judge in this case refers to the need  for  "good  reasons"  to  go
    beyond the rules. The grounds are critical of  that  reasoning  on  the
    basis of the failure to specify the  need  for  exceptional  compelling
    circumstances resulting in unduly  harsh  consequences.  Whilst  it  is
    obvious that good reasons will encompass the meaning   of  the  phrases
    the Respondent asserts are required,  it is not  so  clear  that   good
    reasons will only include those.   I am satisfied that in  the  context
    of a refusal based on an application made before the child had obtained
    seven years residence, and so resulting in a decision under  the  rules
    without any individual consideration of the child's best  interests  as
    reflected  in the question of   the  reasonableness  of  requiring  the
    child to leave,  the judge was entitled to find that it  was  at  least
    arguable that, the child subsequently  having  passed  the  seven  year
    threshold the best interests consideration was not  adequately  covered
    by the rules.  Whilst the judge does not refer to the case of  Gulshan,
    or  use  the  phrase  compelling   circumstances,   or   unduly   harsh
    consequences, his reasoning is consistent with the caselaw dealing with
    the application of the Rules in Article 8 cases. I find that any  error
    in reasoning because of the use of "good reasons"  is  not  a  material
    error  here  because, when read as  a  whole,  it  is  clear  that  the
    process adopted, in light of the facts found, is  consistent  with  the
    correct approach.  It cannot be said, in the context  of  the  relevant
    timelines that I have discussed above, and the requirement to  consider
    the best interests of children affected by an immigration decision,  as
    at the date of hearing,  that there was no arguable case for the  judge
    to deem it appropriate to conduct the proportionality exercise.

15. Although there is legitimate discussion as to whether or not that could
    have been conducted in the context of  "exceptional  circumstances"  in
    the context of the rules rather than the balancing exercise of  Article
    8, absent error in the balancing exercise, any criticism  is  formulaic
    rather than substantive.

16. The relevant date for the assessment of a child's best interests is the
    date of hearing.  As at the date of hearing  in  this  case,  i.e.  May
    2014, the Third Appellant was 7 years and 2 months old, and having been
    born here had spent his whole life here. The child's best interests are
    assessed on their own merits, without reference to the adults'  adverse
    immigration history.

17.  The judge was obliged to make his own assessment of the best interests
    of the child and, in broad terms, to bring that finding  forward  as  a
    primary  but   not   necessarily   paramount   consideration   to   the
    proportionality or balancing exercise under Article 8. The question  of
    weight was for the judge. The grounds infer that the only matter  taken
    into account here was the child's length of residence. A  full  reading
    of the decision does not bear out that assertion.    The  judge  had  a
    significant amount of unchallenged evidence before  him,  and  had  the
    benefit of hearing and seeing the witnesses, including the  child,  and
    he has taken into account the child's own views.

18. Allowing that the  proportionality  exercise  is  open  to  the  judge,
    following correct self direction, where  the  balance  is  drawn  is  a
    finding of fact to be made by the judge who had the benefit of  hearing
    and seeing the evidence. In this case it is not  suggested  that  there
    are factors which the judge has failed to  take  into  account.  As  Mr
    O'Callaghan reminded me the challenge here was not  one  of  perversity
    but one of adequacy of reasoning.  In short I find that the grounds  in
    this case amount to no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the  judge's
    conclusion.  In the case of Mukarkar v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045  at
    paragraph [40]:

         "The mere fact that one Tribunal  has  reached  what  may  seem  an
         unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case does  not
         mean that it has made an error of law ...".

Decision

19. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to  allow  the  Appellants'  appeals
    under Article 8 of the ECHR did not involve the making of an  error  of
    law.  Those decisions stand.

20. The Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


