
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber)                          Appeal  Number:
IA/50989/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1st February 2016                     |   On 30th March 2016             |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                            Mr A K M Washi Uddin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hossain (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   His  appeal  against
    decisions to refuse to vary his leave and to remove him from the United
    Kingdom was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Woolf ("the  judge")
    in a decision promulgated on 31st January 2014.

2.   The decision was made on the basis of the documentary  evidence  before
    the judge.  She noted that the appellant had elected to have his appeal
    determined by way of a hearing.   His notice  of  appeal  contained  no
    grounds of appeal.  The Tribunal made a direction on 6th January  2014,
    requiring him to provide proper grounds by 13th January 2014.
3.   The judge took into account the decisions giving rise  to  the  appeal,
    the Secretary of State's reasons and the notice of appeal.   She  found
    that the appeal could properly be decided without an oral  hearing,  in
    accordance with rule 15(2)(c) of the  2005  Procedure  Rules  (then  in
    force).  She observed that the notice of appeal contained an indication
    from the appellant that he needed more time to prepare his grounds  and
    to seek advice before submitting them.  She  found  that  he  had  been
    given an ample opportunity to prepare  his  case  and  provide  written
    grounds.  His notice of appeal was dated  9th  December  2013.   Having
    assessed  the  material  before  her,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant had not discharged the burden of proof upon him and  had  not
    shown that the adverse decisions  were  unlawful.   She  dismissed  the
    appeal.

4.   In lengthy grounds in support  of  an  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, it was  contended  that  the  appellant  did  not  receive  the
    Tribunal's direction, dated 6th January 2014, and so he was  unable  to
    comply with it.  His application for discretionary leave  was  made  on
    the basis that he acted as a carer for his niece, who had since  passed
    away.  The appellant suggested that as he had paid  fees  for  an  oral
    hearing, he should have been given an opportunity  to  argue  his  case
    that he had established significant ties here since  his  arrival  over
    eight years ago.

5.   Permission to appeal was refused by a First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   The
    application was renewed and the appellant drew attention to the  demise
    of his niece, apparently in January 2014, "during the  time  of  appeal
    procedure", which had the consequence that he had not received "a  fair
    trial".  Permission was then granted by an Upper Tribunal Judge on  the
    basis that  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision was procedurally unfair.

6.   On 8th January 2016, some three  weeks  before  the  hearing  at  Field
    House, there was a further direction.  The parties were put  on  notice
    that the Tribunal did not have any of the documentary  evidence  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The parties were required to  file  and
    serve any documentary evidence upon which reliance was placed, even  if
    that material had been served on an earlier occasion.

7.   The case management file included a short bundle,  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 10th November 2015.  This consisted of a skeleton argument,
    which amounted to  a  rehearsal  of  the  grounds  in  support  of  the
    application for permission to appeal, further copies of  the  Secretary
    of State's decision letter  and  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision, a sponsorship declaration made  by  the  appellant's  brother
    which  was  undated  and  unsigned  and  finally  a  copy  of  a  death
    certificate.  This gave the correct date  of  the  appellant's  niece's
    demise as 31st December 2013, the date of registration of  death  being
    2nd January 2014.

8.   The Secretary of State provided a rule 24 response in which the  appeal
    was opposed on the basis that the judge directed herself  appropriately
    and made sustainable findings open to her on  the  evidence.   She  was
    satisfied that the appellant was given notice of his failure to  comply
    with rule 8 of the 2005 Procedure Rules, which required proper grounds.
     It was open to the judge to find that the  appellant  had  been  given
    ample time to prepare his  case.   There  was  no  supporting  evidence
    regarding his claim that the direction sent to  him  in  early  January
    2014 was not received.

Submissions on Error of Law

9.   Mr Tarlow confirmed that the Secretary of State had received the  short
    bundle from the appellant's solicitors, served in  November  2015.   Mr
    Hossain said that procedural unfairness had resulted from  the  judge's
    dismissal of the appeal.  The appellant did not receive  the  direction
    sent by the Tribunal on 6th January 2014 and he  had  not  received  an
    oral hearing.  He applied for leave to care for his niece,  having  had
    leave to remain as a student between February and July  2013,  but  his
    niece sadly passed away at the end of December 2013.  The appellant had
    not responded to the Tribunal's direction because he had not seen it.

10.   Mr  Tarlow  replied  that  the  bundle  prepared  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors contained nothing amounting to  proper  grounds  of  appeal,
    although there was a skeleton argument.  The judge was entitled to note
    the absence of any grounds.  The responsibility lay with the  appellant
    to provide grounds, whether or not the Tribunal sent out directions  in
    early January 2014.  The judge made no error of law in  acting  as  she
    did.

11.  Mr Hossain said that the appellant was unable  to  provide  grounds  of
    appeal.  He was waiting for a reference number from  the  Tribunal  but
    the demise of his niece and the absence of  any  further  communication
    until dismissal of the appeal meant that he was unable to act in  time.
    His passport was held by the respondent.  The appellant  had  paid  the
    fees required for a hearing but his appeal was decided without one.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  It is  of  considerable  concern  that  the  appellant  has  still  not
    provided properly pleaded  grounds  of  appeal.   There  were  no  such
    grounds before the First-tier Tribunal Judge in early January 2014  and
    none have appeared since although the bundle of documents  provided  by
    his solicitors in November 2015 included a skeleton argument.  There is
    some engagement in that document with the Secretary of State's  adverse
    decisions, at paragraph 11,  and  an  Article  8  case  appears  to  be
    advanced in the paragraphs which  follow.   It  is  asserted  that  the
    appellant has substantial private life ties here, and that he can  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the rules.  It appears that
    he also relies on Article 8, outside the rules.  Paragraph  22  of  the
    skeleton argument is headed "Statement of Additional Grounds" and  this
    contains a case that the appellant has "already passed his  ten  years'
    lawful residency to qualify for the (sic) indefinite leave to  remain".



13.  The critical question is fairness and  important  recent  guidance  was
    given in Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 (IAC), a decision from  the  President
    which builds on the Court of  Appeal's  judgment  in  SH  (Afghanistan)
    [2011] EWCA Civ 1284.  The decision of the judge in the present  appeal
    is cogently reasoned.  In the light of the limited  evidence  available
    and the absence of proper grounds, her decision to  proceed  without  a
    hearing and to decide the appeal was entirely reasonable.

14.  However, the judge was unaware of  the  appellant's  claim,  maintained
    ever since, that he did not receive the  direction  from  the  Tribunal
    sent on 6th January 2014, requiring him to provide  grounds  of  appeal
    within a week.  She was also unaware of the demise of  his  niece,  for
    whom he provided care, on 31st December 2013, some two weeks after  the
    notice of appeal was sent to the Tribunal and a  few  days  before  the
    direction was made.  At the time,  the  appellant  was  acting  without
    professional advice and, in his notice of appeal, he made it clear that
    he wished to seek advice and required more time to provide his grounds.

15.  The chronology shows that at the time the appellant  fell  into  breach
    of the direction, he was still acting in person, had in effect  applied
    for an extension of time and was no doubt in a period of grieving.  The
    judge's pragmatic decision to decide the appeal on the papers  followed
    soon afterwards, at the end of  January  2014.   Less  than  two  weeks
    later, the appellant instructed solicitors and made his application for
    permission to appeal on  11th  February  2014.    The  Tribunal's  case
    management file shows that  the  copy  death  certificate,  sponsorship
    declaration from the appellant's brother and  other  items  accompanied
    the application.  In other words, the appellant acted with a degree  of
    expedition following service of the judge's decision.   Notwithstanding
    the  failure  to  provide  properly  pleaded  grounds  of  appeal,  the
    appellant and his solicitors have at least articulated a case which has
    not yet been considered substantively, as his appeal was not listed for
    hearing.

16.  Overall, I find that there has been procedural unfairness,  through  no
    fault whatsoever on the part of the judge, and that her decision should
    be set aside.  The procedural unfairness arose  because  the  appellant
    did not receive notice of the hearing he was expecting and his  failure
    to comply with directions  must  be  weighed  in  the  context  of  his
    informal application for more time to prepare his grounds, the  absence
    of  professional  advice  at  the  time  and  the   particular   family
    circumstances, all of them coming into play  in  the  short  period  of
    weeks between the end of November 2013 and the end of January 2014.

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will be set aside  and  remade,
    at Taylor House, before a judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Woolf.


NOTICE OF DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  It will be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal, at Taylor House, before a judge other  than  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Woolf.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



ANONYMITY

There has been no application for anonymity and I make no direction on  this
occasion.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


