
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50950/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st April 2015                            |                              |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between

                         MS Ronize Maua Gomez BRANCA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bandigani - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison - Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. This is an appeal by Ms Ronize Maua Gomez Branca, a citizen of  Guinea-
    Bissau born 25th September 1986.  She appeals against the  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Horvath  issued  on  26th  November   2014
    dismissing her appeal against the decision of the  Respondent  made  on
    28th November 2013 to refuse to grant her a residence card as  evidence
    of a derivative right of residence under EEA law.  She  had  previously
    entered the UK in 2007 on a visit visa, overstayed and  sought  an  EEA
    residence card as a dependent of her father and  his  wife.   This  was
    refused by the Respondent and her appeal dismissed  in  November  2009.
    Nothing further was heard from her until 15th  January  2013  when  she
    made the application which is the subject of this appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal against the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and on 26th January 2015 First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Kelly granted permission.  He said:

         "The first ground of application is  that  the  Tribunal's  finding
         that the Appellant's child could be cared for by 'some other  close
         relative' if the Appellant was required to leave  the  UK  was  one
         that was not founded upon any evidence.  Whilst  the  Tribunal  was
         entitled to disbelieve the  Appellant's  claim  that  she  was  the
         child's primary carer and that nobody else  would  be  willing  and
         able to care for him in her absence, it remains  arguable  -  given
         the importance attaching  to  the  welfare  of  the  child  -  that
         positive evidence was required  in  order  to  support  a  specific
         finding to the contrary.  As the Tribunal does  not  refer  to  any
         such evidence this was potentially material to the outcome  of  the
         appeal.  The second ground of application is that the Tribunal  was
         bound to allow the appeal on the ground  that  the  Respondent  had
         made an  unlawful  decision  by  failing  to  conduct  an  adequate
         assessment of the child's welfare under Section 55 of the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Nationality Act 2009.  This ground is also arguable
         in light of the presidential decision in JO and Others (Section 55)
         Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517.  It is also arguable that:

         (i)  the Tribunal's ultimate conclusion - that  it  was  reasonable
             and in the best interests of a British child to  be  separated
             from one  or  other  of  its  parents,  by  the  child  either
             following his mother to  her  country  of  origin  or  by  him
             remaining  in  the  UK  with  his  British  father  -  it  was
             irrational; and

         (ii) in having regard to the fact that the child was born at a time
             when his mother's immigration status was  precarious  it  took
             account  of  an  immaterial  fact   (paragraph   26   of   the
             determination)."

 3. It is submitted in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  that  the  Judge
    misdirected herself in finding that some  other  close  relative  could
    take primary care of the child as opposed to having contact "for a  few
    hours".  The second submission is that she failed in her application of
    Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Nationality  Act  2009  (the
    2009 Act).  Reliance is placed on JO and it  is  submitted  that  given
    that the Appellant had provided evidence that she and her  3  year  old
    child had been granted Section 17 support (ie support as  provided  for
    in s.17 of the Childrens Act 1989) having been thrown out of the family
    home and faced destitution and that she had been the victim of domestic
    abuse, the Judge erred in law by failing to find  that  the  Respondent
    had totally failed in her duty to discharge the Section 55 duty set out
    in the 2009 Act.  It is submitted that although Section 55 is mentioned
    in the refusal letter there is no substantive consideration of the best
    interests of the child.

 4. What the Tribunal said in JO was:


         (1)   The duty imposed by section 55 of the Borders Citizenship and
         Immigration Act 2009 requires the  decision-maker  to  be  properly
         informed of the position of a child affected by the discharge of an
         immigration etc function. Thus equipped, the  decision  maker  must
         conduct a careful  examination  of  all  relevant  information  and
         factors.

         (2)    Being  adequately  informed  and  conducting  a   scrupulous
         analysis are elementary prerequisites to the inter-related tasks of
         identifying the child's best interests and then balancing them with
         other material considerations.

         (3)   The question whether the duties imposed by  section  55  have
         been duly performed  in  any  given  case  will  invariably  be  an
         intensely fact sensitive and contextual one. In the real  world  of
         litigation,  the  tools  available  to  the   court   or   tribunal
         considering this  question  will  frequently  be  confined  to  the
         application or submission  made  to  Secretary  of  State  and  the
         ultimate letter of decision.

 5. The suggestion made by Judge Horvath was that  the  Appellant  deceived
    the government agencies who are providing her with housing, funding and
    assistance.  She suggested that these  agencies  have  not  tested  the
    evidence given to  them  by  the  Appellant  of  for  example  domestic
    violence and destitution.  She relied  on  the  decision  in  Sanneh  v
    Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2013] EWHC 793 (Admin).

 6. At the hearing Mr Harrison relied on the  lack  of  evidence  from  the
    child's father, saying that there is a dearth of evidence  in  general.
    The position of Mr Bandigani  was  that  if  the  requirement  for  the
    Secretary of State to consider Section 55 does not "bite" in this  case
    then it never will given the circumstances of  the  Appellant  and  her
    child.

 7. The Respondent says in the Refusal Letter relative to Section  55  that
    she  has  considered  Section  55  but  there  is   no   reference   to
    consideration of any particular circumstance of the  Appellant  or  her
    child.

 8. In the response submitted by the Secretary of State  to  the  grant  of
    permission to appeal it is submitted that the  Judge  directed  herself
    appropriately.  It is submitted that there was insufficient evidence to
    establish that the child would be unable to remain in  the  UK  if  the
    claimant were required to leave.  It is submitted that the existence of
    a British citizen parent who would be able to assume the responsibility
    for caring for the child but chooses for economic or other reasons  not
    to, excludes the claimant from qualifying for a derivative right  under
    Regulation 15A.  Reliance is placed  on  the  decision  in  MA  and  SM
    (Zambrano: EU children outside the EU) Iran [2013] UKUT  00380  and  in
    particular on what was said in paragraph 41 adopting and agreeing  with
    the summary of the relevant principles to be derived from Zambrano  and
    subsequent decisions of the CJEU and the domestic courts as set out  in
    Sanneh.

 9. Reliance is also placed on paragraph 56 of MA and SM in which the Upper
    Tribunal said:

         "The mere fact that the Sponsor cannot be as economically active as
         he would  wish,  because  of  his  care  responsibilities  to  [the
         children] is not sufficient  to  support  a  conclusion  that  [the
         children] would  be  denied  the  genuine  enjoyment  of  their  EU
         citizenship rights, nor would this be the case if the Sponsor  were
         required to stop working altogether.   The right of residence is  a
         right to reside in the territory of the EU.  It is not a  right  to
         any particular quality of life or to  any  particular  standard  of
         living".

10. It is submitted that although Judge Horvath did not expressly refer  to
    MA and SM she has clearly applied its ratio.  It is  further  submitted
    that although the Judge was not obliged to look at Article  8  ECHR  in
    this case she did so and gave valid reasons for dismissing  the  appeal
    under Article 8.  It is submitted that there are no material errors  of
    law.

11. Judge Horvath said that the Appellant 'has contrived a situation giving
    the appearance that' she is the primary  carer  of  the  child  or  the
    person who has primary responsibility for the child's care  'when  this
    may not be the case'. She noted that although the evidence  before  her
    was that the child's father does not care for him  on any  day  of  the
    week he is in receipt of  child  benefit  and  child  tax  credit.   At
    paragraph 19 she noted the family  circumstances  and  found  that  the
    child would be able to live with her father  or  a  grandparent.  Judge
    Horvath expressly said that she did not find the  Appellant  to  be  'a
    credible or honest witness'. She noted the lack of evidence from people
    with whom the Appellant and child had lived on a temporary basis  after
    she had left the child's father. She reasonably took the view  that  if
    the Appellant had been 'sofa surfing'  as she claimed (for a period  of
    10 months) someone could have provided a  statement  to  confirm  that.
    There was also no  evidence  of  the  alleged  domestic  violence.  The
    Appellant had mentioned family and friends so it was not  as  if  there
    was no one to confirm her account.

12. I have not found this an easy decision but the point is that the burden
    is on the Appellant, even once it is established that she is  the  main
    carer of the child, to show that none of the other family members could
    care for the child if the Appellant had to leave the UK. Clearly  there
    are relatives that the child sees. He sees his father who  incidentally
    is inexplicably in receipt of child benefit. It  may  well  be  that  a
    different Judge would have taken a different  view  but  Judge  Horvath
    took account of all the evidence before her, applied the  relevant  law
    and gave sound and perfectly reasonable reasons for her  decision.  She
    dealt at length with s.55. She did not accept the  Appellant's  account
    and indeed took the view that it had been concocted to  facilitate  her
    application to   remain in the UK. This was not in my view  a  decision
    that could be described as perverse. It was a decision she was entitled
    to make on the evidence before her for the reasons given.

13. It is submitted that Judge Horvath erred in law in failing to remit the
    appeal to the Secretary of  State  of  State  so  that  s.55  could  be
    properly considered in terms of JO. It is said in JO that the Secretary
    of State of State as a decision maker must be 'properly  informed'  and
    that she has to  have  asked  herself  the  right  question  and  taken
    reasonable steps to acquaint herself with the relevant  information  to
    enable her to answer that question  correctly. It  is  clear  that  the
    Secretary of State twice requested information and  evidence  from  the
    Appellant. The letter confirming the support under section 17  that  is
    in the Appellant's bundle is dated 30th October 2014 so could not  have
    been sent to the Home Office in 2013. That is the only document  before
    me that mentions s. 17. Nothing  was  received  by  the  Respondent  in
    response to the request for documents made on 23rd  October  2013.  The
    Secretary of State was aware that the Appellant was dependant on Social
    Services for accommodation and financial support but there  is  nothing
    to suggest that at the time this case was considered she was  aware  of
    the s.17 support. The Respondent did consider s. 55 on  page  5  (there
    are no numbered paragraphs) of  the  Refusal  Letter.  At  that  point,
    although   two opportunities had been given to provide it, there was no
    satisfactory evidence that the Appellant was  the  sole  carer  of  the
    child. There was indeed no evidence at all of the family  circumstances
    other than that there was a father  and  grandparents.  Unsubstantiated
    allegations of domestic violence had been made. The  Appellant had been
    advised what documents she should  provide  to  support  her  claim  of
    domestic violence, including  perhaps  evidence  from  her  doctor  but
    nothing was received.. The Respondent was obliged to consider the  best
    interests of the child. The questions were whether  the  Appellant  was
    the sole carer and whether in the event  that  she  was,  whether   the
    child would have to leave the UK with the Appellant  because there  was
    no other family member in the UK who could  properly  look  after  him,
    always bearing in mind his best interests.    The  Secretary  of  State
    asked the Appellant to provide  the  necessary  information  for  these
    questions to be answered. The Appellant failed to provide it. It  seems
    to  me  that  the  reality  of  the  situation  is  that   in  all  the
    circumstances,  in particular the failure of the  Appellant  to  assist
    with her own case and the fact that there was nothing to  suggest  that
    the child was at any risk,  the Secretary  of State could not have been
    expected to have done more than she did and indeed took all  reasonable
    steps to acquaint herself with the relevant information.  .

Notice of Decision

I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  a
material error  of  law  and  shall  therefore  stand.  The  appeal  of  the
Appellant is dismissed.




Signed   Date: 15th April 2015

N. A Baird
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



