
[pic]
IAC-YW-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50956/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2014                           |On 6 November 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                              Ms Massaran Kone
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Youssefian, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. No anonymity direction has previously been made  in  these  proceedings
    and no reason has been put before me today why such a direction  should
    be made.  I therefore make no such direction.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory  Coast.   She  was  born  on  9
    October 1960.  She claims to have entered the United Kingdom unlawfully
    in November or  in  the  alternative  September  1993  using  a  French
    identity card.  By an application form dated 21 June 2012  she  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  the  basis  of
    her long residence.  The application was submitted before the change in
    the length of residence requirements that took place on  9  July  2012.
    Accordingly the respondent considered her application under  the  "old"
    Rules contained in paragraph 276A-D of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as
    amended).

 3. Following the refusal of her application the appellant appealed.   That
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J. C. Hamilton who
    in a determination promulgated on 24 July 2014 dismissed it.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal.  Her application was granted
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Saffer.  The nub of why  permission
    to appeal was granted by himn on 16 September 2014n can be gleaned from
    paragraph 4 of his decision which states:

         "4.   The  essential  ground  in  both  is   that   confusing   and
             contradictory findings have been made regarding how  long  she
             had been here, and that not all  matters  of  concern  to  the
             judge were put to her.  Both grounds appear to be arguable."

 5. In his oral submissions Mr Youssefian expanded on the  written  grounds
    seeking permission to appeal.  Firstly it is argued  that  there  is  a
    failure by the judge to make clear  findings.   For  example  he  cited
    paragraph 47 of the judge's determination where it states:

         "I need to make clear that I have not made a positive finding  that
         the appellant is being untruthful about the length of time she  has
         been in the UK, merely that on the evidence before me I  am  unable
         to find that she has shown that she has been in the UK as  long  as
         she claims."

    He argued further that  the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  make  clear
    findings and reconcile issues or by failing to  give  adequate  reasons
    for his  findings.   Moreover  given  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    credibility was not an issue and that the evidence she  gave  regarding
    the length of her residence in the United Kingdom was not found  to  be
    untruthful Mr Youssefian argued that  the  judge's  determination  when
    read as a whole, fails to make sense.

 6. The second ground relates to "unfairness" where it is argued  that  the
    judge, on a number of occasions, states that "no explanation was given"
    for particular points which the judge then holds against the appellant.
     In short that the appellant  did  not  have  the  opportunity  at  the
    hearing of dealing with these matters which  were  not  raised  in  the
    Reasons for Refusal Letter at the appeal hearing.  It  is  argued  that
    the judge ought to have given the appellant an opportunity to deal with
    the concerns which the judge clearly gave weight to when coming to  the
    conclusion that the appellant's appeal should be dismissed.

 7. Mr Kandola opposed the application arguing that against the  background
    of the appellant's dishonesty and the  unreliability  of  much  of  the
    evidence it was to be expected that the judge would be unable to  reach
    clear findings and that the approach set out within  the  determination
    was open to him.  Further that he is not obliged to put every point  to
    the appellant and his observations as to the matters complained  of  in
    the second ground were open to him.  Mr Kandola emphasised  that  these
    were "obvious points," and as such they should have been dealt with  by
    the appellant at the hearing.

 8. I deal with the second ground first.  Mr Youssefian used the example of
    the findings in relation to the  issue  of  the  appellant  having  two
    national insurance numbers disclosed on payslips.  He argues  that  she
    was not given the opportunity by the judge, at  the  hearing,  to  deal
    with the issue for which there is a perfectly credible  explanation  in
    that the first national insurance number was a temporary  one  and  the
    second a permanent one.  Mr Kandola suggested that this issue  had  not
    been raised within the grounds seeking permission to appeal.  I do  not
    accept that as clearly the second ground refers to issues of this  kind
    and then goes on to give only some of the examples.  The appellant  had
    an explanation for why two national insurance numbers  existed  and  by
    being deprived of the opportunity to put forward her  explanation,  and
    for it to be considered by the judge, the judge has fallen into error.

 9. I will add that I am also satisfied that there is inadequate  reasoning
    for the findings and that  that  reasoning  is  far  from  clear.   For
    example, again, at paragraph 47 of the judge's determination it states:

         "47. I need to make it clear  that  I  have  not  made  a  positive
             finding that the  appellant  is  being  untruthful  about  the
             length of time she has been in the  UK,  merely  that  on  the
             evidence before me I am unable to find that she has shown  she
             has been in the UK as long as she  claims.   It  does  however
             mean that I do not find the appellant has shown she  has  been
             in the UK for fourteen years and therefore she does  not  meet
             the requirements  of  paragraphs  276A-D  of  the  Immigration
             Rules."

10. On my own analysis it is clear that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law such that it
    must be set aside in its entirety.

11. It is also clear therefore that where the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is set aside the Upper Tribunal has power to remit the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal with directions for reconsideration  of  the
    appeal.  I take account of the Practice  Statement  dated  10  February
    2010 at 7.2 which contemplates that an appeal may be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The nature  and  extent  of  the  judicial  fact-
    finding necessary in order to enable the decision in the appeal  to  be
    remade is such that, having regard to the overriding objective,  it  is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

12. This is what should happen here as the hearing that took  place  within
    the First-tier Tribunal where the First-tier Judge erred prevented  the
    appellant from having a fair hearing.

13. Accordingly this appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    reconsideration of the appeal by a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than
    Judge J. C. Hamilton.  None of the findings of fact made at the  First-
    tier hearing are preserved.  A de novo hearing is required.






Signed                              Date 4 November 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

                                 DIRECTIONS

 1. The substantive hearing of this appeal will take place  at  the  Hatton
    Cross Hearing Centre on the first available date.

 2. The time estimate is two hours.

 3. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is  to  be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other party no  later  than
    4pm five working days prior to the substantive hearing.






Signed                              Date 4 November 2014.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
