
st
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50200/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House                       |Determination Promulgated             |
|on 27th May 2015                     |on 29th May 2015                      |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                          MR.GEORGE NARKWA ANDERSON
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I refer to the parties as they were in the First tier  Tribunal  though
    it is the respondent who is appealing in the present proceedings.

 2. On 7 April 2015 I set aside the decision of First-tier Judge Majid  who
    had allowed the appellant's appeal.

 3. The appellant had applied for a  residence  card  further  to  European
    Treaty rights based upon his marriage to Ms Ansong.  He  had  indicated
    that they married by proxy in Ghana. She  is  a  German  national.  The
    decisions of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024  (IAC)
    and TA and others (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316  (IAC)
    indicated that it is necessary for the appellant  to  demonstrate  that
    the marriage would be recognised in Germany. Part of the Directions for
    the rehearing was that the appellant was to be given an opportunity  to
    demonstrate this.

 4. Alternatively, if it was not established that he  and  Ms  Ansong  were
    married then he could be considered an extended family member if he can
    demonstrate they were in a durable relationship .In  order  to  achieve
    parity with domestic law the respondent uses a yardstick of  two  years
    cohabitation. Consequently, the Directions indicated if he was pursuing
    this he should seek the necessary proofs.

 5. A final aspect of his appeal related to  Article  8.  An  authoritative
    decision is awaited in respect of Article 8 rights in  the  context  of
    application  such  as  the  present.  The  residence  card  sought   is
    declaratory of the right to reside. The appellant is not being removed.
    It is open to the appellant to make a fee based application in relation
    to  his  Article  8  rights.  The  directions  gave  the  appellant  an
    opportunity to indicate how Article 8 was engaged.

The Upper Tribunal hearing of 27th May 2015

 6. The appeal was listed today for 2 PM.  The file indicates  that  notice
    of the hearing was issued to the appellant and his  representatives  on
    30 April  2015.  Neither  the  appellant  nor  his  representative  has
    attended. I have received two bundles  of  documents  with  a  covering
    letter dated 20 May 2015  from  the  appellant's  representatives.  The
    bundles were received at Field House on 26  May  2015  and  the  writer
    refers to the hearing on 27 May 2015. Consequently,  it  is  clear  his
    representatives were aware of the hearing.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has been notified of the hearing and that is in the interests
    of justice to proceed with the hearing in accordance with rules  38  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

The evidence

 7. The first bundle on behalf of  the  appellant  consists  of  19  items.
    Notably, there is no reference to  any  report  from  an  authoritative
    source on German law and the validity of Ms Anson's marriage.

 8. There are a number of documents relating to Ms Ansong. There is a self-
    assessment form from the Inland Revenue dated 6 April  2015.  It  gives
    her address as [ - ] Gardens, Middlesex. There is also a letter dated 4
    October 2014 in respect of national insurance contributions due at  the
    same address. There is a similar letter for contributions due, dated 29
    March 2014.  The address is given as [ - ] Court, Luton. There is  also
    a self-assessment form sent to  her  at  the  same  address,  dated  17
    February 2014. There are various payslips which give this address. They
    cover November 2012, December 2012 and January 2013. Finally, there  is
    a P 60 for the year ending April 2015 only this  time  her  address  is
    given as [ - ] Gardens. In her statement of 19 May 2015 she  gives  her
    address is [ - ] Gardens.  She makes no reference  to  the  alternative
    address used.

 9. There is a TV licence in the name of the appellant, dated 30 June 2014.
    The address given as [ - ] Gardens. There is also a letter  from  Tesco
    and Iceland relating to  loyalty  cards  using  this  address.  In  his
    statement he refers to no other address.

10. The appellant has produced two tenancy agreements. There is  a  tenancy
    agreement in respect of [ - ] Court dated 1 August 2012. There is  also
    a tenancy for [ - ] Gardens, dated 24 April 2014. Both tenancies are in
    joint names. In both tenancies the landlord lives on the let  premises.
    Both documents are virtually identical. I have borne in mind  what  was
    said in Tanveer Ahmed -v- SSHD [2002]  UKIAT  00439.  The  tribunal  at
    paragraph 31 pointed out the need to  differentiate  between  form  and
    content. It is for the claimant to show a  document  is  reliable.  The
    issue is reliability, not  whether  the  document  is  a  forgery.  The
    document should not be viewed in isolation. The tenancy  agreements  do
    not contain contact details  and  so  it  is  very  difficult  for  the
    respondent to carry out any checks. In the circumstance I place  little
    weight upon them.

11. It is fair to say minimal evidence has been produced to  establish  the
    parties are in a durable relationship. Notwithstanding issues about the
    appellant's  status  and  consequently  having  problems  opening  bank
    accounts etc he should have been able  to  produce  some  documentation
    showing his presence, for instance, letters from home. This could  then
    be tied to documentary evidence showing Ms Ansong's presence. There  is
    no reason why she could not produce a volume of  evidence  showing  her
    presence rather than the contradictory and limited  evidence  produced.
    It is for the appellant to show that he is in  a  durable  relationship
    and I find he has not done so.

12. The second bundle provided consists of  documents  which  were  largely
    before the First-tier Tribunal. The skeleton argument although dated 20
    May 2015 relates to the appeal as presented at the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the error of law hearing. There is an expert report in  respect  of
    Ghanaian customary marriages. This however does not address  the  issue
    as to whether the marriage  is  recognised  in  Germany.  The  skeleton
    argument does not say how Article 8 is engaged in this situation.

13. In conclusion, I find it has not been established that the appellant is
    a family  member  of  a  qualified  person.  I  also  do  not  find  it
    established that he is an extended family member. Finally, I can see no
    basis upon  which  is  appeal  should  succeed  under  Article  8.  The
    appellant is seeking a declaration as to his rights. Nothing  indicates
    his right to family or private life is being interfered  with  at  this
    stage. Should there be removal directions then these will carry  appeal
    rights. Insofar as the present decision impacts upon those  rights  the
    appellant has the option of making a fee based  application  to  remain
    and I find this option is a proportionate response. Consequently, I see
    no breach of Article 8 occurring as a result of this decision.

Decision

14. The appeal is dismissed.



Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
