
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/50956/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26 February 2016                    |On 24 March 2016                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                Massaran kone
                       (anonymity direction NOt MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. L. Youssefian, D J Webb & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pedro promulgated on 21 August 2015 in which he  refused
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated  21
    November 2013 to remove her from the United Kingdom.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the Judge should have considered any part  of  the
    Appellant's  evidence  which  he  in  fact  did  find  credible  before
    proceeding to state that he was not prepared to give any weight to  any
    uncorroborated assertions made by the Appellant.


    It is unclear on the basis of paragraph 9 of the decision  whether  the
    totality of the available evidence was found to have been  infected  on
    the footing described by the Judge.[.....]


    Given the Judge's findings stated at paragraph 9 of the decision it  is
    unclear to  what  extent  corroborative  evidence  has  therefore  been
    affected by the Judge's  conclusions  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant stated at paragraph 9."

 3. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard oral submissions from both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision, which I set out
    below with reasons.


Submissions


 4. Mr. Youssefian referred me to the cases of ZH (Bangladesh) [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 8 and Aissaoui [2008] EWCA Civ 37.  He submitted that the judge had
    taken  an  erroneous  approach  to  credibility.   I  was  referred  to
    paragraph [9] of the  decision.   The  most  important  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's claim was her length of stay in the United Kingdom.  I  was
    referred to paragraphs [32] and [33] of MA  (Somalia)  [2010]  UKSC  49
    where it was held that an Appellant should not be dismissed because she
    had told lies, but that the significance of the lies varied  from  case
    to case.  If the  lying  went  to  a  central  issue  it  may  be  more
    significant.


 5. It was submitted that the Appellant  had  not  told  a  lie  about  the
    central issue of her case.  I was referred to paragraph [9]  where  the
    judge found that the Appellant was a liar because she had come  to  the
    United Kingdom illegally and she had worked here  illegally.   To  find
    from the outset that she was  a  liar  without  having  considered  the
    evidence further was a material error of law.


 6. The case of ZH had  found  that  effectively  the  fourteen  year  long
    residence rule was an amnesty clause.  In  both  ZH  and  Aissaoui  the
    Court of Appeal had accepted that most of  those  applying  would  have
    been working illegally and would have assumed a  false  name.   It  was
    submitted that this was the whole point of the  amnesty  and  that,  if
    these factors were taken against the Appellant,  it  would  render  the
    whole of the amnesty clause pointless.  If the fact that the  Appellant
    had entered the United Kingdom illegally and assumed another ID were to
    be taken against her, this would put her on  an  unfair  footing.   The
    judge had erred in law in relying on the Appellant's  previous  conduct
    and had not taken a balanced view.  No credit had  been  given  to  the
    Appellant for her honest account of having entered the  United  Kingdom
    illegally and there had been no balanced assessment of her credibility.




 7.  It  was  submitted  that  meaningful  corroboration  was  particularly
    difficult and that many applicants lacked a  paper  trail  for  obvious
    reasons connected to their illegal entry and illegal  employment.   The
    judge should not have expected the Appellant to be able to  corroborate
    everything.  This error of law was material.


 8. In relation to  the  approach  to  the  documentary  evidence,  it  was
    submitted that the judge had given no weight to the  photographs  which
    were corroborative.  It was submitted that he  could  have  given  them
    limited or little weight, but that he  had  erred  in  giving  them  no
    weight.  In particular,  I  was  referred  to  paragraph  [11]  of  the
    decision, and to the photograph dated 28 October 1995.  The  judge  had
    found that the photograph could have been taken anywhere  although  the
    Appellant had given a detailed account of when and where the photograph
    had been taken.  I was referred to the Record of Proceedings.   At  the
    start of the hearing the Appellant had given detailed evidence relating
    to the photographs.  This evidence was clearly  corroborative,  yet  no
    weight has been attached to it.


 9. It was submitted that the Respondent had raised no issue at the hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the  Appellant's  account  of
    when and where this photograph had been taken.  No  evidence  had  been
    provided to show that the photographs had been manufactured.  This  was
    a significant error of law because this photograph  could  have  placed
    the Appellant in the United Kingdom in 1995.   He  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had explained the context of every single photograph provided
    and there had been no challenge to the  Appellant's  evidence  on  this
    point.  Some weight should have been given to these photographs.  There
    had been no detailed or balanced assessment  of  the  totality  of  the
    evidence relating to the photographs.


10. I was referred to the final sentence of paragraph  [17]  in  which  the
    judge accepts that the Appellant and her assumed identity are  one  and
    the same person.  The judge finds there is no evidence that  from  1999
    to 2009 that the Appellant was living in the United Kingdom in her  own
    name.  I was referred to the evidence in the  Appellant's  supplemental
    bundle consisting of a postcard sent to the Appellant  in  2000  to  an
    address in Hackney to which documents in her assumed name had also been
    sent.  I was also referred to a letter dated 14 April 1999 sent to  the
    Appellant in her own name at the address in Hackney.  It was  submitted
    that there was  evidence  between  1999  and  2009  to  show  that  the
    Appellant was in the United Kingdom using her own name.  The judge  had
    erred in concluding that there were no documents in her real name.


11. Mr. Youssefian submitted that there was a  mischaracterisation  of  the
    approach taken to the issue of the lost documents.  The  Appellant  was
    still relying on the fact that she had submitted extensive  documentary
    evidence from 1999 to 2012 but the  documents  had  been  lost  by  the
    Respondent.  The fact that  the  Appellant  accepted  that  the  appeal
    should proceed because the Respondent had looked for the documents  and
    not been able to find them did not mean that the point fell away.   The
    Appellant still maintained that documentary evidence had been  lost  by
    the Respondent.  The judge attached no weight to this point and gave no
    benefit of the doubt to the Appellant.


12. The judge had erred in failing to consider that the Reasons for Refusal
    Letter did not raise the point that the documentary  evidence  provided
    did not cover fourteen years.  The documents established  that  someone
    had  been  continuously  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom,  but   the
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant and her alias were one and
    the same person.  I was referred to the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  It
    was submitted that at no  point  did  the  Respondent  state  that  the
    documentary evidence did not show that  either  the  Appellant  or  her
    alias had been in the United Kingdom for fourteen years.  If the  judge
    had accepted that the Appellant and her alias were the same  person  he
    should have accepted that she had been here for  fourteen  years.   The
    Secretary of State did not dispute that the Appellant and her alias had
    been here for fourteen years, just that they were not the same person.


13. In relation to ground 3,  Mr.  Youssefian  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    appeal.


14. In response Ms Fijiwala referred to the fact that there  had  been  two
    determinations thus far in the Appellant's appeal and that the decision
    of Judge Pedro came about following  the  remittal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in October 2014.  She submitted that  the  judge  should  have
    found that the decision was not in accordance with  the  law.   As  the
    decision had been made in November 2013 it should not have been made in
    relation to paragraph 276B.  I was referred to the case of Singh [2015]
    EWCA Civ 74.  On that basis she submitted that I should find that there
    was no error of law in the judge's dismissing of the appeal.


15. In relation to the first and second grounds of appeal I was referred to
    paragraph [8] of the decision  where  the  judge  stated  that  he  had
    considered the totality of the evidence.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    judge was entitled to make the findings  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    credible or reliable in paragraph [9].  In relation to the case  of  ZH
    she  submitted  that  this  case  did  not  refer  to  somebody  having
    manufactured illegal identity, but just having obtained it.


16. I was referred to paragraph [10] regarding  the  inconsistency  of  her
    arrival date.  There was nothing further to show that the Appellant had
    arrived in 1993.  The only documentary evidence prior to 1999 consisted
    of one photograph.  The onus lay on the Appellant to show that she  was
    in the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  had  directed  himself  properly
    regarding the photograph.  There was no landmark on the photograph  and
    it could have been taken at any time and any place.   The  judge  could
    not be certain that it was taken in the United Kingdom.   Reasons  were
    given for why the photograph was rejected.  I was referred to paragraph
    [12].  There was nothing else prior to 1999 to place the  Appellant  in
    the United Kingdom.


17. The evidence of Miss Camara had not been challenged in the  grounds  of
    appeal.  The judge had found that she was not a reliable witness and as
    a result he had been entitled to find that the  Appellant  herself  was
    not reliable.  She accepted that the  judge  had  not  found  that  the
    Appellant was not a reliable witness on the basis of the fact  that  he
    did not find Miss Camara's evidence credible, but  she  submitted  that
    the Appellant's evidence was not corroborated by Miss Camara.


18. I was referred to paragraph [16].  The judge appeared  to  accept  that
    the Appellant had been here between 1999 and 2008.  However  there  was
    no evidence that she was here from 2009 to 2011.  The  point  regarding
    the weight to be given to the lost documents had not been challenged in
    the grounds of appeal and had not been raised at  the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The judge had questioned the representative about
    the lost documents and this issue had not been pursued.  I was referred
    to paragraph [4] of the decision where the judge states  that  "it  was
    confirmed that no other documentary evidence was to be relied on except
    that which was before the judge".  In relation to  the  next  available
    documentary evidence from Trinity College, I was referred to  paragraph
    [17] where the judge found that the Appellant could  have  been  coming
    and going between France and the United Kingdom.  On  consideration  of
    all the evidence in its totality the decision was not irrational.  This
    was a very high threshold to reach.


19. In relation to Article 8 she submitted that  paragraphs  [20]  to  [22]
    contained a full and proper analysis of this  and  she  invited  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.


20. In response Mr. Youssefian submitted in relation to the case of  Singh,
    the Respondent had not sought permission to cross-appeal on this point.
     Ms Fijiwala had stated that she could not have cross-appealed but this
    was not the case.  This was precisely the situation where a  Respondent
    could cross-appeal.  He submitted that I did not have the  jurisdiction
    to consider this point.  In any event he submitted that Ms Fijiwala had
    conflated two issues in relation to Singh,  an  application  under  the
    immigration rules and an application under Article  8.   It  was  clear
    from the case of Singh that it applied to a case  where  someone  could
    not meet the immigration rules and  so  had  applied  under  Article  8
    outside the immigration rules.  Singh was relevant as to whether or not
    the decision of the Respondent should be made outside  the  immigration
    rules under Article 8 or under the new immigration rules  in  place  in
    July 2012.  Singh did not apply to a case  where  someone  had  applied
    under paragraph 276B inside the immigration rules.  HC194 made it clear
    that for those who had applied under the immigration rules,  the  rules
    which applied were those in force on 8 July 2012.  He accepted that the
    Respondent was entitled and was correct to consider it  under  the  new
    immigration rules as well.  Little  weight  should  be  given  to  that
    submission.


21. In relation to the inconsistency  regarding  date  of  arrival,  I  was
    referred to paragraph [17] of the Appellant's witness  statement  which
    the judge had not taken into account.  In  relation  to  false  ID  and
    assumed false ID he submitted  that  ZH  envisaged  a  situation  where
    people had been using aliases.  To assume an ID  was  to  use  a  false
    document and how else would  someone  work  in  another  name.   I  was
    referred to paragraph [16] of ZH.  It was submitted that for the use of
    a false identity alone the  judge  had  taken  against  the  Appellant.
    Taking the decision as a whole, the judge  had  not  taken  a  balanced
    approach to credibility.


Error of law decision


22. Paragraph [9] of the decision states:


    "I did not find the appellant to be a credible or reliable witness.  On
    her own admission, she did  at  some  time  enter  the  United  Kingdom
    utilising another person's French identity  card.   Moreover,  she  has
    claimed that she has had two false French identity  cards  manufactured
    for her in the name of Denis Kone Aude.  She is clearly  a  person  who
    has demonstrated a  blatant  disregard  for  UK  laws  and  immigration
    control  to  the  point  where  she  has  claimed  that  she  has   had
    manufactured French identity  cards  in  an  alias  to  enable  her  to
    undertake  unlawful  employment  in  the  United  Kingdom.    In   such
    circumstances, I am not prepared to give any weight to any corroborated
    assertions made by the appellant, particularly as regards her length of
    stay in the United Kingdom."


23. The Appellant's entire case rests on how  long  she  has  been  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The  Appellant  applied  under  paragraph  276B  which
    requires her to  show  that  she  has  had  at  least  fourteen  years'
    continuous  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom.   I   have   carefully
    considered the cases of ZH and Aissaoui.  Paragraph [16] of ZH states:


    "The use of a false identity, which was admitted by the appellant,  was
    held against him.  But no account was taken,  as  it  seems  to  me  it
    needed to be taken, of the reason he gave for using  it:  that  he  was
    afraid of being detected as  an  illegal  immigrant.   That  of  course
    compounds the illegality of his presence here, but it  is  a  different
    reason from the more sinister reason for using a false identity,  which
    is to commit frauds.  While  he  will  not  have  been  paying  tax  or
    national insurance contributions, some recognition was also due to  his
    evidence that he had been trying to obtain an NI number.  Moreover, the
    evidence - which came entirely  from  Mr  Hussain  himself  -  did  not
    support the  immigration  judge's  finding  of  sustained  deceit;  the
    appellant had given evidence of a single date, 2001, when he  had  used
    an alias."


24. I have also taken into account paragraph [17] of ZH  which  found  that
    the "comprehensive denunciation" of the appellant in that case was  not
    "balanced and justified".  It found that the judge had  lost  sight  of
    the fact that this was "a case in which the appellant, by  dint  of  14
    years' unlawful residence during which he  had  maintained  himself  by
    working unlawfully, had reached a point at which the  Home  Secretary's
    own rules, approved by Parliament, gave him a right to remain  so  long
    as it was not undesirable in the public  interest  that  he  should  be
    allowed to do so".


25. I therefore find that for the judge to state that he was  not  prepared
    to give any  weight  to  any  uncorroborated  assertions  made  by  the
    Appellant because she had entered the United Kingdom illegally and  had
    worked here illegally ignores the fact that the purpose of the fourteen
    year rule is to enable those who have been here unlawfully and who have
    worked unlawfully to obtain leave to remain.


26. Ms Fijiwala submitted that it was different  in  the  Appellant's  case
    because she had not only obtained false  ID  cards  but  had  had  them
    manufactured for her.  I find that there is no  significant  difference
    between these two given the purpose for which  the  illegal  cards  are
    being used, which is to enable someone  to  work,  something  which  is
    envisaged by ZH.  It is clear that the judge can take  account  of  the
    fact that the Appellant  has  entered  the  United  Kingdom  illegally,
    remained here illegally and worked here illegally.  However, given  the
    entire basis of the rule which is to allow such people leave to remain,
    to refuse to attach any weight to any of her evidence on the basis that
    she has done those things, is an error of law.


27. I find that the judge's approach in  not  relying  on  the  Appellant's
    evidence unless it was corroborated is flawed.  I find that, instead of
    taking the evidence piece by piece and weighing it in the balance,  the
    judge  has  erred  by  refusing  to  accept  any  of  the   Appellant's
    uncorroborated evidence.


28. In relation to the claimed date of entry to  the  United  Kingdom,  the
    Appellant  has  admitted  that  she  entered  illegally  in  1993.   In
    paragraph [10] the judge sets out that the evidence of her actual  date
    of arrival is contradictory but there is no reference to paragraph [17]
    of her witness statement where she explains that  the  error  regarding
    November 1993 comes from her previous representatives.


29. In relation to the documentary evidence,  I  find  that  the  Appellant
    provided evidence to corroborate her presence in the United Kingdom  in
    1995.  However the judge gives this  no  weight,  paragraph  [11].   He
    states that this could have been taken at any time and  at  any  place,
    whether inside or outside the United Kingdom, but he does not make  any
    reference to the fact that in the Appellant's evidence, and as set  out
    in his Record of Proceedings, the Appellant gave detailed  evidence  as
    to where and when this had been taken.  This was corroborative evidence
    of the Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom, but  the  judge  has
    not referred to it, and has given it no weight.  There  is  nothing  in
    the decision to suggest that the Respondent's  representative  objected
    to the explanation given by  the  Appellant  for  when  and  where  the
    photograph was  taken.   I  find  that  to  fail  to  make  a  balanced
    assessment of this evidence is an error of law.


30. The judge addressed whether or not the Appellant is the same person  as
    Denise Kone Aude in paragraph [16].   He  states  that  there  were  no
    documents produced prior to 1999, but  that  the  documentary  evidence
    before him showed that Denise Kone Aude had been in the United  Kingdom
    from 1999 to 2008.  The judge has not considered the evidence  provided
    by the Appellant in the form of a postcard and a letter dated 2000  and
    1999 respectively which were in the name of Massaran  Kone,  and  which
    had been sent to an address in Hackney for  which  there  was  evidence
    relating to Denise Kone Aude.  I find that there  was  evidence  before
    the judge of the Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom  using  her
    own name in 1999 and 2000.  This goes to the finding as to  whether  or
    not the Appellant and Denise Aude Kone are one and the same person.


31. In paragraphs [16] and [17]  the  judge  appears  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant and Denise Aude Kone are one and the same  person.   However,
    there is no clear finding.  It was  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of
    State did not dispute that either Denise or the Appellant had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for fourteen  years,  but  the  Respondent  did  not
    accept that the Appellant and Denise were  one  and  the  same  person.
    Given this, it was incumbent on the judge to make a  clear  finding  on
    this point, and his failure to do so is a material error.


32. In relation to consideration Article 8, given that I  have  found  that
    the judge erred in his approach to the evidence and his  assessment  of
    credibility, I find that his consideration of Article 8 is infected  by
    these errors.


33. I have considered  the  Respondent's  representative's  submissions  in
    relation  to  the  incorrect  application  of  paragraph   276B.    The
    Respondent could have cross-appealed on this point, but she did not.  I
    note that this decision which was made under Rule  276B  has  now  been
    looked at by three separate judges, including the previous decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal to remit the appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal,
    and at no point has the Respondent submitted  that  she  had  erred  in
    considering the application under paragraph 276B.


34. In any event, I was referred to Singh which sets out HC194 in paragraph
    [7].  It provides that "if an application for entry clearance, leave to
    remain or indefinite leave to remain has been made before 9  July  2012
    and the application has  not  been  decided,  it  will  be  decided  in
    accordance with the rules in force on  8  July  2012".   This  is  what
    happened in the Appellant's case.  She applied  under  the  immigration
    rules for leave to remain prior to 9 July  2012.   Singh  is  concerned
    with those who did not make an application under the immigration rules.


35. I am mindful that this appeal has already once  been  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  However, bearing in mind  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010, given the nature and  extent
    of the fact-finding necessary to  enable  this  appeal  to  be  remade,
    having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective,  I  find  that  it   is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


36. The decision involves the making of a material error of law, and I  set
    the decision aside.


37. The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing.
    Judges Pedro and Hamilton are excluded.





No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 9 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


