
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50181/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2 February and 13 May 2016             |On 27 May 2016                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr Sumit Lamgade
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr P Nath (02.02.16) and Mr S. Kandola (13.05.16),
                      Specialist Appeals
Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr V Makol, Solicitor, Maalik & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Kimnell  sitting  in  Hatton  Cross  on  3  July  2015)
    allowing the claimant's appeal against the decision of  an  Immigration
    Officer to refuse the claimant  leave  to  enter,  and  to  cancel  his
    continuing leave to remain as a  student,  on  the  ground  that  false
    representations were employed or material facts were not disclosed  for
    the purposes of obtaining leave, or that there had been such  a  change
    of circumstances in his case since the leave was granted that it should
    be cancelled.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity
    direction, and I do not consider that the claimant should  be  accorded
    anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The claimant, who is a national of Nepal, had leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant issued to him on 3
    October 2013.  On 27 November 2014 he  was  served  with  a  notice  of
    refusal of leave to enter at Heathrow Airport, Terminal 4.  The  notice
    said the Home  Office  had  now  identified  that  he  had  made  false
    representations in the application which he had made for  the  purposes
    of obtaining leave to remain as a student.  He had  submitted  a  TOEIC
    certificate from ETS.  ETS had a record of his  speaking  test.   Using
    voice verification software, ETS was  able  to  detect  when  a  single
    person was undertaking multiple tests.  ETS had undertaken a  check  of
    his test and  had  confirmed  to  the  Secretary  of  State  there  was
    significant evidence to conclude that his certificate was  fraudulently
    obtained.  The scores from his test taken on 16 and 20 August  2013  at
    Premier Language Training Centre had now been cancelled by ETS.  On the
    basis of the information provided to it by ETS,  the  Home  Office  was
    satisfied there was substantial evidence to  conclude  that  the  TOEIC
    certificate was fraudulently obtained.  In light of  this  information,
    the Immigration Officer  was  accordingly  satisfied  he  had  utilised
    deception to gain leave to remain in the UK.

 3. In his grounds  of  appeal,  the  claimant  averred  that  he  had  not
    fraudulently obtained any documents in relation to his application.  He
    further averred that the burden of proof was on the Secretary of State,
    and that the Secretary of  State  had  not  provided  any  evidence  to
    discharge the burden of proof.

 4. For the purposes of the appeal hearing, the Border Force  Appeals  Team
    compiled  a  Home  Office  bundle  containing  a  detailed  explanatory
    statement with a number of appendices.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 5. At the hearing before Judge Kimnell, there was no  Presenting  Officer.
    Mr Makol, who appeared on behalf of the claimant, relied on a bundle of
    documents which he had assembled, which included an expert report  from
    Dr Philip Harrison and a lengthy skeleton argument.  In his  subsequent
    decision, Judge Kimnell summarised Mr Makol's case in  paragraph  [10].
    The statements submitted  by  the  Immigration  Officer  were  generic.
    There was nothing specific relating to the claimant in this  case,  and
    as a result the  evidence  tendered  by  the  Immigration  Officer  was
    insufficient to discharge the burden of proof.

 6. The judge agreed with Mr Makol's submission for the  reasons  which  he
    gave in paragraphs [13] to [19] of  his  decision,  which  I  reproduce
    verbatim below:

         13.  The evidence on which the respondent relies is,  as  Mr  Makol
             submitted, largely generic though not entirely so.

         14.  The respondent  relies  first  on  the  witness  statement  of
             Rebecca Collings who sets out the background to  the  language
             testing policy that was introduced in 2008.   It  subsequently
             came to attention that there had been a serious breach of  the
             system because individuals have  been  able  to  pay  to  pass
             English language tests  with  proxy  test  takers  taking  the
             speaking element of the test.  In addition answers  were  seen
             to be read out in front of a class supposedly taking  a  multi
             choice element of the test.

         15.  A process was set up whereby  ETS  informed  the  Home  Office
             where they were able to identify impersonation and proxy  test
             taking.  The analysis was carried  out  by  voice  recognition
             software verified by special trained analysts.

         16.  A second statement is made by Peter Millington,  also  of  the
             Home Office, who  again  sets  out  the  background.   He  has
             visited ETS premises where  the  process  by  which  biometric
             voice recognition took place was explained to him.  The  basic
             technology extracts biometric features  from  an  individual's
             speech to generate a voice print.  That voice print  was  then
             run against samples to establish whether it was likely  to  be
             recorded by the same person.  Further  human  verification  of
             "flagged" matches then took place by staff  who  had  received
             mandatory training in voice recognition analysis.

         17.  Appendix F contains the prints of the tests set at the Premier
             Language Training Centre naming the appellant and  giving  his
             correct date of birth and nationality.  I can find no  legible
             evidence in the bundle however indicating that the appellant's
             language test certificate has been  cancelled  or  giving  any
             reason why.  The Explanatory Statement at paragraph 22 records
             the fact that test results have been cancelled by ETS  on  the
             basis of their own analysis  and  that  the  Home  Office  was
             notified by way of an entry on a spreadsheet,  an  excerpt  of
             which includes the appellant (Appendix G).  I am afraid I  can
             make no sense, however, of Appendix G  a  part  of  which  has
             become  illegible  in  the  photocopying   process.    Without
             explanation of the screen prints I am not satisfied that  they
             contain evidence that the appellant's language test was  taken
             by a  proxy  or  that  the  results  of  the  test  have  been
             invalidated or cancelled.

         18.  The respondent's bundle also contains a record of an interview
             held with the appellant in which he denies that he employed  a
             proxy to take the language test on his behalf.

         19.  I have to agree with the submission made by Mr Makol that  the
             respondent has not discharged the  burden  of  proof  in  this
             case.  The appeal is allowed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

 7. The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for finding  that
    the Immigration Officer had not discharged the burden  of  proof.   She
    quoted various extracts from the witness statements  of  Mr  Millington
    and Ms Collings.  Taking account of this evidence, it was clear that in
    order to be categorised as invalid on the spreadsheet provided  to  the
    Home Office the case had to have  gone  through  a  computer  programme
    analysing speech and then two independent voice analysts.  If all three
    were in agreement that a proxy had been used, then the  test  would  be
    categorised as invalid.  The printout of the relevant  section  of  the
    ETS  spreadsheet  was  attached  at  Appendix  F  of  the   explanatory
    statement.   The  spreadsheet  identified  the  claimant  by  name  and
    recorded that the test taken on 20 August 2013 was invalid.

The Initial Refusal of Permission to Appeal

 8.  On  20  October  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Frankish   refused
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "The respondent's reliance on two standard form witness  statements
         in every case and, as found here, illegible scrap of extract from a
         spreadsheet is a much vexed  issue  in  allegations  of  dishonesty
         under 321A.  It is a dilemma familiar to  all  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judges and, to date, no legal guidance has been provided to support
         the respondent's approach to these cases."

The Eventual Grant of Permission

 9. On a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, on 9 November 2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  granted
    permission to appeal as he considered it was arguable that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had erred in concluding that the Secretary of State
    had not discharged the burden of  proof  upon  her  to  show  that  the
    claimant had used deception in the English language test which  he  had
    undertaken.

The Error of Law Hearing on 2 February 2016

10. At the hearing to determine whether an error of law  was  made  out,  I
    drew the parties' attention to the fact that there was  legal  guidance
    supporting the Secretary of State's use  of  generic  evidence  in  ETS
    cases, albeit in the context of judicial  review  rather  than  in  the
    context of statutory appeals.  I refer to this guidance  below.   After
    hearing from both representatives, I ruled that an  error  of  law  was
    made out for reasons which I indicated  in  short  form.   My  extended
    written reasons for finding an error of law are set out below.

11. On the topic of the forum for remaking  the  decision,  Ms  Holmes  was
    neutral, whereas Mr Makol was insistent that fairness required that the
    appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I decided to reserve my
    decision on this question.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

12. The relevant legal guidance is Gazi v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department (ETS - judicial review) IJR [2015] UKUT 00327  (IAC)  and  R
    (Ali and Mehmood) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 744.

13. Giving the leading judgment in the Ali and  Mehmood  case,  Beatson  LJ
    said at paragraph [24] that in February 2014 the  television  programme
    Panorama revealed, using covert recording, that  there  was  widespread
    fraud in the taking of language tests, in  particular  by  the  use  of
    proxy test takers.  As a result of this, ETS reviewed  all  its  tests.
    It did so using computerised voice recognition software and two reviews
    by anti-fraud staff trained in voice recognition.  ETS  concluded  that
    thousands of tests, including Mr Ali's test, had not been taken by  the
    person who was named on the certificate but by another person.

14. At paragraph [25], Beatson LJ noted that the Secretary of State  relied
    on the witness statements, both dated 23 June 2014, of Rebecca Collings
    and Peter Millington, which had originally been  filed  in  proceedings
    brought by Zaheer Hussain Mohammed, and  which  had  subsequently  been
    relied on in all cases in defence of challenges to removal decisions on
    the ground of deception in  language  testing  and  TOEIC  certificates
    issued by ETS.  Beatson LJ continued in paragraph [26]:

         "These   statements   describe   the   way   anti-fraud    measures
         (particularly online verification systems) were introduced, and the
         steps  taken  following  the  'Panorama'  programme  and  the  Home
         Office's contact with ETS, and why the Home Office  accepted  that,
         where ETS had cancelled a test score because of  impersonation  and
         proxy test taking, that test score had been obtained by  deception.
         Mr Millington stated that ETS's statistics bore out the  underlying
         reliability of the voice biometrics technology, and the reason  the
         Home Office considered that, where ETS  identifies  positive  voice
         matches for two candidates with different names, it is because  one
         person has sat the speaking and writing exam for  both  candidates.
         That, he stated,  is  clear  evidence  that  both  candidates  have
         fraudulently  obtained  their  TOEIC   certificate   and   employed
         deception in their application for leave to remain.  In R (Gazi)  v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS - judicial  review)
         [2015]  UKUT  00327  (IAC)  at  6  and  9,  the  President  of  the
         Immigration and  Asylum  Chamber  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTIAC)
         described these as 'generic' witness statements, because  they  did
         not show the exact reason why ETS invalidated the certificate of  a
         particular person or provide  evidence  relating  to  the  personal
         circumstances of an individual."

15. One of the issues in Gazi was whether the Secretary of State's reliance
    on the generic evidence of Mr Millington and Ms Collings was  compliant
    with the following published guidance, which  is  quoted  at  paragraph
    [28] of Gazi:

         "The evidence must always prove to a  high  degree  of  probability
         that deception had been used to gain the leave, whether or  not  an
         admission of deception is made.  The  onus  -  as  always  in  such
         situations - is on the officer making the assertion  to  prove  his
         case."

    The President said as follows at paragraph [35]:

         "In my view, taking  into  account  Chapter  50  of  the  EIG,  the
         respondent's  evidence,  summarised  in  Chapter  II   above,   was
         sufficient to warrant the assessment that the applicant's TOEIC had
         been  procured  by  deception  and,  thus,  provided  an   adequate
         foundation for the decision made under Section 10 of the 1999  Act.
         True it is that,  at  this  remove  and  with  the  benefit  of  Dr
         Harrison's report, there may be grounds for  contending  that  said
         evidence is not infallible.  And there may be  sufficient  material
         for a lively debate about  its  various  ingredients  ...  For  the
         purpose of disposing of this ground of  challenge  and  bearing  in
         mind that the jurisdiction being exercised is  one  of  supervisory
         review rather than merits appeal, it suffices for this Tribunal  to
         be satisfied that the evidence upon which the impugned decision was
         made has the hallmarks of care, thoroughness, underlying  expertise
         and sufficient reliability.  The  cornerstone  of  the  applicant's
         case is that the evidence was insufficient  for  this  purpose.   I
         reject this challenge."

16. The claimant before me was pursing a merits based appeal, and so it was
    open to the First-tier Tribunal to find on the particular facts of  the
    case that the Secretary of State  had  not  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that the TOEIC certificate had been obtained through the use of
    a proxy test taker, and thus  the  claimant's  leave  to  remain  as  a
    student had not been procured by deception.

17. But the judge was wrong in law to find that the generic evidence relied
    on by the Secretary of State, taken in conjunction  with  the  evidence
    specific to the claimant in Appendix F, was insufficient  to  discharge
    the burden of proof.  The judge ought to have directed himself that the
    Secretary of State's evidence established a prima facie case of  fraud,
    and that the evidential onus shifted to the  claimant  to  rebut  fraud
    (although the legal burden to prove fraud continued to  rest  with  the
    Secretary of State.)

18. The significance of Appendix F is that it contained  the  extract  from
    the ETS spreadsheet showing that test numbers 130844 and  130845  taken
    by the claimant had been declared invalid by ETS. So this was  evidence
    specific to the claimant.

19. The judge was wrong to hold that there was no legible evidence  in  the
    bundle indicating that the language test certificate had been cancelled
    or giving any reason why.   The  document  at  Appendix  F  is  clearly
    legible, and it clearly shows that the test results have been  declared
    invalid.  The explanatory statement, and  the  generic  evidence  which
    accompanied it, explains very clearly the significance of a test  being
    declared invalid.  The import of the declaration is that the  test  has
    been cancelled because ETS is satisfied (as a  result  of  the  process
    described in paragraph [16] of the judge's decision) that the test  has
    not been taken by the claimant, but by another person.

20. It was open to the judge to characterise Appendix G as being illegible,
    but  Appendix  G  was  not  relied  as  containing  evidence  that  the
    claimant's language test was taken by proxy  or  as  showing  that  the
    results of the test had been invalidated or cancelled.

21. The judge also failed to engage with the circumstantial evidence relied
    on in the explanatory  statement  as  reinforcing  the  case  that  the
    claimant's test had been taken by a proxy.

22. At paragraph [19] of the explanatory statement, the Immigration Officer
    drew attention to the fact that the claimant had been very vague as  to
    where he had taken his TOEIC test, on the one hand saying that  it  was
    at a test centre five minutes from "Bakle Street" train station, and on
    the other hand saying it  was  possibly  five  minutes  from  West  Ham
    station.

23. The claimant volunteered in the course of his  interview  that  he  had
    taken an IELTS test in June or  July  2013  and  the  scores  which  he
    recollected obtaining were not high enough to  allow  him  to  continue
    studying in the UK.  He gave this as the reason why he  then  undertook
    the TOEIC test. He said he had been told it was easier to pass.

24. In conclusion, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated  by
    a material error of law such that it must be set aside and remade.

Appropriate Forum

25. The practice statement provides that  remaking  rather  than  remitting
    will constitute the normal approach to  determining  appeals  where  an
    error of law is found, even if some further fact finding is necessary.

26. Some further fact finding is necessary in respect of the circumstantial
    evidence and the claimant's evidence in rebuttal. Its nature and extent
    is not such that, having regard to  the  overriding  objective,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

27. The only possible justification for remitting the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal would be if the claimant had  been  deprived  of  a  fair
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal or other opportunity for his case to
    be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

28. Mr Makol submitted that it had been unfair  to  the  claimant  that  no
    Presenting Officer had appeared at the hearing  before  Judge  Kimnell.
    But this submission does not stand up to scrutiny.   The  claimant  was
    legally represented before the First-tier Tribunal, and the hearing was
    conducted on the ground chosen by Mr Makol.  So he cannot be  heard  to
    say on behalf of his client that the hearing was unfair  because  there
    was not a Presenting Officer present. The claimant was not deprived  of
    a fair hearing before the First-tier Tribunal or other opportunity  for
    his case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

Directions for the Resumed Hearing

29. I gave permission to the claimant to  serve  further  evidence,  if  so
    advised, to support his contention that he did not  use  a  proxy  test
    taker, provided that such evidence was contained  in  a  paginated  and
    indexed bundle and was served on the Specialist Appeals  Team  and  the
    Upper Tribunal no later than seven days before the resumed hearing.

The Resumed Hearing on 13 May 2006

30. On 12 May 2016  the  claimant's  representatives  faxed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal a letter dated 11 May 2016 in which  they  invited  the  Upper
    Tribunal to remake the decision on the  papers.   They  confirmed  that
    they would not be attending the resumed hearing.  They went on to  make
    lengthy submissions about the decision of the Presidential Panel in the
    test cases of SM and Ihsan Qadir ("Qadir"), which they acknowledged had
    not been reported. They quoted extensively from the decision, and  from
    a summary of the decision handed down at the  end  of  March  2016,  in
    support of a submission  that,  on  a  proper  reading  of  Qadir,  the
    respondent's evidence against their client suffered from such  manifest
    frailties that it was simply unreliable; and it was  thus  unreasonable
    for their client to be removed pursuant to  the  Secretary  of  State's
    evidence.

31. Meanwhile, on  11  May  2016  Mr  Kandola  emailed  to  the  claimant's
    representatives and faxed to the Upper Tribunal a  report  on  forensic
    speaker comparison tests undertaken by ETS. The report dated  20  April
    2016 had been prepared by Professor Peter French on the instructions of
    the  Government  Legal  Department,  in  response  (I  infer)  to   the
    criticisms of the Presidential Panel about the lack of  expert  opinion
    underpinning the generic evidence.  In the covering letter, Mr  Kandola
    said that the Secretary of State  wished  to  rely  upon  the  enclosed
    expert report of Professor French in the upcoming  continuance  hearing
    on 13 May 2016.

32. The Upper Tribunal subsequently received  a  letter  from  Malik  &  Co
    acknowledging receipt of Professor French's report, but  not  otherwise
    making any comment on the Rule 15(2A) application.

33. At the resumed hearing, Mr  Kandola  said  he  had  been  investigating
    whether the claimant had undertaken  a  voluntary  departure.   In  the
    absence of confirmation of this fact,  he  invited  me  to  remake  the
    decision in the Secretary of State's favour.  He submitted that as  the
    decision of Qadir was unreported, it could not  be  relied  on  by  the
    claimant.  In any event, it  did  not  decide  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence was incapable  of  discharging  the  legal  burden  of
    proof, and moreover matters had moved on.  The Secretary of  State  now
    relied on the expert evidence of Professor Peter French  as  fortifying
    the case against ETS claimants such as Mr Lamgade.

Discussions and Findings on Remaking

34. As the claimant's representatives have obtained sight of the unreported
    decision in Qadir, and as they rely on the  decision  as  showing  that
    their client has no case  to  answer,  I  consider  that  it  would  be
    procedurally unfair and not in accordance with the overriding objective
    to shut out the claimant's case on remaking  on  the  ground  that  the
    decision relied upon has not officially been reported.

35. Qadir does not purport to  establish  the  proposition  for  which  the
    claimant's representatives contend.  The  Presidential  Panel  did  not
    find that the generic evidence relied on by the Secretary of State  was
    incapable of discharging the  legal  burden  of  proof.   Having  heard
    rebuttal evidence from  both  claimants,  the  Presidential  Panel  was
    satisfied on the totality of the evidence that the Secretary  of  State
    had not  discharged  the  legal  burden  of  proof  against  those  two
    claimants. It does not follow that the Secretary of State's evidence in
    this appeal does not discharge the burden of proof against Mr  Lamgade,
    as the following passage from the decision makes clear:



         "67. We begin by asking ourselves whether the  Secretary  of  State
             has discharged the  evidential  burden  of  proving  that  the
             Appellants were, or either of them was, guilty  of  dishonesty
             in the respects alleged. Bearing in mind that, as noted above,
             all of the Secretary of State's evidence  was  adduced  first,
             reflecting the burden of proof, it is  appropriate  to  record
             that at the stage when the Secretary of  State's  case  closed
             there was no submission on behalf of either Appellant that the
             aforementioned evidential burden had not been discharged.   We
             draw attention, en passant, to a procedural issue which may be
             worthy  of  fuller  consideration  in  an  appropriate  future
             appeal, namely the question of whether in  a  case  where  the
             Secretary of State bears the evidential burden of establishing
             sufficient evidence of deception and,  at  the  hearing,  goes
             first in the order of  batting,  the  Tribunal  should  invite
             submissions from the parties'  representatives  at  the  stage
             when the Secretary of State's evidence is completed.

         68.  As our analysis and conclusions in the  immediately  preceding
             section make clear, we have substantial reservations about the
             strength and quality of the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence.
             Its shortcomings  are  manifest.  On  the  other  hand,  while
             bearing in mind that the context is one of alleged  deception,
             we must be mindful of the comparatively modest threshold which
             an evidential burden entails.  The  calls  for  an  evaluative
             assessment on the part  of  the  tribunal.  By  an  admittedly
             narrow margin we are satisfied that the Secretary of State has
             discharged this burden.  The effect of this is that there is a
             burden, again an evidential one, on the Appellants of  raising
             an innocent explanation."

36. Accordingly, I find that my legal analysis in my error of law  decision
    still holds good.  The Secretary of State has established a prima facie
    case of dishonesty,  so  that  the  evidential  burden  shifts  to  the
    claimant to raise an innocent explanation.

37. The claimant was called as a witness before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    but his witness statement has not been re-served for  the  purposes  of
    the remaking of the decision in the Upper Tribunal;  and  the  claimant
    has not been tendered as a witness to be cross-examined on his  witness
    statement.  The case against the claimant is not solely  based  on  the
    generic evidence of Rebecca Collings  and  Peter  Millington.   In  the
    Immigration Officer's Explanatory Statement, the Immigration Officer at
    paragraph 19 referred to some of the answers  which  the  claimant  had
    given in interview.  At paragraph 23, he said that his conclusion as to
    the claimant's dishonesty,  derived  from  the  generic  evidence,  was
    supported by the vagueness of the  claimant's  account  of  taking  the
    test, "which lacks a level of detail and a recollection which would  be
    expected if the [claimant] had genuinely been undertaking the  test  in
    person".  The Immigration Officer further observed that the  conclusion
    of dishonesty was supported by the claimant's admission  that  he  only
    undertook the ETS test following two attempts at the IELTS  test  where
    he failed to achieve a high enough mark in order to rely on  the  IELTS
    test for the purposes of his leave to remain application.

38. I  consider  that  the  matters  relied  on  in  paragraph  23  of  the
    Explanatory Statement  fortify  the  case  of  dishonesty  against  the
    claimant, and I find  that  the  claimant  has  not  provided  credible
    evidence in rebuttal of the prima facie case that he used a proxy  test
    taker in order to obtain his TOEIC certificate.  So  I  find  that  the
    decision should be remade in the Secretary of  State's  favour  on  the
    documentary evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal  and  that
    it is not necessary to pray in aid the  expert  evidence  of  Professor
    French. However, if his report is taken into account, the case  against
    the claimant is significantly reinforced.

39. The  claimant's  representatives  did  not  object  to  the  very  late
    introduction of the report from Professor French.  I consider  that  it
    is appropriate to admit the report  into  evidence  for  the  following
    reasons: firstly, it is highly pertinent; secondly, it  was  reasonable
    for the Secretary of State not to seek to rely on such a report  before
    the First-tier Tribunal as it was not  until  the  recent  decision  of
    Qadir that the shortcomings in the generic  evidence  became  manifest;
    and thirdly the delay in its production is not unreasonable.

40. The matters on which Professor French was asked to opine was whether on
    the balance of probabilities, ETS's methodology is likely to result  in
    any false positives, i.e. speaker comparison tests  results  indicating
    that different speakers are the same person.  If  he  considered  false
    positives were likely, he was asked to estimate how many.

41. In the course of his report, Professor French, comments extensively  on
    the expert evidence of Dr Harrison, who gave oral  expert  evidence  to
    the Presidential Panel and upon whose expert opinion  the  Presidential
    Panel drew heavily in identifying shortcomings in the generic evidence.

42. Professor French's conclusions include the following:

         '(1)  The   conditions   used   for   trained   listeners   compare
             confirmation, in conjunction  with  the  (albeit  unspecified)
             conservative  threshold  set  for  ASR  match   identification
             (witness statement of Peter Millington, para 31), would, in my
             view, have resulted in  substantially  more  false  rejections
             than false positives. ...

         (3)  If a 2% error rate established for the  TOEFL  pilot  readings
             were to apply to the TOEIC recordings, then I  would  estimate
             the rate of false positive to be very substantially less  than
             1% after the process of assessment by  trained  listeners  had
             been applied. ...

         (4)  Even if the TOIEC recordings were on average somewhat  shorter
             and poorer in quality than the TOEFL pilot test recordings, on
             the basis of the information that has been provided,  I  would
             still estimate the number of false  positives  emanating  from
             the overall processes of ASR analysis followed  by  assessment
             by two trained listeners to be very small.'

43. The Secretary of State only has to establish her case on the balance of
    probabilities, not beyond reasonable doubt.  In the light of the expert
    report of Professor French, read alongside the expert  evidence  of  Dr
    Harrison as rehearsed in Qadir, it is very unlikely that this  claimant
    is the victim of a false positive test result. Although there is a huge
    divergence between the two  experts  on  the  likely  number  of  false
    positive test results, even on Dr Harrison's figures  in  a  worse-case
    scenario the cumulative rate will be less than 15%, with  over  85%  of
    the final positive results being sound.  This assumes  a  rate  of  30%
    false positives at stage one (automated voice recognition) and  a  rate
    of 36% false positives at stage 2 (human checking).

44. In conclusion, for the reasons given above, I find that  the  Secretary
    of State has discharged the legal burden of proving that  the  claimant
    procured his TOIEC certificate by deception.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,
accordingly it is set aside and the following decision is substituted:

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 27th May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

