
[pic]
IAC-HW-AM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50496/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 17 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                GHULAM FARID
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gondal of Berkshire Law Chamber


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent (the Applicant) is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 April
    1974.  He states he arrived on 31 December 2010 with leave to enter  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant, expiring on 17 May 2014, and on  16
    May 2014 he  submitted  an  application  for  a  residence  card  under
    Regulation 8 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as amended as an
    extended family member of his cousin,  a  Spanish  national  exercising
    treaty rights in the United Kingdom as a worker.

The Secretary of State's Decision

 2. On 8 December 2014 the Secretary of State (SSHD)  refused  to  issue  a
    residence card for the reasons given in a letter  of  8  December  2014
    (the reasons letter).  The SSHD made enquiries  about  the  Appellant's
    Sponsor's employment and considered that his employer company was not a
    genuine  business.  The  Applicant  had  supplied   a   non-functioning
    telephone number for the company and on-line searches did not  disclose
    anything relating to the business of the  company.   Consequently,  the
    SSHD considered the Applicant's Sponsor was not a worker and so  not  a
    qualified person within the meaning of Reg.6 of  the  2006  Regulations
    and refused the application with reference to Regs.6 and  8(2)  of  the
    2006  Regulations.  The  SSHD  had  also  considered  the  evidence  of
    dependency and was not satisfied the Applicant had shown he had at  any
    time been dependent on his Spanish cousin.

 3. On 9 January 2015 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Reg.26 of
    the 2006 Regulations and Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The grounds  are  entirely  formulaic  and
    generic and include a reference to Article 8 of the European Convention
    but no particulars are given why or how the decision might  breach  any
    rights protected by Article 8.

The First-tier Tribunal Proceedings

 4. By a decision promulgated on  6  July  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Majid allowed the appeal  but  did  not  specify  whether  the
    appeal was allowed under the 2006 Regulations or by way of reference to
    Article 8 of the European Convention.

 5. On 9 October 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McDade  granted  the
    SSHD permission to appeal on the basis it was arguable  the  Judge  had
    erred in law because at no point had he  set  out  the  nature  of  the
    decision the Applicant had appealed and his treatment of  the  evidence
    was inadequate.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 6. The Applicant attended the hearing but  took  no  active  part  in  the
    proceedings, the purpose and procedure of which I explained to him.

 7. For the SSHD Mr  Nath  submitted  the  Judge  had  not  identified  the
    substance of the original decision appealed against by  the  Applicant.
    He had simply referred at para.2 to a "negative decision".   The  Judge
    had referred at paras.5 and 7 of his decision to the evidence  but  had
    given no details of the substance of the evidence.  At para.10  he  had
    referred to the Applicant's claimed payment of fees to a college by his
    Spanish cousin but again had given no details such as the  movement  of
    funds or subsequently made a finding whether he accepted that evidence.

 8. At paragraph 14 he had set out an extract  from  the  headnote  of  the
    determination in Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Reg  8(2))  [2012]  UKUT  79
    (IAC) which did appear to have relevance to the appeal  but  failed  to
    give any reasons to explain his conclusion at para.15 of  his  decision
    that the Applicant was a dependent of his Spanish cousin.

 9. He concluded that the decision contained errors of  law  such  that  it
    should be set aside in its entirety.  The decision did not  inform  the
    parties and in particular the SSHD why  the  appeal  had  been  decided
    against the SSHD.

10. For the Applicant Mr Gondal referred me to paras.2,  6,  8  and  10  in
    which the Judge had stated he had considered all the other evidence  to
    which he had referred.  There was no need for the Judge to set out  the
    details of the SSHD decision.  His consideration  of  the  evidence  at
    para.10 was adequate.  He  had  given  the  reason  for  accepting  the
    evidence, namely that the oral evidence of the Appellant  "corroborated
    the fact that he was dependent on his cousin throughout as  established
    by the evidence contained in the  various  documents  in  the  bundle".
    Additionally, the Judge  had  rightly  referred  to  and  set  out  the
    jurisprudence of the determination in Dauhoo.  The  decision  contained
    no error of law and should stand.

Findings and Consideration

11. The First-tier Tribunal's decision  is  generic.   The  Judge  did  not
    engage with the claim because the SSHD did  not  find  the  Applicant's
    Sponsor, his Spanish cousin,  to  be  a  qualified  person  within  the
    meaning of Reg.6.  The Judge  did  not  engage  with  any  specific  or
    detailed aspects of the documentary evidence.  The consequence is  that
    the SSHD as the party losing the appeal was not given  any  reason  why
    the appeal had been allowed.

12. A Judge may have some measure of discretion.  When judicial  discretion
    is exercised it is incumbent on the Judge to explain  the  reasons  why
    such discretion has been exercised in a particular way  and  especially
    so that the disappointed party may understand why the Judge reached the
    decision in question.

13. The Judge gave no explanation why he did not address the SSHD's refusal
    of the Applicant's claim under Article 8  of  the  European  Convention
    whether within the Immigration Rules, by reference to paragraph 276ADE,
    or outside the Rules.  In the  event  this  is  not  a  material  error
    because of the subsequent jurisprudence in Amirtyemour and others  (EEA
    appeal; human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466  which  was  promulgated  on  4
    August 2015 after the hearing of this appeal on 26  June  and  affirmed
    for different reasons by the Court of Appeal in TY (Sri Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ.1233.

14. For all these reasons, I find the First-tier Tribunal decision contains
    errors of law such that it should be set aside in its entirety.  Having
    regard to s.12 Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice
    Statement 7(B) and the nature of the  errors  of  law,  I  consider  it
    appropriate for the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to
    decide.

Anonymity

15. There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the matter I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained errors  of  law  such
    that it should be set aside in its entirety.  The matter is remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal to decide afresh.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 12. ii. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

