
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/50916/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                   |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 30th July 2015                     |                   On 14th August 2015|
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                        MISS Nalvathani Muthukrishan
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Jeearajahic
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 5th March 1982 is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka.   The
    Appellant was represented by  Miss  Jeearajahic.   The  Respondent  was
    represented by Mr Bramble, a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application  for  a  derivative  residence  card
    under  the  2006  Regulations.   The  Respondent   had   refused   that
    application on 12th November 2013.

 3. The Appellant had appealed that decision and the appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal sitting at Hatton Cross on 1st July 2014.
     The judge had allowed the appeal under both the Immigration Rules  and
    the Human Rights Act.

 4. The Appellant had made application for permission  to  appeal  on  14th
    July 2014 and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge P J M
    Hollingworth on 1st September 2014.  It was said that arguable  errors
    of  law  had  arisen  in  terms  of  the  matters  raised  within   the
    Respondent's grounds.  Directions were issued directing that the  Upper
    Tribunal should firstly decide whether an error of law  had  been  made
    and the matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Bramble referred me to the Grounds of Appeal.  It was submitted that
    the judge had failed to give  any  or  any  adequate  reasons  for  the
    decision that the appeal should be allowed under the Immigration  Rules
    having neither considered in any detail the Rules nor  identifying  the
    specific Rule under which it was said that the appeal succeeded.

 6. It was further submitted that in terms  of  Article  8  the  judge  had
    failed   to   give   public   interest   considerations   within    the
    proportionality evaluation exercise and in any event had erred  in  law
    in not deciding firstly whether  there  were  compelling  circumstances
    that would allow an examination of Article 8 outside of the Rules.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 7. Miss Jeearajahic submitted that paragraph 13 of  the  judge's  decision
    was clear in that the judge had noted within that paragraph that whilst
    the Appellant may not necessarily have fulfilled  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 15 of the 2006 Regulations at the date  of  application  the
    judge had found that at the hearing date the Appellant had so satisfied
    the Regulations and therefore the matter had  been  allowed  under  the
    European Regulations.  It was said therefore that the points raised  by
    the Respondent were of no relevance.

 8. I reserved my decision to consider the submissions and documents and  I
    now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is a very short decision but  I
    have done my best to  draw  any  proper  inferences  from  the  limited
    available material.

10. The Appellant's application was for a derivative residence  card  under
    Regulation 18 of the 2006 Regulations.  The Appellant had claimed to be
    the primary carer of her two children and referred specifically  within
    her application form to the fact that she was breastfeeding her younger
    8 month old daughter.  However  the  Appellant  had  within  that  same
    application form also noted that her husband, with whom she lived,  was
    also a primary carer (7.1 to 7.16).

11. Not surprisingly, in  those  circumstances  the  Respondent  found  the
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of Regulation 15A(7)(i) or (ii)
    of the 2006 Regulations.  The Respondent also found separately that the
    children would be able to  reside  in  the  UK  if  the  Appellant  was
    required to leave and found therefore the  Appellant  did  not  satisfy
    Regulation 15A(4A).

12. In consideration of Regulation 15A of the 2006 Regulations the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is confined to paragraph 13 of that decision
    alone.  Miss Jeearajahic relies upon this paragraph for the proposition
    that the judge accepted that at  the  date  of  application  the  judge
    agreed that the Appellant could not meet Regulation 15A but at the date
    of hearing she could.  Even  seeking  to  infer  any  proper  inference
    within paragraph 13 of the judge's  decision  there  is  no  basis  for
    inferring that the judge necessarily meant that or even  if  the  judge
    had meant that had dealt with the matter properly.

13. It is true that a proper reading of paragraph  13  indicates  that  the
    Appellant's Counsel at the appeal hearing conceded that  the  Appellant
    at  the  time  of  application  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 15A(7) given  that  within  her  own  application  form  the
    Appellant had accepted that she shared responsibility with her  husband
    who was not an exempt person.  The judge referring to him or herself in
    the abstract term "the Tribunal" may well have accepted that concession
    made by Counsel as being accurate.  However the judge seems to  suggest
    that the evidence as it emerged at the hearing changed  that  position.
    That is the inference it is submitted that I should make from paragraph
    13.  The judge at paragraph 13 does not distinguish in  the  concession
    made by Counsel and accepted  by  the  judge  himself  the  distinction
    between Regulation 15A(7) and Regulation 15A(4A).   The  concession  is
    simply put as openly as "Regulation 15".  It is difficult  to  properly
    infer that the judge had in mind the separate features that  needed  to
    be  examined.   Further  to  say  or  infer  from  paragraph  13   that
    circumstances had changed between application and hearing bears  little
    relation to the evidence.

14. At the time of application the Appellant had noted as a central feature
    that she was breastfeeding the younger child.   She  also  referred  to
    both children being very young.  The first feature may not  necessarily
    have applied at the date of hearing,  it  is  unclear.   Certainly  the
    children were older at the date of hearing.  It could therefore be said
    that the Appellant's argument if anything had weakened between date  of
    application and hearing.  The only evidence referred to by the judge in
    paragraph 13 was that in cross-examination the Appellant had said  "she
    could not live without her children".  The judge  refers  to  no  other
    evidence.  The judge does not analyse  or  comment  upon  whether  that
    phrase should  be  taken  literally  or  merely  as  an  expression  of
    unhappiness if there was a separation.  The judge does not  analyse  or
    comment upon whether that position adopted by the Appellant at the date
    of hearing did or did not exist at the date  of  application.   If  the
    Appellant would have described matters in similar vein at the  date  of
    application then nothing had changed.  There is no  indication  whether
    the judge had in mind Regulation 15A(4A)  within  paragraph  13  simply
    because there is a reference to Regulation 15 only.  Further even if it
    could be inferred that the judge had in  mind  specifically  Regulation
    15A(4A) the question appropriate under that  sub-paragraph  is  whether
    the children would be unable to reside in the UK if the  Appellant  was
    removed rather than the state of mind either literally or  figuratively
    of the Appellant.  Even the concluding phrase "she is their main  carer
    and they are extremely young" is not based on  any  assessment  of  the
    evidence or adequacy of explanation  nor  does  it  appear  to  be  any
    different at date of hearing as the date of application  where  it  was
    conceded that the Appellant could not succeed in this case.

15. As indicated  above  if  anything  the  features  relied  upon  by  the
    Appellant would have weakened by the  date  of  hearing.   Further,  as
    indicated above paragraph 13 also seems to be essentially looking, very
    briefly, through the eyes of the Appellant  rather  than  the  approach
    required under  paragraph  15A(4A).   It  is  a  confusing  and  wholly
    inadequate analysis of this case  under  Regulation  15A  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

16. Under the final heading "decision" the judge allows this  appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.  There is no reference
    to the EEA Regulations.  I have tried to infer that the judge in  error
    said "under the Immigration Rules" rather  than  correctly  "under  the
    2006 Regulations".  However the concession recorded by her and  adopted
    within paragraph 13 that the Appellant could not meet the  requirements
    of Regulation 15 and the absence of any cohesive evaluation  thereafter
    means it is difficult to make that proper inference.   Further  if  the
    judge had meant to allow it under the EEA Regulations there was no need
    to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.   Accordingly,  whilst  unclear  the
    fact the judge purports to allow this case under the Immigration  Rules
    without conducting any analysis of the evidence within the terms of the
    Immigration Rules or seeking to identify which Rule the  judge  had  in
    mind is a further material error of law.

17. Finally there is the consideration of this case under Article 8 of  the
    ECHR which further discloses serious  errors  of  law.   I  accept  the
    question of whether judges are entitled to look at  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR in circumstances such as these is a vexed  question.   Mr  Bramble
    suggested this aspect should perhaps be adjourned as he understood  the
    issue was being considered by the Upper Tribunal.  I disagree with that
    suggestion.  This jurisdiction is  beset  with  vexed  and  conflicting
    views and cases in many areas.  There are always fresh  cases  emerging
    from the Superior Courts that seek to  give  assistance  or  definitive
    answers.  They do not necessarily achieve that purpose.  If cases  were
    adjourned to await such pronouncements little or no work would be  done
    within this jurisdiction.  I have therefore within the context of  this
    hearing looked at whether the judge was entitled to consider Article  8
    of the ECHR having conceded it is a  conflicting  and  confusing  area.
    However I take the view the judge was not entitled to look at Article 8
    of the ECHR for a number of reasons:

      a) An examination of Article 8 of the ECHR is only relevant  if  there
         is evidence that there may be a proposed interference  with  family
         and/or private life.  The Home Office refusal  letter  in  no  less
         than four separate places invited the Appellant to make application
         under the Immigration Rules (including Article 8 of  the  ECHR)  if
         the Appellant so wished; and further made clear that there  was  no
         intention to remove until  at  least  the  Appellant  had  had  the
         opportunity to make such application and for  the  Home  Office  to
         consider it.  It is plain therefore that this refusal by  the  Home
         Office  did  not  propose  any  imminent  removal   and   therefore
         interference with family or private life and further made it  plain
         that if such position arrived the Respondent would  be  considering
         that matter further.

      b) The First-tier Tribunal is an  Appellate  jurisdiction.   The  Home
         Office for reasons explained above had not even looked at this case
         under Article 8 of the ECHR and for the judge to so do  meant  that
         the judge was effectively placing himself in the role  of  decision
         maker of first instance which is not the role of  a  judge  in  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

      c) Article 8 of the ECHR now, is looked  at  through  the  Immigration
         Rules as the refusal letter makes clear.  There is  also  case  law
         (Singh) to suggest that considering Article 8 of the  ECHR  without
         first looking at the Immigration Rules is unlawful.

      d) Finally if the Appellant makes no further application or  did  make
         an application as invited by the Home Office then  further  removal
         directions and/or decisions would be made by the  Respondent  which
         of  course  may  be  favourable  to  the  Appellant  but  even   if
         unfavourable would generate a right of appeal including  an  appeal
         under Article 8 rendering this decision both academic and  outdated
         and therefore pointless.

18. For the above reasons there was in  my  view  no  basis  in  the  judge
    considering Article 8 of the ECHR in  this  case.   In  any  event  the
    consideration under Article 8 of the ECHR disclosed in itself  material
    errors of law in that:

      a) It had not been examined within the ambit of the Immigration Rules.



      b) If as the judge had declared within the decision paragraph that the
         appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules it  was  unnecessary
         to consider it in any event under Article 8 of the ECHR outside  of
         the Rules.

      c) There were  no  reasons  given  as  to  why  the  judge  should  be
         considering the case outside of the Rules.

      d) There was no consideration of  Section  117B  of  the  2002  Act  a
         statutory consideration necessary (Dube [2015]).

      e) Too much reliance was placed on ZH (Tanzania)  and  although  "best
         interests of children" is a primary consideration it  is  certainly
         not the only factor  whenever  an  examination  of  proportionality
         between the public good and private wishes is under  consideration.
         The judge does not appear to have noted that point.

Notice of Decision

19. There were a number of material errors of law  made  in  this  decision
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal needs to be set aside
    and remade.

20. Anonymity not retained.






Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

