
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/51670/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1st September 2014                         |On 29th September 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                                  Mr Charles AMOAKO
                                                  (Anonymity Direction Not
      Made)


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     MS Jaisri instructed by Crown & Mehira Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I shall refer to the parties as they were  termed
    before the First Tier Tribunal, that is Mr Amoako as the appellant  and
    The Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on 1st January  1975,  and  he
    made an application for a residence card as confirmation of a right  to
    reside in the UK on the basis of a  marriage  or  durable  relationship
    with a Belgian and EEA national.

 3. The respondent refused the appellant's application  with  reference  to
    Regulation 7 of  the  EEA  Regulations  on  20th  November  2013.   The
    respondent alleged that  the  appellant  had  also  failed  to  provide
    satisfactory evidence she was is in a durable relationship with an  EEA
    national in accordance with Regulation 8.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell determined the  matter  on  22nd  May
    2014 and allowed the appeal on 28th May 2014.  The judge accepted  that
    there  was  a  valid  customary  marriage  and   the   certificate   of
    registration of marriage was genuine. He found that the  appellant  had
    produced a letter from the Ghanaian High Commission dated 22nd  January
    2014 which stated that the competent authorities in Ghana had confirmed
    that the marriage  was  properly  registered  in  accordance  with  the
    Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)  Law  1985  and   the
    Amendment Law 1991.

 5. The Secretary of State applied for Permission to Appeal  on  the  basis
    that the judge had failed to follow Kareem  (Proxy  marriages  EU  law)
    Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 and thus there was an error of law.

 6. There was no finding that any evidence of the relevant foreign law  was
    provided by the appellant.

The Hearing

 7. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had scant regard to  Kareem  and  the
    determination was very short.  Kareem was promulgated by the  date  the
    judge considered the appeal and this should have been followed.  TA and
    Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 316  (IAC)  confirmed  that
    evidence in relation to foreign law should  be  provided  for  a  proxy
    marriage of an EEA national.   Indeed  Mr  Jaisiri  confirmed  that  he
    raised Kareem with the judge at the First  Tier  Tribunal  hearing.  He
    argued that if he were not persuaded the certificate was  issued  by  a
    competent authority then the EEA national's country's  laws  should  be
    considered with respect a proxy marriage.

 8. Mr Jaisiri confirmed that he raised Kareem with the judge but that  his
    failure to follow Kareem was not an error of law.  Only  if  the  judge
    were satisfied that the  marriage  certificate  was  not  issued  by  a
    competent authority need he go on to consider the matter of whether the
    sponsor national's country permitted proxy marriages.



Conclusions

 9. It is clear from paragraph 22 of Kareem that the question to  be  asked
    is whether the appellant is the spouse of a qualified  person  for  the
    purposes of EU law and in  that  light  it  is  important  to  seek  to
    determine the legal system in which it is to be established whether the
    appellant was in a marital relationship.  The fundamental question  was
    whether, in that case, according to Austrian law, the marriage could be
    regarded as having been celebrated in Ghana and thus whether a proxy or
    customary marriage would be recognised in Austria. In this instance the
    relevant laws are those of Belgium.

10. Kareem confirms that there must be proof of the  private  international
    law of the relevant  country,  in  this  case  Belgium  as  to  whether
    marriages in the form of proxy marriages are valid  and  such  evidence
    will not only have to identify relevant legal provisions in that  other
    country (Belgium) but identify how they operate in practice. The  legal
    system of the nationality  of  the  Union  citizen  governs  whether  a
    marriage has been contracted Kareem [18].

11. TA  and  Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  00316  (IAC)
    confirms that 'following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages  -  EU
    law) [2014] UKUT 24, the determination of whether there  is  a  marital
    relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006
    must always be examined in accordance with the laws of the Member State
    from which the Union citizen obtains nationality.

12. In this instance there was no evidence of  the  relevant  foreign  law.
    There was no examination of the law of the member  state  with  regards
    proxy marriages, Kareem [17].  I do not accept that the  issue  of  the
    law of Belgium should come after a consideration of the  documentation.
    The judge made an error of law and I set aside  his  determination  and
    remake the decision.

13. No evidence was submitted in relation to the  point  regarding  Belgium
    law and as fundamental point, I find  that  the  appeal  must  fail  in
    respect of the validity of marriage further to the EEA Regulations.

14. I was asked to consider the matter with respect to  durability  of  the
    relationship. There was little evidence before me with regard this  and
    as pointed out in the refusal letter of the respondent it  is  expected
    that the appellant should demonstrate he has been living with  his  EEA
    sponsor for two years.  This refusal pointed out that the appellant had
    provided no evidence that he resided together was a couple at the  same
    address prior to the date of his customary marriage certificate and one
    scanned copy of a bill from Sky was  insufficient.  No further evidence
    was provided to me despite the appellant having had  nearly  10  months
    notice (from the date of decision) that this might be required.  Indeed
    Mr Jaisiri himself acknowledged the paucity of evidence and although he
    did not withdraw the application indicated  that  the  appellant  would
    have to make a fresh application.

15. The dearth of evidence and the nature of evidence produced overall does
    not persuade me that there is a durable relationship for  the  purposes
    of the EEA Regulations.

16. For the reasons given above I find an error of law in the determination
    of Judge Maxwell and  set  aside  his  determination.   I  remake  that
    determination and dismiss the appeal under Regulation 7 and  Regulation
    8(5) of the EEA Regulations on the basis of the reasoning above.

17. At the outset I note no decision to remove the appellant has been made.
    That said, I find no family life has been established and even  if  the
    appellant has established a right to a private life that is precarious.
    He entered illegally in only 2011.

18. The appellant cannot succeed under paragraph 276 ADE as he has not been
    living in the UK for twenty years and I do not accept that he has  lost
    cultural ties with Ghana or there  are  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration in Ghana. He has  relations  in  Ghana  whom  he  claimed
    attended his proxy marriage ceremony and has spent the majority of  his
    life in Ghana. There are no arguably good grounds for  considering  the
    matter outside the Immigration Rules Shahzad (Art  8:  legitimate  aim)
    [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC).

19. Following the Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 principles, I do not  accept
    that he has established a right to a  family  life.   Even  if  he  had
    established a private life and I note that the threshold  is  low,  the
    refusal is in accordance with the law and necessary for the rights  and
    freedoms of others through the maintenance of immigration control.

20. I give weight to Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
    Act and note that this appellant entered the UK illegally, has remained
    in the UK illegally and appears to have worked  illegally.  Further  to
    Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11 I did not find that the appellant's private
    life had been prejudiced in a manner sufficiently serious  to  outweigh
    the respondent's decision.

Order

The appeal of Mr Amoako is dismissed under the EEA Regulations and on  Human
Rights grounds.

Signed                                             Date 25th September 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



