

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51525/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 23 January 2015                   |On 3 February 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DRABU CBE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MICHAEL ONYEMAEZE
                                                                  Respondent

                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr O Nwokeji, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State who was granted
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of
    Judge Majid who for reasons given in his determination promulgated on
    25 September 2014 allowed the appeal of the respondent. The respondent,
    a national of Nigeria had been refused a residence card as a
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as husband of
    an EEA national. The Secretary of State took the view that the marriage
    between the respondent and his EEA national wife was one of
    convenience. It was also concluded that their relationship was not
    genuine or subsisting.

 2. Judge Majid at Taylor House heard appeal against the decision on 17
    September 2014 and for the reasons given in his determination, which
    was promulgated on 25th of September 2014, he allowed the appeal. He
    found that the marriage between the respondent and his sponsor was a
    genuine marriage and the relationship between the two was a subsisting
    relationship. The Judge also concluded that the respondent merits the
    benefit of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006,
    as amended, as well as the Articles of the ECHR.

 3. In granting permission to appeal, Judge P J M Hollingworth, a judge of
    the First-Tier tribunal said "arguable errors of law have arisen in
    respect of applying TA and Others, the validity of the proxy manage,
    the methodology of approach in relation to the issue of the marriage of
    convenience and in respect of the analysis of the factors leading to
    the conclusion of durability of the relationship."

 4. At the hearing before me, Mr Nwokeji, representing the respondent
    readily conceded that the determination was unsustainable for reasons
    identified in the grounds of appeal supporting the application. Mr S
    Walker asked that the determination be set aside and a remittal for de-
    novo hearing before the First tier Tribunal be directed. Mr Nwokeji did
    not resist the request.

 5. Accordingly the decision made by Judge Majid is set aside as being in
    material errors of law. This appeal is therefore allowed. I direct that
    the appeal be heard afresh by any Judge of the First Tier Tribunal
    except Judge Majid.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
2 February 2015


DIRECTIONS REGARDING ANONYMITY NOT MADE.

ORDER ON FEES:
The appeal having been allowed and it having been found  that  the  impugned
decision was fundamentally flawed, I direct that order made by  Judge  Majid
to award for full fees to be paid to Mr Onyemaeze be reversed. No award  for
fees is made.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

