
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51627/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 08 July 2014                               |On 21 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

     SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MIKE OSARETIN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

 Appellant:       Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

 Respondent:  Mr I Singh of Rakkani Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is a condensed  version  of  the  judgment  given  orally  at  the
    conclusion of the hearing of  this  appeal,  in  the  presence  of  the
    parties' representatives, on 08 July 2014.

 2. This appeal has its origins in an application made by  the  Respondent,
    Mr Osaretin, who is of Nigerian nationality and aged 34  years,  for  a
    permanent residence card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.
    This gave rise to a refusal decision on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department (the  "Secretary  of  State"),  dated  05
    December 2013.  The key reason for the refusal was based on information
    provided to the Secretary of State by HMRC, pursuant to an  enquiry  on
    the part of the former.  This stimulated a letter  dated  02  September
    2013 from HMRC which stated, inter alia, that  the  National  Insurance
    Number represented as being that of the Respondent's partner,  did  not
    correlate to her but, rather, related to a male person  born  in  2001.
    This prompted the following assessment in the letter of decision:

         "Due to our confirmation from HMRC we do not believe the  documents
         you provided are genuine as claimed. Therefore  we  have  not  seen
         evidence of your EEA sponsor exercising Treaty rights in the United
         Kingdom for 5 years as required for permanence residence ....


         As we have refused your application for permanent residence due  to
         the fact we believe the evidence you submitted is forged,  we  have
         revoked your residence card which was issued on 27 May 2011 and you
         now have no valid leave to remain."

 3. The First-tier Tribunal (the "FtT") allowed the  ensuing  appeal.   The
    Judge, having noted that the burden of proof was on the Appellant  [now
    Respondent], recorded  the  evidence  which  I  have  rehearsed  above.
    Having done so, the Judge turned to consider the evidence submitted  on
    behalf of the Respondent.  This included a series of pay statements and
    Forms P60 documenting that the National Insurance number concerned  was
    that of his sponsor.   The evidence also included material retrieved by
    the Respondent's solicitors from the HMRC website.  This indicates that
    while every child in respect of whom a claim for Child Benefit has been
    made is allocated a "Child Reference Number" for the use  of  HMRC  and
    DWP, this is discontinued at the age of 15 years  and  9  months,  when
    HMRC notifies each child of their National Insurance Number: in effect,
    a conversion takes place.  This suggests that the statement in the HMRC
    letter quoted above cannot have been correct since, at  the  date  when
    the letter was written, a person born in 2001 would have been  aged  no
    more than 12 or years.  The  Respondent  also  relied  on  a  statement
    emanating from the HMRC website indicating:

         "HMRC's systems will automatically check your  employee's  National
         Insurance Numbers on your first FPS  (or  your  Employer  Alignment
         Submission)  or  when  you  report  starting  details  for  a   new
         employee."


    The significance of this statement is that  the  evidence  demonstrates
    that the Respondent's sponsor has had several  jobs,  with  the  result
    that, presumtively, her asserted National  Insurance  Number  has  been
    checked and verified by HMRC on more than one occasion.


 4. In brief compass, the FtT found the evidence submitted on behalf of the
    Respondent persuasive and, further, found that the contents of the HMRC
    letter were, in this  discrete  respect,  incorrect.   The  Judge  then
    proceeded to consider the other documentary evidence submitted with the
    application.  Having noted the  concerns  expressed  about  aspects  of
    these in the  letter  of  decision,  the  Judge  made  the  overarching
    conclusion that the Respondent had demonstrated that  his  sponsor  has
    been working in the United Kingdom exercising  Treaty  rights  for  the
    requisite period.   The appeal succeeded accordingly.

 5. In the Secretary of State's application for permission  to  appeal,  it
    was stated:

         "The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal has made a material error  of
         law in the determination .....


         The information before the FtTJ  was  incomplete.   Attached  is  a
         House of Commons Library Standard Note (SN2481) on the question  of
         National Insurance Numbers .... 'the automatic issuing of  National
         Insurance Numbers is based on the  receipt  of  child  benefit:  in
         brief, when a claim  for  Child  Benefit  is  made,  the  child  is
         allocated a Child Reference Number (CRN).  When the  child  reaches
         15 years 9 months  this  information  is  passed  over  to  the  NI
         Recording System, the CRN is converted into that person's NINO  and
         HMRC notifies  the  person  by  sending  them  their  NINO  .....'.
         Clearly a male born in 2001 who is in receipt of child benefit will
         have a CRN which will in due course become the NINO of that  person
         ....


         It is submitted that the first error as identified  above  led  the
         FtTJ to place weight on documents submitted by the Appellant  which
         contained a NINO which did not belong to the Appellant's spouse."

     Permission  to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "As set out in the grounds the National Insurance  Number  did  not
         relate to the Appellant's spouse and could not be  genuine.   There
         is an arguable error of law in the determination."

 6. The first observation to be made about the application  for  permission
    to appeal is that, properly analysed,  it  did  not  disclose  evidence
    calling into question the decision of the  FtT.   Carefully  read,  the
    excerpt from the House of Commons Library Standard Note is confirmatory
    of the documentary evidence retrieved from the HMRC  website  on  which
    the Respondent relied and to which the FtT  gave  weight.   Pausing  at
    this juncture, it is clear that permission to appeal  should  not  have
    been granted.

 7. I further consider that permission to appeal should have  been  refused
    on the independent ground that the application for permission  resolved
    to nothing more than a quarrel with the Judge's decision to give weight
    to one particular piece of evidence rather than another.   The  grounds
    specifically used the language of  "placing  weight".   Simultaneously,
    the grounds miserably failed to identify the error of law said to  have
    been committed by the FtT, in manifest contravention of  Rule  24(5)(b)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   This
    was no merely formal infirmity.  It  was,  rather,  a  misdemeanour  of
    considerable substance, one which should have  alerted  the  permission
    Judge to the manifest  lack  of  merit  in  the  application.   If  any
    reinforcement of this assessment were required, it was to be  found  in
    the Appellant's reliance in the permission application on new evidence.
     The application explicitly recognised this factor.

 8. Furthermore, I consider that  it  should  have  been  apparent  to  the
    permission Judge that, even taking the permission  application  at  its
    zenith, no conceivable error of law had been committed by the FtT.   In
    granting permission, the Judge adverted  to  the  conflicting  evidence
    before the FtT.  I consider that the permission  Judge  ought  to  have
    realised that the application resolved to nothing more than  a  quarrel
    with the FtT for opting to give  weight  to  the  evidence  adduced  on
    behalf of the Respondent in preference to that on which  the  Secretary
    of State relied.

 9. Finally, I record the submission on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State
    that the FtT should have been mindful of its powers under  Rule  45  of
    the 2005 Rules to give directions relating to, inter alia,  the  filing
    of witness statements.  The existence of this  power  featured  in  the
    recently promulgated decision of Shen - v - Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC).  It was not suggested,  however,
    that the non-exercise of this power by the FtT in the present case  was
    tantamount to an error of law.   Furthermore, I observe that this issue
    lies outwith the grant of permission to appeal in any event.

DECISION

10. I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT was not,  on  any  showing,
    irrational.  The Judge performed the judicial duty of  considering  the
    opposing pieces of evidence and  the  weighing  thereof.   The  Judge's
    preference for the evidence indicating that the statement in  the  HMRC
    letter must be incorrect lay comfortably within the  range  of  options
    reasonably available.  Hence it cannot be stigmatised irrational.  This
    appeal has no merit and must be dismissed.

11. I dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.





                                        Signed:
                                                      [pic]
                                             THE HON. MR JUSTICEMCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                        Date:   12 July 2014
