
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51411/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26th September 2014                          |On 9th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               SERGEJS HOHLOVS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Habtemariam


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Hohlovs is described as a stateless citizen of Latvia whose date  of
    birth is recorded as 13th October 1957.  On 5th  August  2013  he  made
    application for a Residence Card as confirmation of a right  to  reside
    in the  United  Kingdom.   He  relied  on  Regulation  7(1)(c)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. On 21st November 2013 the decision was made to refuse  the  application
    and Mr Hohlovs appealed.  His appeal was heard  on  8th  July  2014  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Broe sitting  at  Birmingham.   Having
    considered the totality of the evidence Judge Broe  came  to  the  view
    that Mr Hohlovs had discharged the burden that was upon him and allowed
    the appeal.  Not content with that decision the Secretary of  State  by
    Notice dated 6th August 2014 made application for permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  There  were  two  grounds.   The  first  ground
    contended that there was a conflict in the evidence which the judge had
    failed to resolve, namely who paid for food.  The second ground submits
    that there is a failure to provide adequate reasons.

 3. On 18th August 2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Blandy  granted
    permission.

 4. Mr Bramble sought to persuade me that  there  was  simply  insufficient
    reasoning on the part of the judge  to  entitle  him  to  come  to  the
    decision at which  he  arrived.   It  is  important  to  note  that  at
    paragraph 21, the judge recorded that  he  found  Mr  Hohlovs  and  the
    witnesses to be credible. The judge accepted their various  immigration
    histories and he was satisfied that the family lived together in Latvia
    before coming to the United Kingdom.  The judge was also satisfied that
    Mr Hohlovs's son paid sufficient of the needs of Mr Hohlovs for  it  to
    be said that there was a dependency.

 5. It is now trite law that dependency has to be in respect  of  essential
    needs. There is guidance in a number of cases, including Reyes v Sweden
    [2014] EUECJ C-423/12.  In the instant appeal the  Secretary  of  State
    joins issue with the findings of fact but I come to the  view,  reading
    the determination as a whole that whilst the judge might have said more
    there is still sufficient so that it is demonstrated that the  findings
    are perverse or irrational but rather were open to the judge  to  find.
    In ground one it is submitted that  the  Appellant  has  sufficient  to
    provide for himself but the guidance in Reyes (supra) makes clear  that
    that is not the approach to be taken. The question is whether there  is
    dependency, it matters not if it is of choice;  the  Judge  found  that
    there was. The grounds suggest there was error on the part of the Judge
    because any dependency would have been past dependency. I do  not  read
    the determination in that way. The judge found it to be continuing  and
    therefore present  dependency,  as  to  which  see:  Reyes  (EEA  Regs:
    dependency) [2013] UKUT 00314 (IAC)

 6. On the issue of who paid for the food, the judge found that  there  was
    no clear line about who paid for food. The Secretary of State points to
    a contradiction in the evidence about who was paying for food. I detect
    no contradiction. That the Appellant spent some of his  money  on  food
    did not mean that others did not also - "there was no clear line".   As
    to how the Judge came to his conclusions that the evidence was credible
    it is clear that he listened  to  all  the  witnesses,  assessed  their
    testimony and made a judgment.

DECISION

 7. I find no material error of law in this determination.  The  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
