
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
IA/51558/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 21 October 2014                       |On 28 October 2014        |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between

                              Mr FELIX KUKWENCH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Jeshani, Counsel
      (instructed by Aston Brooke Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS













      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 11 September 2014 against  the
           determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cresswell  who  had
           dismissed the Appellant's appeal in a determination  promulgated
           on 14 July 2014.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Cameroon, born on 4 August  1978,
           who had applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  under
           Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules, which
           was refused by the Secretary of State on 19 November 2013.   The
           judge made adverse credibility findings as  to  the  Appellant's
           claimed relationship with his partner, held that the Immigration
           Rules were not satisfied and that any breach of the  Appellant's
           right to respect for his private life was proportionate.


      3.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by First-
           tier Tribunal Grant-Hutchison because she considered that it was
           arguable that the judge had  (a)  made  perverse  or  irrational
           findings (b) erred in finding the date on  which  the  Appellant
           had completed his studies; and (c) not given the  Appellant  the
           opportunity to address the lack of cohabitation  when  assessing
           the claimed family ties.


      4.    The Respondent indicated by a rule 24 notice  that  the  onwards
           appeal was opposed.  Standard directions were made.




      Submissions - error of law


      5.    Mr Jeshani for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal on which permission to  appeal  had  been  granted.   The
           judge ought to have raised concerns about the evidence with  the
           Appellant at the  hearing.   The  judge  had  acted  perversely.
           Although less  weight  could  be  attached  to  the  Appellant's
           partner's witness statement because of her inability  to  attend
           the hearing, it was an error of law to give  no  weight  to  the
           witness  statement  at  all.   The   judge   misunderstood   the
           Appellant's evidence as to the  date  when  he  had  ceased  his
           studies, which was in June 2013, not  June  2003.   The  judge's
           finding that  the  Appellant  was  not  in  a  relationship  was
           unreasonable.  That error carried over into the  judge's  family
           life findings.
      6.    Mr Wilding for  the  Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
           perversity and that the submissions on behalf of  the  Appellant
           simply amounted to disagreement with the judge's decsion.




      No material error of law finding


      7.    The tribunal indicated that it found  that  the  judge  had  not
           fallen into material error of law.  The grant of  permission  to
           appeal must be seen as overly generous.  The  experienced  judge
           had heard and seen the Appellant, and reached conclusions  which
           were open to her.    The  tribunal  reserved  its  determination
           which now follows.


      8.    The judge had not  misunderstood  the  facts.   The  context  of
           [15(vii)] of the determination shows that "June 2003" was simply
           a typographical error for June 2013:  see,  e.g.,  [15(iv)]  and
           [14(i)].  The judge's point was that the Appellant  shifted  his
           ground when giving evidence.  That point was well  supported  by
           the examples identified.


      9.    It is trite law that weight is a matter for the  judge.   It  is
           similarly trite law that perversity  is  a  high  hurdle.    The
           present  decision  was  not  perverse  by  any  stretch  of  the
           imagination.  The judge gave at least  5  separate  reasons  for
           finding  that  the  alleged  relationship  which  the  Appellant
           advanced did not exist: see [15(iii)], [15(v)],  [15(viii)]  and
           [15(ix)] of the determination.  The Appellant  produced  witness
           statements from various  persons,  none  of  whom  attended  the
           hearing, and it was open to the judge to  assess  them  as  they
           stood.  That was  the  judge's  task.   They  were  not  witness
           statements made by the Appellant and he was not in a position to
           explain what those statements might  or  might  not  amount  to.
           It was plain that the judge had properly weighed and  considered
           all of the evidence produced, and had given  sufficient  reasons
           to support her findings and decision.


      10.   Given that the judge found that  the  Appellant  was  unable  to
           satisfy the Immigration Rules, and the adverse findings  reached
           on the family life claim  advanced,  all  that  remained  to  be
           considered  under  Article  8  ECHR  was  the  evidence  of  the
           Appellant's private life, such as it was.  The  judge  correctly
           applied the relevant authorities such  as  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
           EWCA Civ 1192 and Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  rules  -  correct
           approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).


      11.   There was no material error of  law  in  the  determination  and
           there is no basis for interfering with the judge's decision.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     21 October 2014




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      The appeal was dismissed so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell     21 October 2014
