
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51878/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21st May 2014                              |On 24th June 2014            |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                       Mrs Philomena Oghogho Oghenovo

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Nwaekwu, Solicitor with Moorehouse Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on 6th March 1986.

2.   The appellant was married on 29th May 2013 to Ralph Mario  Matos  Gomes
    Da Silva, citizen of Portugal.

3.   She made application to the  respondent  under  Regulation  17  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 for the issue  of
    a residence card as a family member of a qualified EEA national.

4.   It was the appellant's claim that her husband Ralph Mario  Matos  Gomes
    Da Silva was exercising treaty  rights  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    respondent refused the application because she was not  satisfied  that
    the appellant had met the requirements of Regulation 6 in that  it  was
    not accepted that the appellant had  proved  that  her  husband  was  a
    worker or otherwise exercising treaty rights.

5.   She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 11th March 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simon  Batiste
    found her claim that the sponsor was working for Lexington Catering Ltd
    was false because a wage slip produced from  that  company  dated  30th
    April 2013 was found by the respondent not to be genuine.  A  telephone
    call to the employer indicated that the sponsor no  longer  worked  for
    that company and had only worked for them between  25th  February  2011
    and 31st March 2011.  The judge reminded himself  that  the  burden  of
    proof shifted to the respondent and that the standard of proof was  the
    highest civil standard.  He was satisfied that the  document  submitted
    was false.

6.   It was suggested before the judge that the sponsor was now employed  by
    another company and one wage slip purporting to be  from  that  company
    was submitted together with bank statements from the sponsor  which  it
    was claimed showed three payments going  into  his  account  from  that
    company.  He concluded that the evidence was not sufficient  to  enable
    him to be satisfied that the sponsor was employed by that  company  and
    therefore exercising treaty rights.   The  wage  slip  was  not  in  an
    original form.  False documents had previously been submitted which  he
    felt undermined  the  reliability  of  documents  and  no  contract  of
    employment had been submitted or documents from  Inland  Revenue  or  a
    letter from the employer provided.  He noted in particular that even if
    the sponsor had been employed at the end of January  2014  it  did  not
    follow that he remained employed.  He dismissed the appeal.

7.   In paragraph 10 of his determination  he  noted  that  the  grounds  of
    appeal claimed that the decision caused a  breach  of  the  appellant's
    Article 8 rights.  He found, however, that since there were no  removal
    directions  the  decision  did  not  cause  an  interference  with  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights and he did not feel it either  appropriate
    or necessary to deal with them.

8.   The appellant challenged the decision on the basis firstly  that  there
    was sufficient evidence before the judge to show that the  sponsor  was
    exercising treaty rights and secondly on the basis that the  judge  was
    wrong not to have considered the Article 8 appeal notwithstanding  that
    there were no removal directions.

9.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson found that the first challenge  had
    no merit and failed to identify any properly arguable error of  law  on
    the part of the judge.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Robertson,  having
    considered  the  determination,  found,  however,  that  there  was  an
    arguable error of law in relation to the second challenge.   Article  8
    was raised in the appellant's grounds of appeal  and  it  fell  to  the
    judge to determine all the matters raised  in  the  grounds  of  appeal
    under Section 86(2) of the 2002 Act.  Following  the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in JM (Liberia) where  there  had  been  a  refusal  of
    application for leave even where there  was  no  removal  direction  an
    indirect consequence of the refusal  of  leave  is  that  removal  will
    follow.  Consequently leave was granted.

10.  Before me it was accepted by Mr Nwaekwu  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    that the evidence before the judge in relation to Article  8  consisted
    only of a copy of the appellant's marriage certificate dated May  2013,
    the appellant's statement and the sponsor's statement in  a  bundle  of
    documents and a copy of her passport showing that she first entered the
    United Kingdom in January 2011 as a Tier 4  Student  with  leave  until
    August 2013.  Mr Nwaekwu accepted that on the basis  of  that  evidence
    the judge, had he considered the appellant's Article  8  appeal,  would
    have been bound to find that  removal  was  not  disproportionate.   Mr
    Nwaekwu confirmed that his client could not succeed under Article 8  on
    the basis of the Immigration Rules.

11.  I find therefore that the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Simon Batiste did contain an error  of  law  but  such  error  was  not
    material.  I therefore uphold his decision and the  appellant's  appeal
    is dismissed.






Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

