
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/51707/2013
                                                               IA/51712/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                   Decision & Reasons |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 19th May 2015                      |                   On 3rd June 2015   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE EDIS
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MR MANSUKHLAL KHODIDAS MULJI GADHIA
                   MRS SUSHILA MANSUKHLAL KHODIDAS GADHIA

                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondents:   Ms G Kiai (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The respondents' appeals against decisions  to  refuse  to  vary  their
    leave and to remove them from the United Kingdom were allowed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Swaniker ("the judge") in a decision promulgated on
    19th January 2015.  The respondents sought to remain as dependent adult
    relatives, having last entered the United Kingdom as visitors in  2012.
    The judge found that the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
    rules") were not met and went on to  make  an  assessment  outside  the
    rules, in the light of the respondents' reliance upon Article 8 of  the
    Human Rights Convention.  She took into  account  medical  and  country
    evidence regarding the first respondent's dementia and the availability
    of support for someone suffering  from  the  condition  in  Kenya,  the
    country of the respondents'  nationality.   The  judge  concluded  that
    removal to Kenya would amount to a disproportionate  interference  with
    the respondents' family life with their children here  and  with  their
    private lives and allowed the appeals.

2.   The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge made a material  misdirection  of  law  in  relation  to
    Article 8.  In particular, the judge failed to take into account public
    interest factors including the cost of medical provision in the  United
    Kingdom.  It was asserted on the appellant's behalf that care would  be
    available in Kenya and that  the  respondents'  children  could  choose
    whether to accompany their parents abroad.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on 26th February 2015, on the basis that it was  arguable  that
    the judge failed to have sufficient regard to the  public  interest  in
    removal in her assessment.

3.   A response was made under rule 24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   The  appeal  was  opposed.   The  respondents
    contended that the  judge  took  into  account  all  relevant  matters,
    including  the  cost  of  medical  provision.   She  found   that   the
    respondents were self-sufficient and accepted that medical care in  the
    United Kingdom had been paid for privately and  that  the  respondents'
    children (British nationals), would care  for  them  financially.   All
    relevant public interest factors were taken into account and the health
    aspect  was  properly  weighed   in   the   balance   by   the   judge.
    Alternatively, any error of law was  immaterial  as  the  Secretary  of
    State did not challenge the findings of fact made by the judge and  the
    overall conclusion was one which was available to her, on the evidence.
     In summary, the grounds amounted to a disagreement  with  the  outcome
    but disclosed no material error of law.

Submissions on Error of Law

4.   Mr Whitwell said that reliance was placed upon the grounds.  He  handed
    up a copy of  the Immigration Directorate Instruction ("IDI") regarding
    family members under Appendix FM  of  the  rules  and  a  copy  of  the
    judgment of the Court of Appeal in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40.

5.   The respondents made their application for leave  under  paragraph  317
    of the rules but that route closed on 9th July 2012 and,  subsequently,
    the application was considered under Appendix FM and outside the rules.
     It was clear from the  IDI  that  an  expectation  of  settlement  for
    dependent adult relatives was severed in December  2012.   It  was  not
    possible  to  switch  into  a  settlement  route  in  the  respondents'
    circumstances from within the United Kingdom.  The requirement that the
    application be made out-of-country was important because  the  overseas
    post could seek a five year undertaking regarding adequate maintenance,
    and would also have much better insight into the reality of the medical
    treatment available to the applicant than was available in the UK.    A
    claimant might be referred for a professional assessment of his or  her
    circumstances.  Paragraph (c) of  the  grounds  raised  concerns  which
    appeared in the IDI.  Mr Whitwell also relied upon the judgment of  the
    Court of Appeal in GS (India), particularly at paragraphs 110 and  111.
    The judge in the present appeals appeared to treat  the  inadequacy  of
    medical treatment for Alzheimer's in Kenya as determinative  and  found
    family life between the respondents and their adult  children,  without
    giving sufficient reasons.

6.   Ms Kiai relied upon the rule  24  response.   The  respondents  applied
    under paragraph 317 of the rules without any prospect of success, as  a
    result of poor advice.  The five year undertaking which appeared in the
    IDI was not material in the particular circumstances of the case in the
    light of the judge's finding regarding  the  family's  financial  self-
    sufficiency.  So far as the extent of the first respondent's ill-health
    was concerned, the Secretary of State  had  not  disputed  the  medical
    evidence.  It was correct that the  respondents  could  not  apply  for
    leave in-country but the reason no application abroad had been made was
    the first respondent's ill-health.  He was unable to  travel  to  Kenya
    for this purpose.  If the respondents had gone abroad, the requirements
    of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5. would have been met.  So far as GS (India) was
    concerned,  the  medical  treatment  available  in  Kenya  was  not   a
    determinative factor and the appeal was not allowed merely on the basis
    that any treatment in Kenya would fall  short  of  what  was  available
    here.   The  judge  made  a  clear  finding  of  fact   regarding   the
    respondents' dependence on their children, and in particular  on  their
    son.  This was clear from paragraph 21 of  the  decision  and  was  not
    challenged in the grounds.

7.   The case was not advanced simply on the basis of a  comparison  between
    medical treatment here and in  Kenya.   Indeed,  the  medical  evidence
    showed that Alzheimer's, as a condition, could not be properly  treated
    as such.  The judge had in mind the first respondent's  ill-health  and
    also the impact on the second respondent, his wife.

8.   In a brief response, Mr Whitwell observed that no mention was  made  of
    GS (India) in the grounds because the judgment was not  available  when
    they were drafted.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   The decision has been carefully prepared  and  the  judge  has  clearly
    assessed the evidence before her.  Turning to  the  first  ground,  the
    judge has, contrary to what appears there, taken  into  account  public
    interest factors which include the  cost  of  medical  support  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This is clear from paragraph 24 of the decision, where
    she  accepts  the  evidence  before  her  that  the   respondents   are
    economically self-sufficient and that their children, British citizens,
    are able and willing to support them financially.  The  author  of  the
    grounds has drawn attention to Akhalu [2013] UKUT 00400 and Mr Whitwell
    handed up the judgment in GS (India).  In both the Upper  Tribunal  and
    the Court of Appeal, guidance given  in  the  earlier  decision  of  MM
    (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279 was taken into account and applied.

10.  In this context, the appellant asserted in the  grounds  that  care  is
    available in Kenya  and  that  the  respondents'  children  may  choose
    whether to accompany their parents abroad  for  an  interim  period  or
    permanently.  The decision shows that the judge had these  features  of
    the case in mind.  Indeed, she noted acceptance by the respondents that
    carers were available in Kenya but went on to find, having  taken  into
    account expert evidence from Dr Lunn,  that  such  care  would  not  be
    suitable, in the light of the  first  respondent's  advanced  dementia.
    Importantly, the judge found that family life was shown  and  that  the
    first respondent was dependent upon his children, and particularly  his
    son, for all  practical  support  and  guidance  and  that  the  second
    respondent, his wife, was, similarly, dependent.  At paragraph 23,  the
    judge made findings regarding the absence of family members  in  Kenya,
    the extent to which the  respondents'  British  citizen  children  have
    established themselves here with their own families and she went on  to
    find that it was not reasonable  to  expect  those  family  members  to
    abandon all that they have invested here.

11.  In GS (India), Underhill LJ raised the question of how  the  engagement
    of Article 8 in a  health  case  is  reconcilable  with  Article  3  in
    relation to the "no obligation to treat" principle enunciated in  N  in
    the House of Lords ([2005] UKHL 31) and in Strasbourg ((2008)  47  EHRR
    39) and addressed by the Court of Appeal in  MM  (Zimbabwe).   Laws  LJ
    foresaw cases where the absence of adequate medical  treatment  in  the
    country to which a person is to be removed would be relevant to Article
    8 only where it is an additional factor to be weighed in  the  balance.
    The Article 8 paradigm would require firm family ties established here,
    so that the  availability  of  continuing  medical  treatment  in  this
    country, coupled with dependence  on  the  family  for  support,  would
    together establish an Article 8 case.  That case would  not  involve  a
    comparison between medical facilities here and abroad.

12.  In the present appeal, we accept Ms Kiai's submission, in the light  of
    the judge's findings of fact regarding family and  private  life,  that
    this is not simply a health case.  The outcome  did  not  depend  on  a
    comparison between the medical support and facilities available in  the
    United Kingdom to treat the first respondent's dementia, compared  with
    what is available in Kenya.  The  health  aspect,  although  clearly  a
    salient feature, was a factor  taken  into  account  by  the  judge  in
    reaching her conclusion that family life and dependency are shown.  The
    respondents'  circumstances  fall  within  the  Article   8   paradigm,
    explained by Laws LJ in GS (India).   This would not be the case if the
    health aspect were determinative.  As  Mr  Whitwell  pointed  out,  the
    judgment in GS (India) was not available when the grounds were  drafted
    but the judgment in that case makes no  real  difference.   Again,  the
    guidance given in the earlier  judgment  in  MM  (Zimbabwe)  shows  the
    limited impact of Article 8 in a health case.

13.  The judge took into account section  117A  to  D  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002  Act"),  in  weighing  the
    competing interests.  Her finding of fact regarding the financial self-
    sufficiency of the respondents was plainly material  in  the  light  of
    section 117B(2) and shows that the judge considered that they would not
    be a burden on the tax payer, touching on the  same  underlying  policy
    issue as appears in the IDI Mr Whitwell handed up, in  the  context  of
    the undertaking maintenance that might be sought from a person  seeking
    entry clearance from abroad.

14.  In our judgment, the grounds have not been made  out  and  no  material
    error of law has been shown  in  the  decision.   The  judge  carefully
    summarised the evidence before her, took all salient  features  of  the
    case into account and made sustainable findings of fact  regarding  the
    existence of family life in the United Kingdom.  Understandably, in the
    light of the respondents' ages and the ill-health suffered by the first
    respondent, she gave particular scrutiny to  the  medical  and  related
    country evidence.  She did not fall into error by treating  the  health
    aspect as determinative.  Rather, it formed one part of her assessment,
    the  focus  properly  being  on  the  family  and  private  life   ties
    established here.  In  weighing  the  competing  interests,  the  judge
    properly took into account the factors which appear in section 117A  to
    D of the 2002 Act.  Having done so, she concluded that removal would be
    disproportionate.   We  find  that  she  was  entitled  to  reach  that
    conclusion and that sustainable reasons  supporting  the  outcome  have
    been given.

15.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and shall stand.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow these appeals shall  stand.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



