
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/51892/2013
     IA/51895/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 August 2014                               |On 29 August 2014          |
|Prepared on 21 August 2014                      |                           |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                    ms dorothy nalubega (first Appellant)
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                         Miss S K (SECOND Appellant)
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms J. Victor-Mazeli of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are both citizens of Uganda and are mother and  daughter
    respectively.  The first  Appellant  who  I  shall  refer  to  as  "the
    Appellant" was born on 1 November 1984.  The  second  Appellant  who  I
    shall refer to as "S" was born on 21 July 2012. S is dependent upon the
    Appellant's appeal.  They appeal against  decisions  of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Walters  sitting  at  Richmond  on  15  May  2014
    dismissing their appeals against decisions of the Respondent  dated  21
    November  2013.   Those  decisions  were  to  refuse  the   Appellant's
    application for leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  and  to
    remove both Appellants by way of directions under  Section  47  of  the
    Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

2.   The Appellant and S first entered the United Kingdom on 30 May 2013  on
    visitors' visas valid  until  22  October  2013.   They  had  residence
    permits  in  Italy  to  reside  with  Mr  Ronald  Kiyemba  who  is  the
    Appellant's husband and the father of S.  The Appellant and Mr  Kiyemba
    had married in Verona, Italy on 5 February 2011.  The Appellant's leave
    to reside  in  Italy  has  been  extended  until  February  2015.   The
    relationship between the Appellant and Mr Kiyemba was strained.  He was
    violent towards her and his mother also threatened the  Appellant.   He
    made it clear that he did not  want  her  to  live  with  him  anymore.
    Shortly before the Appellant's leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  a
    visitor was due to expire she applied for leave to remain on 9  October
    2013 on the basis of her private and family life and on  the  basis  of
    fear of return to Italy.

The Explanation for Refusal

3.    The  Respondent  considered  the  application  under  Article  8  with
    reference to the Immigration Rules  in  force  from  9  July  2012,  in
    particular Appendix FM.  The refusal letter made two main points.   The
    first was that the Appellant's child S was neither  a  British  citizen
    nor had lived in the United Kingdom for at least seven years  preceding
    the date of application thus the Appellant could not succeed under  the
    parent route paragraph E-LTRPT.2.2.  The  Appellant  had  been  in  the
    United Kingdom as a visitor and  switching  to  the  parent  route  was
    prohibited by paragraph E-LTRPT.3.1. She  could  not  come  within  the
    criteria of paragraph EX.1.

4.   The second point was that the Respondent  did  not  consider  that  the
    Appellant's   application   raised   or   contained   any   exceptional
    circumstances which (consistent with the right to respect  for  private
    and family life contained in Article 8) might warrant a grant of  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Appellant had argued that she was a victim of domestic violence by  her
    husband  in  Italy  and  thus  feared  return  there.   A  request  for
    international protection constituted an asylum  application  under  the
    terms of paragraph 327(b) of the Immigration  Rules.   The  Appellant's
    claim should have been made in person via an appointment at the  Asylum
    Screening Unit.  It was not open for the Appellant to make such a claim
    in her application under the Immigration Rules. The claim that she  had
    made was refused because she did not meet the  Rules  and  it  did  not
    raise or contain any exceptional circumstances.

5.   The Respondent also made  a  decision  that  the  Appellant  could  not
    succeed under the private life requirements of paragraph 276ADE of  the
    Rules as she had not lived continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  at
    least twenty years, she was over the age of 25 and therefore could  not
    meet subparagraphs (iv) and (v).  She  had  spent  29  years  and  four
    months of her life in Uganda/Italy and it was not accepted that  during
    the period of time that she had been in the United Kingdom she had lost
    ties to her home country.  S's application was refused in line with the
    Appellant's.

The Proceedings at First Instance

6.   The Appellant appealed against those decisions arguing that  she  could
    not go back to Uganda as she would be homeless and on the streets.  She
    would not be accepted in her home village unless she and  her  daughter
    were subjected to female genital mutilation (FGM). Whilst in the United
    Kingdom the Appellant had developed a close  family  relationship  with
    her mother, brother, cousins and other family members which went beyond
    normal emotional ties.  She was a victim of domestic violence which had
    left her traumatised.  Her husband would have no hesitation in  harming
    her if she were to return to Italy.  Her private and family life  would
    be severely disrupted if she were forced to return to Uganda.

7.   The matter came before the Judge  who  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Appellant and from her mother and father.  It  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not meet the private and family life requirements under
    the Immigration Rules.   The  Appellant's  case  was  put  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, the Respondent's  arguments  under  the  Immigration
    Rules thereby being accepted.

8.   The Judge  agreed  with  the  Respondent  that  the  fear  of  domestic
    violence on return to Italy amounted to an Article 3 claim which  could
    only be decided if an asylum application was  lodged.   The  Respondent
    had not served a One-Stop Notice and the Judge indicated  at  paragraph
    17 of the determination that he was not prepared to consider the  issue
    of the alleged domestic  violence.   The  Judge  was  not  prepared  to
    consider the claim to fear FGM upon return to  Uganda  either  for  the
    same reason that the Appellant had failed to make  this  in  an  asylum
    claim to the Respondent.   The  Judge  did  note  that  the  Respondent
    appeared  not  to  have  considered  Section  55  of  the  Borders  and
    Citizenship Act but proceeded to consider it himself at  paragraph  19.
    S's best interests were to  remain  with  the  Appellant  wherever  the
    Appellant may be.  At paragraph 20 the Judge concluded:

         "I therefore did not find that there are any arguably good  grounds
         based on relevant evidence for granting leave to remain outside the
         Rules."

    He dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

9.   The Appellant appealed  against  those  decisions  arguing  in  grounds
    submitted by Counsel  who  had  appeared  at  first  instance  and  who
    appeared  before  me  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  add   in   his
    determination that  submissions  had  been  made  regarding  Article  8
    outside the Immigration Rules. The Judge had failed to  consider  them.
    In particular the Judge had  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the  Rules.
    The fear of domestic violence and fear of FGM were factors which should
    have  been  considered  in  deciding  whether  there  were   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules.   There  was
    no attempt to apply the structured approach required  by  the  case  of
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  The Tribunal should have determined whether the
    interference with  the  Appellant's  private  and/or  family  life  was
    proportionate.  The Judge was wrong to accept the Respondent's argument
    that an Article 3 claim could not be decided unless there was an asylum
    claim made.  The Judge was also wrong to state that the  Appellant  had
    failed to  make  a  human  rights  claim  to  the  Respondent  and  had
    misdirected himself.

10.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on the papers on 24 June  2014.   In
    granting permission to appeal he wrote:

         "It is arguable that the Judge should not have declined  to  decide
         the Appellant's case as regards them claiming to face a  real  risk
         of serious harm in (a) Italy and (b) Uganda (see Patel [2013]  UKSC
         72 and Chichvarkin [2010] EWHC 1858)."

11.  Having said that he then went on to say:

         The Appellants should not take this  grant  of  permission  as  any
         indication that the  appeals  will  ultimately  be  successful.   I
         suspect that the Appellants' case for being granted leave to remain
         in the United Kingdom  will  turn  out  to  be  weak  in  the  last
         analysis.  But it is at least  arguable  that  the  Appellants  are
         entitled to a fuller consideration of their case  than  that  which
         appears from the five page determination under consideration."

12.  The Respondent's response to the grant of  permission  came  by  letter
    dated 11 July 2014.  The Respondent continued to oppose the Appellant's
    appeal and whilst accepting that Judge Walters' determination was short
    stated it was unfair to criticise him where under the circumstances  he
    took all relevant information into consideration and  properly  weighed
    the evidence. He made findings that were open to him on that  evidence.
    He properly directed himself to the law and  considered  whether  there
    were good arguable grounds for granting leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Rules and found there were no such  grounds.   The  argument  that  the
    Judge was wrong by not considering the claim of risk of serious harm in
    Italy and Uganda was erroneous.  The Judge properly directed himself to
    the Respondent's policy that claims were required to be made in  person
    at an ASU and it was open to him  to  accept  the  Respondent's  policy
    position on this and find that  despite  the  refusal  letter  no  such
    asylum or human rights claim had  been  made  by  the  Appellant.   The
    Respondent's policy of requiring such claims to be made in person was a
    procedure designed to ensure a reasonable process was followed and that
    the identity of the individual claiming protection was checked.

13.  Directions were sent out to the parties  by  Principal  Resident  Judge
    Southern directing them to prepare for the forthcoming "error  of  law"
    hearing on the basis that if the Upper Tribunal decided  to  set  aside
    the determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  any  further  evidence
    including supplementary oral evidence that  the  Upper  Tribunal  might
    need to consider if it decided to  remake  the  decision  could  be  so
    considered at that hearing.

The Hearing before Me

14.  Counsel for the Appellant relied on the grounds which she had  drafted.
     The Judge had not directed himself properly  by  failing  to  consider
    whether there were good grounds for the Appellant to be  granted  leave
    outside the Rules.  The Tribunal had failed to  make  findings  whether
    removal would interfere with Article 8 and Razgar had not been applied.
     If the Appellant were returned to Italy she would be  unable  to  live
    away from her husband.  He did not want her and so she should not  come
    back.

15.  For the Respondent it was pointed out that the Appellant had  now  made
    a claim for asylum on the basis of her fears upon return to Uganda  and
    had had a screening interview on 2 July in which she had said that  she
    had leave to remain in Italy until February 2015.

16.   In  conclusion  Counsel  argued  that  the   determination   was   not
    sufficiently detailed to give  the  Judge's  reasons  why  he  was  not
    considering the evidence of risk of FGM.  The  Judge  had  made  a  one
    sentence conclusion and that was not sufficiently detailed.

Findings

17.  It is not in dispute in this  case  that  the  Appellant  cannot  bring
    herself within the Immigration Rules.  She argues that  she  should  be
    entitled to remain outside the Rules because  she  has  an  established
    private and family life  in  this  country  and  there  are  compelling
    circumstances such that her application should be allowed  outside  the
    Rules.  Those compelling circumstances do not relate to the Appellant's
    residence in this country, they relate to her fear that if she were  to
    return to Italy she would be subject to violence from her husband or if
    returned to Uganda she and her daughter might be at risk from FGM.

18.  The Judge had refused to deal with either of those two claims and as  a
    result found that there were no compelling circumstances such that  the
    claim should succeed outside the Rules.  As the Respondent acknowledged
    in the Rule 24 response the determination was indeed brief.  The  Judge
    did not cite the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 but it is clear from
    the wording he used at paragraph 20 that he was aware of the  ratio  of
    that case because he specifically said that he did not find that  there
    were any arguably good grounds based on relevant evidence for leave  to
    be granted outside the Rules.  That was a concise  description  of  the
    position.  For the Appellant to succeed outside the Rules  she  had  to
    show that there were arguably good grounds for Article 8 to  be  prayed
    in aid.  The Judge was indicating in effect under the ratio of  Gulshan
    that there were not.  That in turn was based on the fact  that  he  was
    not prepared to consider either the issue raised about return to  Italy
    or the issue raised about return to Uganda.

19.  If the Judge was correct not to consider either of  those  two  factors
    then his determination cannot be criticised.  Indeed in  the  light  of
    the recent Upper Tribunal authority of Budhathoki [2014] UKUT 00341:

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases.  It is however  necessary
         for Judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms  their  reasons  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost".

20.  Applying that  ratio  to  the  present  case,  it  was  clear  why  the
    Appellant had lost her case at first instance because the Judge did not
    find that there were arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain
    outside the Rules since he had disregarded the claims  in  relation  to
    Italy and Uganda.

21.  The question is: was he right to do  so?   In  granting  permission  to
    appeal Judge Cruthers felt that it was arguable that the  Judge  should
    not have declined to decide the Appellant's case on either of those two
    countries and cited two  authorities  Patel  and  Chichvarkin.   It  is
    difficult however to see the relevance of the case  of  Patel  to  this
    appeal.  Patel was concerned with the situation  where  the  Respondent
    has served a Section 120 Notice with the result that an Appellant could
    rely on Section 85(2) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 to raise a new ground in the response to the Section  120  Notice.
    Here as Judge Walters pointed out there was no Section 120 Notice.   In
    Chichvarkin the position was factually different to the case before me.



22.  In Chichvarkin the Appellant had sought to add a Ground of Appeal  that
    removal  to  Russia  would  breach  the  Human  Rights  Convention   in
    circumstances where the initial application to the Respondent had  been
    as a Tier 1 Highly Skilled Migrant.  The Respondent sought to  withdraw
    the initial decision so that she could  consider  all  matters  in  the
    round in particular give more consideration  to  the  late  claim  that
    return to Russia would breach Article 3.  The High Court  indicated  it
    was perfectly proper for the Respondent to  withdraw  her  decision  in
    those circumstances but went on to make a number of comments which  are
    very far from supporting the Appellant's argument in the  instant  case
    before me.

23.  The court approved at paragraph 37 of their judgment a submission  made
    by the Respondent that:

         "This primary role of the Respondent also enables certain decisions
         to  be  made  more  effectively  and  efficiently.    For   example
         fingerprinting at the asylum interview conducted by the  UK  Border
         Agency  allows  the  UK  authorities  to   determine   whether   an
         application for asylum and the  applicant  may  be  transferred  to
         another Member State with which the  applicant  was  linked  (under
         Council Regulation EC No 343/2003 of February  2003  "Dublin  II").
         As a primary decision-maker the  Respondent  may  also  certify  an
         asylum and/or human rights  claim  as  clearly  unfounded  (Section
         94(1A) of  the  Act)  so  that  the  Claimant  does  not  have  the
         suspensive right of appeal against a relevant consequential adverse
         immigration decision whilst remaining in the UK  ....   We  believe
         also that in many cases the Appellate process is itself  likely  to
         benefit from a first instance decision by the  Respondent.  Primary
         findings  of  credibility  under  Section  8  of  the  Asylum   and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 may assist  the
         Tribunal in its own deliberations and  a  two-stage  procedure  may
         enable the issues on the appeal to be  more  precisely  focused  in
         each instance promoting the overriding objective ...  A  favourable
         decision by the Respondent of  course  obviates  the  need  for  an
         appeal altogether".

24.  This case underpins the Respondent's policy  that  asylum  applications
    should be made in the correct form and indeed  the  Appellant  has  now
    done that.  It was quite correct for the Judge to say  that  he  should
    not consider the Appellant's claim that she and her daughter  would  be
    at risk upon return to  Uganda  on  refugee  grounds  as  that  was  an
    application which should be made more properly to the Respondent first.
     The asylum claim is likely to be on the basis that the Appellant and S
    are members of a particular social group namely  uncircumcised  Ugandan
    females who would be at risk of persecution and/or  ill-treatment.   It
    was not appropriate for the Judge to consider the merits  or  otherwise
    of  that  application  and  thus  it  did  not  constitute   compelling
    circumstances such that the Appellant's application should  be  allowed
    outside the Rules.

25.  In relation to the other issue he did not consider it is  difficult  to
    see how the Appellant's claim to be at risk upon return  to  Italy  had
    any evidential basis.  Although the Judge did not  consider  the  claim
    for the same reason that he did not consider the claim  regarding  fear
    of return to Uganda, the claim itself upon closer inspection appears to
    have no merit.  Italy is a large populous country with a  sophisticated
    legal  system  and  laws  designed  to  protect  spouses  from  abusive
    relationships.  It has an  effective  functioning  police  force.   The
    Appellant's own evidence is that her husband far from seeking  her  out
    if she were to be returned to Italy wants to have nothing  to  do  with
    her.  The only risk potentially to the Appellant would be if  she  were
    to put herself in that position by forcing herself  upon  her  husband.
    That cannot amount  to  a  claim  for  international  protection.   The
    Appellant has leave to reside in Italy and could therefore be  returned
    there under the Dublin Convention  but  that  is  a  matter  which  the
    Respondent must consider when considering the  Appellant's  application
    recently made for asylum.

26.  Whilst I do not find there was any error  in  the  Judge's  failure  to
    consider the claim of risk if returned to Italy, upon examination there
    is no substance to that claim in any event.  Thus even if the Judge was
    wrong not to consider it, the result would still  have  been  the  same
    that it could not have been  prayed  in  aid  by  the  Appellant  as  a
    compelling factor such that her appeal should be  allowed  outside  the
    Rules.

27.  As both of the Appellant's claims to  remain  outside  the  Rules  fall
    away, it follows that the Judge was quite right to say at paragraph  20
    there were no arguably good grounds based on relevant evidence, that is
    to say the evidence which  he  had  considered,  to  allow  the  appeal
    outside the Rules.  There was thus no  error  of  law  in  the  Judge's
    decision albeit that it was somewhat brief. The Judge did not spell out
    the Razgar step by step approach but since he found there was  no  good
    reason to allow the appeal outside the Rules that omission  was  not  a
    material error. The grant of permission appears to have been based on a
    misunderstanding of the relevant case law.  I dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal and the appeal of S  also  stands  to  be  dismissed  as  it  is
    dependent upon that of the Appellant.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order in relation  to  the  Appellant  as  there  is  no
public policy reason for so doing but  I  do  make  an  anonymity  order  in
relation to S.

As I have dismissed the appeals I do not disturb Judge Walters' decision  at
paragraph 25 to make no fee award.


Signed this 28th day of  August   2014


.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

