
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51555/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2014                               |On 27 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                                SAMUEL SERBEH
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini, Counsel, instructed by Michael & Co
Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Ghana.  He came to the UK  as  a  visitor
    in 2004, and subsequently overstayed.   An  application  for  leave  to
    remain on compassionate grounds was refused  in  2007,  and  an  appeal
    against that refusal was dismissed in the  same  year.   The  appellant
    remained in  the  UK,  as  an  overstayer,  and  subsequently  made  an
    application for an EEA residence card based on his marriage to a  Dutch
    national.  This application was  refused  on  25  November  2013.   The
    appellant opted for a paper determination, and his appeal was dismissed
    by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Robson,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 25 March 2014.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge David  Taylor,  on
    2 May 2014.  The decision contained the following:

         "Although the grounds do little more than disagree with the judge's
         decision, it is apparent that the judge failed to take any  account
         of the most recent  Upper  Tribunal  decision  on  proxy  marriages
         involving an EEA citizen, namely Kareem (Proxy Marriages - EU  Law)
         [2014] UKUT 00024. That case must be considered in  detail  in  the
         context of the facts of this appellant's case at any  oral  hearing
         of the appeal."

3.   At the error of law hearing I heard submissions  from  both  sides.   I
    was provided with a copy of the Kareem decision.  Mr  Melvin,  for  the
    respondent, produced written submissions.

4.   Mr Saini, for the appellant, rested his submissions on headnote (b)  of
    the Kareem case, particularly the observation that the production of  a
    marriage certificate issued by a competent authority will  'usually  be
    sufficient'.  It was therefore argued that the judge had erred  in  law
    in not regarding  the  customary  marriage  certificate  as  raising  a
    presumption  that  the  couple  were  married.   Mr  Melvin,  for   the
    respondent submitted, in essence, that the judge was entitled  to  make
    the findings that he did at paragraphs 20 to  24,  and  also  those  at
    paragraphs 26 to 27 in relation to the lack of evidence for  a  durable
    relationship (if the couple were not found to be legally married).

Decision and Reasons

5.   I have decided  that  there  was  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination, and that the  judge's  decision  dismissing  the  appeal
    remains undisturbed.  Any consideration of the Kareem case  would  have
    made no difference to the negative outcome.

6.   The  Kareem  decision  has  introduced  an  additional  element  to  be
    considered, namely the legal system of the  nationality  of  the  Union
    citizen.  In this case, as in the Kareem case, that is the Dutch  civil
    code.

7.   The order of things, however, still starts with considering the law  of
    the country in which the marriage  was  celebrated.   In  order  to  be
    successful the appellant would therefore have to show that the marriage
    was conducted in a way that would make it valid in Ghana.  Under Kareem
    it would then be necessary to go on to look at the question of  whether
    the marriage would be recognised under the Dutch civil code.

8.   In this appeal the judge concluded that the  documentary  evidence  did
    not establish that the relevant legal requirements had been met  for  a
    valid proxy  marriage  in  Ghana.   As  noted  by  the  judge  granting
    permission the grounds disagree with that decision, but in my  view  it
    cannot be said that those were findings that were not open to the judge
    on the evidence before him.

9.   I do not accept the submission as to the meaning  of  the  headnote  in
    Kareem.  I accept that there is some room for ambiguity, but the detail
    of the judgment makes it clear that  the  case  is  not  setting  up  a
    presumption in the way suggested.  In any event the  document  produced
    in this appeal appears to be one registering a customary marriage.   It
    is not a marriage certificate in the sense of a document issued by  the
    civil authority that has conducted the marriage.  On  that  basis  also
    the attempt to use the comments in headnote (b) of Kareem appears to me
    to be wide of the mark.

10.  The more detailed submissions as to the Dutch civil code are  therefore
    addressing an issue that does not arise.  If the judge was entitled  to
    find, on the evidence before him, that the customary marriage  did  not
    meet the requirements  for  validity  in  Ghana,  then  any  additional
    argument that it would be recognised under the Dutch civil  code  would
    fail at the first hurdle, because the marriage could not be shown to be
    valid under the law of the state where it took place.

11.  For these reasons I have decided that  the  judge's  decision  in  this
    appeal did not involve an  error  of  law  that  was  material  to  the
    outcome.  Even if the Kareem case had been  considered  it  could  have
    made no difference.

 12. It was not suggested that there was any  need  for  anonymity  in  this
    appeal, and I make no such order.  The  appeal  having  been  dismissed
    there can be no question of any fee award.

Decision

13.  No material error  of  law  having  been  found  the  judge's  decision
    dismissing the appeal remains undisturbed.

14.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

