

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
No: IA/51959/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



Heard at Field House
              Determination promulgated
on 11 December 2014                                              on 12
January 2015


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DIGNEY

                                   Between


                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           AGHILES HANAFI CHEHRIT


Respondent
Representation:

For the appellant: Ms Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the respondent: Mr Doerfel


                               DECISION AND REASONS


   1. On 28 May   2013 the respondent made an application  for  a  residence
      card as confirmation of his right to reside in the United  Kingdom  as
      the spouse of an EEA national; in fact  a  national  of  Spain.   That
      application was refused  on  9  November  2013.  The  application  was
      refused because the appellant concluded that the marriage was  one  of
      convenience. An appeal against the decision was   heard  on  6  August
      2014 and the appeal was allowed.

   2. Permission to appeal was sought on two grounds. The first and the only
      one on which leave was  granted  was,  in  effect,  that  the  judge's
      conclusion that the marriage  was  not  one  of  convenience  was  not
      properly reasoned.    In granting permission, the judge  granting  it,
      said:


             An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the  extent
             to which the judge has engaged with the  discrepancies  raised
             by the respondent. It is arguable that over reliance has  been
             placed by the judge on the "joint statement".  The  judge  has
             concluded that the  discrepancies  were  not  as  to  the  key
             matters without providing an adequate  analysis  to  create  a
             foundation for this conclusion.

   3. It has to be admitted that the determination is open to criticism.  It
      contains a number of formulaic expressions that are  not  of  a  great
      deal of assistance as they are so clearly formulaic. More significant,
      however, is the judge's approach to the  case,  which  deals  with  an
      application under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
      2006. He deals with the matter under the Immigration Rules but accepts
      that applications that relate to  EEA  citizens  have  to  be  treated
      differently and in accordance with EEA law. Whilst it is impossible to
      be sure as to his jurisprudential approach, one thing  is  clear.  The
      judge saw the crucial matter that had to be decided  was  whether  the
      marriage was one of convenience. That is the matter at issue  and  the
      judge dealt with it. It follows that his unorthodox  approach  can  be
      disregarded as he arrived at the correct question.[1] The crux of  the
      matter is whether his conclusion was properly argued.


   4. The judge reached  his  conclusions  for  a  number  of  reasons.   He
      concluded that the discrepancies were not to key matters. He  accepted
      the reasons given for those discrepancies and he  found  the  evidence
      given on behalf of the respondent,  particularly  that  of  his  wife,
      convincing. He also saw the length of the  relationship  as  a  cogent
      factor. He also relied on  the  documentary  evidence  that  had  been
      produced. It is often said that the test  as  to  whether  a  decision
      passes the test of "being properly reasoned" is whether it enables the
      losing party to know why they have lost.  This  decision  passes  that
      test; the appellant lost for the reasons set out above. It seems to me
      that what is being asked for is reasons for reasons. Here it is  clear
      what the reasons behind the decision are and at the heart of those are
      the fact that the judge believed the respondent and his wife.


   5. I have looked carefully at the evidence before the judge and the judge
      was entitled to reach the conclusion that he did on that evidence.  He
      was entitled to give the weight to the joint statement  he  did,  pace
      the judge who granted permission.  His conclusions cannot be  seen  as
      being in any way  perverse  or  irrational  and  he  was  entitled  to
      conclude that the discrepancies related to matters that were not  key.
      I conclude that the judge's  conclusions  are  properly  reasoned  and
      contain no error of law.[2]


   6. The grounds argue that the judge's reasoning on article 8  is  flawed.
      Permission to appeal was not granted on this point  and  the  grounds,
      subject to one matter, do not identify a material error of law.  It is
      arguable, that having allowed the appeal under the EEA regulations  it
      was wrong of the judge to consider article 8. It is fair to  say  that
      legal opinion is divided on this point at the  current  time.  However
      this point was not raised in the grounds of appeal, and in any  event,
      the  judge  having  allowed  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  the  EEA
      relationship, the decision under article 8 makes no difference to  the
      conclusion, the EEA rights being stronger than those under the ECHR.

   7.  It follows that the original determination did not contain  an  error
      of law and the decision shall stand.

The appeal is accordingly dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
                                    7 January 2015
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


-----------------------
[1] Indeed, the grounds of appeal do not deal with this error. Assuming
that the matter had been noticed that was correct as the error was not
material for the reasons that I have given.
[2] I have obviously provided my own reasons for concluding that the
judge's reasoning on the question of the marriage contains no error of law
but I would add that I found the argument in the  rule 24 response
persuasive and well reasoned.

