
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/51118/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2014                           |On 31 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MUHAMMAD ABID NAZIR
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Present, but not represented


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  by  Judge
   of the First-tier Tribunal Scobbie allowing an appeal  seemingly  on  the
   basis that the Secretary of State's decision was not in  accordance  with
   the law.  The respondent before the  Upper  Tribunal,  Mr  Muhammad  Abid
   Nazir (hereinafter referred to as  "the  claimant"),  was  the  appellant
   before the First-tier Tribunal.  He appeared before us unrepresented.

2) The claimant was on 19 October 1983 and is a national of  Pakistan.   His
   appeal to the First-tier Tribunal arose from a decision by the  Secretary
   of State revoking the claimant's residence card.  This residence card had
   been issued to him in February 2012 as the family member of  a  qualified
   person.  In the view of the Secretary of State the claimant had ceased to
   be a family member of that person so no longer had a right  of  residence
   in the UK or a right to hold a residence card.  The  Secretary  of  State
   considered that the claimant had no basis to stay in  the  UK  under  the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("EEA Regulations")



3) The reason why the Secretary of State considered that  the  claimant  was
   no longer a family member of a qualified person was that his marriage  to
   an EEA national had broken down.

4) At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the parties focused on  the
   issue of whether the revocation decision by the Secretary  of  State  was
   valid, in the sense that it complied with  the  appropriate  formalities.
   The revocation decision was neither signed nor dated.  It was accompanied
   by a letter giving reasons  dated  20  January  2013.   This  letter  was
   unsigned although it bore a typewritten  name  beside  the  place  for  a
   signature.

5) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal took the view  that  the  revocation
   decision was invalid because of the lack  of  a  date  or  signature  and
   therefore the claimant was entitled to retain his  residence  card.   The
   judge further observed that the claimant had not ceased to be the  spouse
   of an EEA national because he was still married to her.  The judge stated
   that he would have allowed the appeal on this  basis  if  the  revocation
   decision had been in a valid form.

6) The application  for  permission  to  appeal  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
   Secretary of State relied  upon  the  Immigration  (Notices)  Regulations
   2003, in which there was no requirement for signing or dating  a  notice.
   The judge had not shown any authority for the proposition that the notice
   was invalid.

7) The Secretary of State took issue further with the finding by  the  judge
   that the claimant was still married to his EEA national spouse.  This was
   not supported by adequate reasoning.  Alternatively, if the claimant  was
   still a family member of an EEA national then this could be said to  have
   waived any defect in the revocation decision.  Finally, the Secretary  of
   State submitted that if the decision under appeal was invalid it was  not
   open to the judge to allow the appeal.  If there was no valid immigration
   decision before the Tribunal then there was no jurisdiction.

8) Permission was granted on these grounds.

9) The appeal first came before the Upper  Tribunal  on  2  September  2014,
   when the President, the Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, was sitting with Upper
   Tribunal Judge Deans.  The Upper Tribunal pointed out that the  Secretary
   of State's view that the marriage had broken down was based  entirely  on
   the evidence of a decree of judicial separation made by an Irish court on
   22 October 2012.  The Upper Tribunal  directed  that  skeleton  arguments
   should be prepared by each party on the two questions of law  which  were
   to be determined, as follows:

   a)    Whether  there  had  been  compliance  with  Regulation  7  of  the
      Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003, including the issue of waiver.
   b) Whether the effect of the decree  of  judicial  separation  was  that,
      thenceforth, the respondent was  no  longer  the  spouse  of  the  EEA
      national concerned within the ambit and meaning of the EEA Regulations
      2006.

10) The appeal was relisted before the Upper  Tribunal  for  hearing  on  19
   December 2014 before a panel comprising the Vice  President,  Mr  C  M  G
   Ockelton and Upper Tribunal Judge Deans.

11)  At  this  hearing  the  claimant  explained  that  he  was  no   longer
   represented.  On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Patterson explained
   that a skeleton argument had  been  provided  to  the  claimant's  former
   representatives on 16 December, who in response had confirmed  that  they
   had withdrawn from acting.  Ms Patterson indicated that she had not  seen
   the skeleton argument herself until the day before the  hearing  and  she
   sought an adjournment to allow time for further preparation.

12) It was put to Ms Patterson that the starting point for determination  of
   the appeal was  the  position  of  the  claimant's  wife.   The  claimant
   confirmed that she was still his wife.  Her name was Sadaf Saddiq and she
   was an Irish national.  She was now living in the Republic of Ireland and
   had been doing so since October 2012.  The proceedings  she  had  brought
   there were for a judicial separation.   The  claimant  said  he  went  to
   Ireland in January 2013  to  seek  access  to  his  son  and  there  were
   proceedings in Ireland relating to this.

13) It was put to the claimant that he  was  not  entitled  to  continue  to
   reside in the UK without his wife.  He replied that he had been here  for
   7 years and had been  working  here.   He  could  not  suddenly  move  to
   Ireland.  He was asked when he first told the Secretary of State that his
   wife was outwith the UK.   The claimant replied that  this  was  when  he
   received documents after returning from Ireland to the UK on 21  November
   2013.  He had put this in his statement.

14) The claimant's witness statement was referred to.  This stated that  his
   wife left on 2 October 2012  but  in  January  2013  she  was  still  on
   maternity leave from her employment in the UK.   The  claimant  confirmed
   that his wife had been in Ireland since October 2012.

15) At this point we rose for consideration and returned to the  hearing  to
   give our decision.

16) On the question of the adjournment sought on behalf of the Secretary  of
   State, we noted that the skeleton argument for the Secretary of State had
   been supplied only the  day  before  the  hearing.   The  directions  had
   required that the claimant's skeleton argument be provided within 28 days
   of 3 September 2014 and the Secretary of State's skeleton argument within
   a further period of  28  days.   The  claimant's  skeleton  argument  was
   received by the Upper Tribunal on 11 November  2014.   The  Secretary  of
   State's skeleton argument should have followed within 28 days thereafter.
    No explanation had been provided as to  why  the  Secretary  of  State's
   argument was supplied so  late.   There  had  been  ample  time  since  3
   September for the Secretary of State to consider  the  issues  concerned.
   Accordingly an adjournment was refused.

17) On the question of the validity of the decision revoking  the  residence
   card, we accept the submission on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that
   in the Notices Regulations there is no requirement for this to be  signed
   and dated.  The claimant  was  served  with  the  decision  revoking  the
   residence card on his return from the Republic  of  Ireland  in  November
   2013.  There was no requirement that the  notice  should  be  signed  and
   dated.  It was properly served upon the claimant in accordance with  reg.
   7 and was a valid decision.  It was the supposed lack of validity of  the
   notice on which the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  erroneously  based
   his decision and accordingly this decision cannot stand and is set aside.



18) The second issue before us was whether  the  Irish  decree  of  judicial
   separation amounted to a divorce.  If it was a divorce then the  claimant
   was no longer a family member under the EEA Regulations.  Although we had
   no expert evidence before us on the meaning of  the  judicial  separation
   under Irish  law,  we  were  satisfied  that  by  definition  a  judicial
   separation was not a divorce.  The  claimant  and  his  wife  were  still
   married.

19) According to the Secretary of State's decision the  residence  card  was
   revoked because the claimant ceased to be the family  member  of  an  EEA
   national.  As stated in the preceding paragraph,  we  are  not  satisfied
   that he  his  marriage  terminated.   It  does  not  necessarily  follow,
   however, that the Secretary of State was wrong to  revoke  the  residence
   card on the basis that the claimant was no longer the family member of  a
   qualified person.

20) Under reg. 17(1) the Secretary of State must issue a residence  card  to
   a person who is not an EEA  national  and  is  the  family  member  of  a
   qualified person.   In terms of reg. 20(2) of  the  EEA  Regulations  the
   Secretary of State may revoke a residence card if the holder  has  ceased
   to have a right to reside under the Regulations.  A "qualified person" is
   defined in reg. 6 and extends to an EEA national who  is  in  the  United
   Kingdom in one of several different capacities, such as a  worker,  self-
   employed person or student.  The significant point in  relation  to  this
   appeal is that in order to be a qualified person the EEA national must be
   in the United Kingdom.

21) As the claimant made clear at the hearing before us, his  wife  has  not
   lived in the UK since October 2012 and it appears she has not visited the
   UK since then.  While the  claimant  was  entitled  to  travel  with  and
   accompany his wife and child, he was not entitled under European law to a
   residence card as his wife's family member after his wife and  child  had
   left the United Kingdom.   It  is  clear  that  there  were  grounds  for
   revoking the residence card as the claimant's EEA national spouse was  no
   longer a qualified person and so the claimant no  longer  had  any  right
   under European law to reside in the UK.

22) The claimant asserted that the UK was his home  and  that  he  had  been
   here for 7 years.  He never agreed to his  wife  travelling  to  Ireland.
   This was not a matter, however, that would affect  the  outcome  of  this
   appeal. If the claimant sought to regularise his position he  would  have
   to pursue this either with the Secretary of State or with the authorities
   of the Irish Republic.

23) The claimant pointed out to us that his wife was still in employment  in
   the UK at the date of revocation of the residence  card.   We  note  that
   although his evidence was that she was employed,  she  was  on  maternity
   leave and she was no longer residing in the  UK.   The  exercise  of  her
   contractual rights in relation to her maternity leave were  not  relevant
   to showing that she was in the UK when in fact she was  residing  in  the
   Republic of Ireland.

24) Our conclusion is that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
   aside on the grounds of an error of law.  The First-tier Tribunal did not
   deal with all the grounds before it but made its decision on an incorrect
   basis.  We substitute a decision stating that the claimant has  no  right
   to a residence card either at the date of the decision or at the date  of
   the hearing.


Conclusions

25) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  involve  the
   making of an error on a point of law.

26) We set aside the decision.

27) We re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

28) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order for  anonymity.   We  have
   not been asked to make such an order and see no reason of  substance  for
   so doing.

Fee  Award                               Note:  this  is  not  part  of  the
determination

   In the light of our decision to re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  by
   dismissing it, no fee award can be made



Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans


