
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51761/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2014                               |On 26 June 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Romano Godfrey White

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant/The Secretary of State for the Home Department:  Ms A
Holmes
For the Respondent/Claimant:  None


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant (whom I will refer to as the appellant as  he  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal) Mr Romano Godfrey White is a citizen of  South
    Africa and his date of  birth  is  15  September  1984.  Heapplied  for
    permanent residence pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 on the basis that he has continually resided  in
    the UK with his spouse Justyna Rowinska, who is a Polish national.

2.   The Secretary of State refused the application  because  the  appellant
    had not established that the EEA sponsor  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights in the United Kingdom for a continuous  period  of  five  years.
    The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    of 24 September 2013 and his appeal was allowed by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hembrough in a determination which was promulgated on  31
    March 2014.  The matter was determined on the papers at the request  of
    the appellant. Permission to appeal was granted  to  the  Secretary  of
    State and thus the matter came before me.


The Findings of the First-tier Tribunal

3.   The Judge made the following findings:

         "10. The  documents  before  me  were  those  on  the  appeal  file
             including a miscellany of original documentation submitted  by
             the Appellant with the notice of  appeal  and  a  Respondent's
             bundle  comprising  the  application,  immigration   decision,
             reasons for refusal letter and notice of appeal.


         11.  Before making a determination in this appeal I have considered
             all of the admissible documentation in light of the grounds of
             appeal.


         12.  As I have  already  noted  the  Appellant  was  given  an  EEA
             registration certificate on 14 November 2007 on the  basis  of
             his marriage to the Sponsor.  It follows that  the  Respondent
             must have been satisfied that the latter  was  exercising  EEA
             Treaty rights at that time.  Original Accession  State  Worker
             Registration Certificates were submitted with  the  notice  of
             appeal which I find show that Sponsor was employed in 2008 and
             2009.  I note that she gave birth to a son on 19 October  2010
             of whom the Appellant is the father.  In the birth certificate
             she is described as a quality controller.


         13.  A P60 for the year 2010/11 shows that she was employed with  a
             temping agency at least for part of  that  year  and  original
             correspondence from HMRC shows that she was working in 2011/12
             and has been working ever since as evidenced by  further  HMRC
             correspondence, tax returns, P60s and bank statements.  I find
             that that she did not cease to be a qualified person by reason
             of her maternity.


         14.  Evidence in the form of  correspondence  from  HMRC,  DWP  and
             South Holland District Council shows that  the  Appellant  and
             the Sponsor have been residing together at  the  same  address
             and continue to do so.


         15.  The Appellant has submitted HMRC corresponded and P60s showing
             that he has been working in  the  UK  since  2010.   A  Police
             Service subject access request confirms his presence  here  in
             2008 and 2009.


         16.  Looking at the evidence before me in the round I find  that  I
             have been satisfied on the balance of probabilities that as at
             the date of the refusal decision the Appellant had resided  in
             the UK in accordance with the 2006 Regulation for a continuous
             period  of  5  years.   I  therefore  allow  the  appeal  with
             reference to the 2006 Regulations."

4.   At the hearing before me the appellant attended with  the  sponsor  and
    their young son.  It was clear to me that Judge Hemrough's decision  to
    allow the appeal was based on documentation produced by the  appellant.
    However, there was no appellant's bundle on my file and Ms  Holmes  did
    not have sight of this. The Judge did not specify the documents that he
    relied on, but the appellant attended the  hearing  with  a  bundle  of
    documents which he stated had been before the First-tier  Tribunal.  He
    stated that the original documents had been  returned  to  him  by  the
    Tribunal following Judge Hembrough's decision.   Ms  Holmes  agreed  to
    consider the documents that the appellant had brought to  the  hearing.
    In my view, it is not clear how the Judge reached his conclusion. It is
    not apparent from  the  determination  whether  his  conclusion  was  a
    legitimate inference that was open to  him  to  draw  on  the  evidence
    before him or whether he engaged in speculation.

5.   Having given Ms Holmes the opportunity to consider the  paperwork  that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal, she conceded that the error of  law
    was not material. It was open to the Judge to allow the appeal, but  he
    should have given more detailed reasons for his decision. She  referred
    me to specific documentation, namely as follows:

    (1)   an  Accession  State  Worker  Registration  Scheme   registration
         certificate issued 5 January 2009;


    (2)   an  Accession  State  Worker  Registration  Scheme   registration
         certificate dated 27 September 2005;


    (3)   an  Accession  State  Worker  Registration  Scheme   registration
         certificate dated 27 July 2009;


    (4)  the EEA sponsor's P60 for the year ending 5 April 2013;


    (5)  a letter from HM Revenue &  Customs  to  the  EEA  sponsor  of  10
         February 2014 which outlines her employment history and income from
         April 2007 until the tax year ending 5 April 2010;


    (6)  a document from HM Revenue & Customs relating to the appellant and
         the EEA sponsor relating to amended tax  credits  between  6  April
         2013 and 5 April 2014;


    (7)  a document from HM Revenue &  Customs  referring  to  amended  tax
         credits awarded for the period between 6 April  2011  and  5  April
         2012;


    (8)  a document from HM Revenue  &  Customs  relating  to  tax  credits
         awarded to the appellant and the EEA sponsor for the period from  6
         April 2013 to 5 April 2014;


    (9)  a P60 relating to the EEA sponsor for the tax year ending 5  April
         2011.

6.   In my view, it was open to the Judge to infer that the EEA sponsor  had
    been exercising treaty rights in the UK  for  a  continuous  five  year
    period in accordance with the 2006 Regulations. It is regrettable  that
    the Judge did not make it clear  on  what  evidence  his  decision  was
    based. It was conceded by Ms Holmes that there was no issue in relation
    to maternity leave because the documentation submitted by the appellant
    was sufficient to establish that the EEA sponsor had been a worker  and
    therefore there was no argument under Prix v SSWP [2012] UKSC 49.

7.   There was no material error in the determination of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Hembrough and the decision to allow the appeal under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  stands  and  the
    appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.



Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 25 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


