
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51480/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 July 2014                               |On 24 March 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               stephen ameyaw
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Khan, instructed by BWF Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant as  they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant, Stephen Ameyaw, was born on 31 March 1976 and
    is a male citizen of Ghana.  He applied in August 2013 for a  residence
    card as confirmation of his right to remain as  the  spouse  of  Dorcas
    Adusei, a French citizen exercising EEA treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The application was refused on 29 November 2013 both  on  the
    basis that there was no evidence sufficient to prove that the appellant
    and Ms Adusei were married, as they claimed, by proxy in Ghana nor  was
    there  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  they  were  in  a  durable
    relationship of at least two years' duration.  The  appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Saffer)  which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 22 April 2014, allowed the appeal under the  Immigration
    Rules.

 2. Ms Khan, who now appears for the appellant, agreed that  there  was  no
    evidence to show  that  the  marriage  purportedly  contracted  by  the
    appellant  and  Ms  Adusei  was  recognised  in  the  law  of   France.
    Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal should not have allowed the appeal
    (see Kareem (proxy  marriages  -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT  00024  (IAC).
    Accordingly, I set aside the determination of  Judge  Saffer  and  have
    remade the decision.

 3. I heard evidence from  the  appellant  (who  adopted  his  two  written
    statements and his evidence-in-chief) and  also  from  the  appellant's
    sponsor,  Ms  Adusei.   Both  witnesses  were  cross-examined  by   Mrs
    Pettersen.  I heard the oral submissions  of  both  representatives,  I
    reserved my determination.

 4.  The  cross-examination  of  the   witnesses   did   not   expose   any
    inconsistencies of any significance between the two accounts which they
    have respectively given in their written evidence.   The  parties  both
    claim to have met in 2012 and became engaged  in  August  2012.   Their
    purported Ghanaian marriage (under Ghanaian customary law)  took  place
    in September 2012.  Both the appellant and Ms Adusei claimed to live in
    a flat in Leeds with her children.  Curiously, those children were  not
    mentioned by the appellant in his original statement.  I am prepared to
    accept that the professional advisers of the appellant who prepared the
    written statement were, at that time, concentrating  on  the  customary
    marriage of the appellant and Ms Adusei though it was likely that  they
    did not consider any lengthy discussion of the children to  be  in  any
    way significant to the outcome of the forthcoming appeal in the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

 5. I also have a considerable volume of documentary  evidence  as  regards
    the exercise of Treaty rights by Ms Adusei who works  in  this  country
    and who has produced payslips and P60s  of  proof  of  doing  so.   Her
    Barclays bank statements dating back  to  2013  showing  the  appellant
    living at the same address as Ms Adusei.  It was also  clear  from  the
    cross-examination that the appellant was aware in some  detail  of  the
    nature of Ms Adusei's employment in the health sector.  I am  satisfied
    that the parties are in a genuine relationship and that  their  current
    arrangement (the appellant looks after Ms Adusei's children  while  she
    works and earns money for the family) operates in the manner  in  which
    they claim.  There  is  no  evidence  that  this  may  be  a  mercenary
    relationship only and I am prepared, on the standard of  proof  of  the
    balance  of  probabilities,  to  accept  the  accounts  given  by  both
    witnesses as to how they  met  and  how  their  relationship  developed
    towards marriage.  I am concerned that both  of  these  parties  should
    have undertaken a proxy marriage when they might have  taken  steps  to
    marry in the United Kingdom or in France.  However, both Ms Adusei  and
    the appellant are of Ghanaian origin and I accept that  they  may  have
    wished that their marriage be conducted according to the customary laws
    of  their  mutual  country  of  origin.   I  am  aware  also  that  the
    relationship is of less than two years' duration but I accept Ms Khan's
    submission that that fact  alone  need  not  prevent  the  issue  of  a
    residence card to the appellant on the basis of the durability  of  the
    relationship.  I find that both the appellant and Ms Adusei have  given
    credible and reliable evidence.  I accept that they are  in  a  durable
    relationship as claimed  and  that  the  appellant  is  entitled  to  a
    residence card by virtue of Regulation 8(1) of  the  2006  Regulations.
    Accordingly, I allow the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision of 29 November 2013.

    DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which is promulgated on 22
    April 2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  The  appellant's
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision dated 29 November 2013
    is allowed.


No anonymity direction is made.







Signed                              Date 28 February 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

