
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51060/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination given orally   |
|On 21 July 2014                               |On 1st Aug 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



                          Mr Ismail Hussain Shaikh
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Mannan, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent appeals with permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Courtney sitting at Hatton Cross in which she
    allowed the claimant's appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent
    made on 14 November 2013 to refuse him leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  She allowed the appeal not under the Immigration Rules but on
    the basis that removal of the claimant would be a breach of the  United
    Kingdom's obligations pursuant to Article 8 of the European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

 2. The claimant was born on 1 January 1926 and is a citizen  of  Pakistan.
    He is in ill health and there is no challenge to the  judge's  findings
    that he lives in Bradford with his youngest son; that his wife died  in
    2005; that his middle son died in 2006; that he is suffering idiopathic
    Parkinson's disease and has been for more than fifteen years.  He  also
    suffers from chronic kidney disease, he has been  completely  bedridden
    since September 2013; is fragile; has poor appetite; and, his cognitive
    ability has deteriorated to such an extent that an application was made
    to the Court of Protection, prior  to  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, as his GP had assessed the claimant  as  being  incapable  of
    managing his own affairs.

 3. The respondent's case as set out in the refusal letter is that  he  did
    not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  and  that  having
    considered his case on an exceptional basis  outside  the  Rules  there
    were no sufficient compelling or compassionate  issues  such  that  the
    Secretary of State would be prepared  to  exercise  discretion  in  his
    favour.

 4. On appeal, the judge made findings  with  respect  to  the  appellant's
    state of health.  She also found that he had an established family life
    in this country with his relatives to the extent  that  he  was  almost
    entirely dependent on them.

 5. The judge considered that, given his age, ill  health  and  dependency,
    although there may be treatment available for him in Pakistan, that  it
    would be disproportionate to require him to travel back to Pakistan for
    him to make an application out  of  country  as  an  elderly  dependent
    relative and that the legitimate aim of proper immigration control  was
    outweighed by the rights of the appellant and his sons to  respect  for
    their family life in the UK.

 6. The respondent sought permission on the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law by:

      a) not considering the case under the Immigration Rules;

      b) simply undertaking a freestanding Article 8 assessment; and,

      c) in failing to identify any arguably good grounds for granting leave
         to remain outside the Immigration Rules and identify whether  there
         were compelling circumstances not recognised under the  Immigration
         Rules as set out in Gulshan.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on
    14 May 2014.  It is important to note that in the grant Judge Page said
    that it was clear that the judge had identified  features  which  could
    have amounted to exceptional circumstances not recognised by the  Rules
    because the health was so bad that the UK Border  Agency  had  exempted
    him from reporting, his cognitive abilities had  deteriorated  and  the
    judge doubted whether the appellant could undertake the journey home.

 8. Permission was granted on the basis that:

         "The aims of immigration control were outweighed by the appellant's
         circumstances but this is no  longer  the  test.   As  the  judge's
         conclusions were formed outside of the framework  of  current  case
         law the respondent has an arguable case;  there  may  have  been  a
         material error of law."

 9. I heard submissions from both representatives.

10. Given the very clear findings of fact in respect of this  appellant  as
    to his age,  disability  and  lack  of  cognitive  ability,  which  are
    unchallenged and in any event sustainable,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    judge was properly entitled to conclude that there were compelling  and
    compassionate circumstances.

11. Although she does not mention that explicitly, it was evident that  the
    judge had considered that although the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules were not  met  that  she  should  still  nonetheless,  given  the
    compassionate facts in this case, have gone  on  to  consider  whether,
    despite that, there were still such  circumstances  that  it  would  be
    disproportionate.

12. In this case, given the substantial number of compelling circumstances,
    it was open to the judge on the facts as found to conclude that,  given
    the claimant's illness, infirmity and  evident  lack  of  capacity,  it
    would be disproportionate to require him to leave the  United  Kingdom,
    the weight of the public interest  in  ensuring  that  the  Immigration
    Rules are met and are complied with notwithstanding.

13. On that basis I find that the determination of Judge Courtney  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law and I uphold it.




Signed                                  Date 25 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


