
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51545/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1st May 2014                               |On 5th September 2014        |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                           mr mahmudul hassan naim
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M Ahammed (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   On 22nd November 2013, the Secretary of  State  decided  to  refuse  to
    vary the appellant's leave and to remove him from the United Kingdom by
    way of directions under section  47  of  the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.  The basis  of  the  adverse  decisions  was  the
    appellant's failure to meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    ("the rules"), following his  application  on  30th  October  2013  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

2.   The Secretary of State found that the appellant had not shown  that  he
    held the required funds in the Maintenance (Funds) category, and so the
    requirement of paragraph 245ZX(a)  of  the  rules  was  not  met.   His
    application was also refused under paragraph 322(3) of the  rules.   He
    was previously given leave following an application in  December  2009,
    to enable him to study at the London College of Accountancy on a course
    lasting three years and three months.  With his present application, he
    submitted a certificate from St Peter's College of London ("St  Peter's
    College") confirming that he had studied on a BTEC Level 5  HND  Course
    in Business and that he was awarded a pass on 28th September 2013.  The
    Secretary of State noted that the appellant had made no application for
    leave to study at St Peter's College and so he was  in  breach  of  the
    conditions attached to his leave.  His application fell to  be  refused
    under paragraph  322(3)  of  the  rules,  in  the  light  of  paragraph
    245ZY(c)(iv) of the rules.

3.   The appellant's appeal against the adverse  decisions  was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  Parker  ("the  judge")  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 7th March 2014.  So far as  funds  were  concerned,  the
    judge took into account a supporting letter  from  City  Bank,  finding
    that this document accompanied the application.   The  evidence  showed
    that the maintenance requirements of the rules were  met.   So  far  as
    paragraph 322 of the rules was concerned, the judge took  into  account
    evidence showing the appellant's studies at  St  Peter's  College.   He
    found that the appellant had studied both  at  the  London  College  of
    Accountancy and at St Peter's College and that he was pursuing a course
    leading to an award from the University of Sunderland.   When  he  made
    his application, he relied upon a CAS which only mentioned the Level  5
    Diploma (at St Peter's College).  The judge found  that  the  appellant
    had made satisfactory progress and that his appeal should  be  allowed.
    Under paragraph 245AA of the rules, the Secretary of State was able  to
    seek evidence of progress relating to a student's course  and  she  had
    failed to do so in this  case.   If  an  enquiry  had  been  made,  the
    appellant would have been able to provide  evidence  of  his  progress.
    The judge concluded that the adverse decision  was  not  in  accordance
    with the law.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

4.   The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge failed to properly address  the  grounds  on  which  the
    appellant's application had been refused.  The judge did not deal  with
    the Secretary of State's finding that the appellant  had  breached  the
    conditions attached to his leave to remain.  In a second ground, it was
    contended that the judge's  reasoning  in  support  of  his  favourable
    finding regarding funds was insufficient.  There was no explanation for
    the finding that the letter from City Bank accompanied the  application
    for leave.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted on 25th March 2014 on the  basis  that
    it was arguable that the judge erred in not expressly dealing with  the
    Secretary  of  State's  case  that  the  conditions  attached  to   the
    appellant's leave were breached.

6.   In directions sent out by the Upper Tribunal, the parties were  advised
    to prepare for the  hearing  on  the  basis  that,  if  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision were set aside, any further evidence that the Upper
    Tribunal might need in remaking the decision could be considered at the
    hearing.

Submissions on Error of Law

7.   Mr Tarlow said that reliance was placed upon the Secretary  of  State's
    grounds.   It  was  accepted  that   the   appellant   was,   in   some
    circumstances, entitled to take additional studies, while pursuing  his
    main course.  An example might be evening classes.  The  appellant  was
    given permission to take a course which he completed in 2011 at  Anglia
    Ruskin University.  He then moved to St Peter's College and completed a
    course there in September  2013.   This  could  not  be  considered  an
    ancillary course as he studied at St Peter's  full-time,  for  eighteen
    months.  The judge noted the position at paragraphs 15 and  16  in  the
    determination but failed to deal with the fact that the  appellant  had
    not applied for permission to study at St Peter's College.   The  judge
    also erred in relation to funds, dealt with  in  the  determination  at
    paragraph 14.  More was required in support than simply the appellant's
    claim that the bank letter was sent with the application.

8.   Mrs Ahammed said that the appellant came to the United Kingdom in  2009
    and took a course in accountancy and  management  in  2010,  at  Anglia
    Ruskin University.  He completed seven modules.  He had  a  visa  valid
    for three years and three months.  He applied to St Peter's College  to
    take a supplementary course.  She said that  the  appellant  "continued
    with Anglia Ruskin", even after he completed his modules in 2011.   She
    accepted that there was no  evidence  of  this  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.  She also accepted that  the  appellant
    had not applied for permission to study at St Peter's College but  this
    was because it was not his main course.  This was  made  clear  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  those  grounds,  the
    course at St Peter's College was  described  as  a  "parallel  degree".
    Reliance was also placed on evidential flexibility.

9.   Mrs Ahammed said that the appellant was not able to  show  progress  in
    his studies after 2011, having completed the seven  modules.   However,
    in the application cover sheet, the Home Office advised applicants that
    "We will write to you if any of the required supporting  documents  are
    missing or unsuitable".  The Home Office could have written asking  for
    clarification.  Mrs Ahammed said that  the  evidence  showed  that  the
    appellant was a full-time student at Anglia Ruskin all the way  through
    his period of studies.  The  judge  found  that  he  had  completed  an
    "access certificate".  The appellant provided a CAS and did not need to
    submit any certificates from Anglia Ruskin.  The judge was entitled  to
    find, at paragraph 17 of the determination, that the Secretary of State
    could have asked for evidence of progress relating to his course.

10.  So far as bank statements were concerned, the  appellant  was  able  to
    show that he had more than the minimum  funds  required,  between  22nd
    August and 30th September in  the  relevant  year  and  the  judge  was
    entitled to make favourable findings of fact.  Reliance was also placed
    on a "brief submission note" prepared on  the  appellant's  behalf,  in
    which it was submitted that the judge gave  adequate  reasons  for  his
    decision to allow the appeal.

11.  Mr Tarlow said that he had nothing to add.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12.  In the light of the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    submissions made by the representatives, I find that the  determination
    contains a clear error of  law.   The  appellant's  case  was  advanced
    before me on the basis that his main course continued at Anglia  Ruskin
    University from 2011 to 2013, when he made his application for  further
    leave.  This is simply not so.  The appellant was a  full-time  student
    at St Peter's College from 2011 until  September  2013.   The  evidence
    before the judge, at page 23 of the appellant's bundle,  shows  clearly
    that the date of the award from Anglia Ruskin was 13th September  2012.
    There was simply no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  or  before
    me showing that the appellant was a student at Anglia Ruskin University
    thereafter.

13.  It follows that the error  of  law  identified  in  the  first  of  the
    Secretary of State's grounds is made out.  The judge erred  in  failing
    to properly engage with the  Secretary  of  State's  finding  that  the
    appellant had breached the conditions attached to his leave by studying
    at St Peter's College, without any permission or application for  leave
    to do so.  There is no merit at all  in  the  contention  made  on  the
    appellant's behalf that he was not required to seek permission  because
    he remained a student at Anglia Ruskin throughout the duration  of  his
    studies.

14.  So far as  the  Maintenance  (Funds)  requirements  of  the  rules  are
    concerned, I conclude that the Secretary of State's case  is  not  made
    out.   The  judge's  reasoning  appears  at   paragraph   11   of   the
    determination and he was entitled to find as a  fact  that  the  letter
    from City Bank dated 21st  October  2013  accompanied  the  appellant's
    application.

15.  Nonetheless, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and
    must be remade.


Remaking the Decision

16.  Mrs Ahammed said that she  would  need  a  short  conference  with  her
    client because she believed that more evidence might be available  from
    Anglia Ruskin University, showing that the appellant  was  a  full-time
    student there beyond September 2012.  The appellant might  be  in  some
    difficulty because if he made a fresh application for leave, which  was
    refused by  the  Secretary  of  State,  he  might  have  to  return  to
    Bangladesh without completing his course.

17.  Mrs Ahammed  then  took  instructions  from  her  client  and,  shortly
    thereafter, she said that no evidence  from  Anglia  Ruskin  University
    would, after all, be forthcoming.  The appellant's current course would
    finish in about three months' time.

18.  I decided that no further adjournment was necessary.   Mr  Tarlow  said
    that the Upper Tribunal should  simply  remake  the  decision  and  Mrs
    Ahammed gave no reason why that course should not be followed.

19.  The appellant was called.   He  adopted  the  witness  statement  which
    appeared at pages 12 to 14 of his bundle.  In that  statement,  he  set
    out his immigration history.   He  began  his  studies  at  the  London
    College of Accountancy and at the end of 2010 he began a BTEC  Level  5
    HND in Business at St Peter's  College.  He claimed  in  his  statement
    that his studies continued "as a  parallel  degree".   He  obtained  an
    "access certificate in accounting and management" and some  modules  at
    Level 7.  He also completed the BTEC course.  He now wished  to  pursue
    studies at the London Campus  of  the  University  of  Sunderland.   He
    provided a CAS with his application for further leave.  This  mentioned
    the level 5 HND course.  That was why he did not submit evidence of his
    earlier progress at the London College of  Accountancy.   He  described
    himself as a genuine student, in the middle of his studies.

20.  Mrs Ahammed had no questions she wished to put.   In  cross-examination
    by Mr Tarlow, the appellant said that he first began studying  on  13th
    January 2010 at the London College of Accountancy.  The course was a BA
    (Honours) in Applied Accountancy and it was due to  finish  in  October
    2013.  Mr Tarlow asked the appellant whether he completed that  course.
    He replied that he did not.  He studied at St Peter's College  as  well
    as at Anglia Ruskin University.  He became more interested in  business
    studies, at St Peter's College.  This course started  in  January  2011
    and led to a level 5 HND.

21.  Mr Tarlow asked whether the course at  St  Peter's  College  was  full-
    time.  The appellant replied that it was a supplementary course and  he
    went there for two days.  He began studying at Anglia Ruskin in January
    2010.  This was at the London Bridge Campus.  He was unable to pass all
    the subjects but used to go to the  college  and  was  studying  at  St
    Peter's College at the same time.

22.  The appellant said that he did not pass  any  exams  or  modules  after
    September 2012, recorded in the document at  page  23  of  his  bundle.
    This showed that he received a "credit" in  that  month.   He  did  not
    receive a degree because he could not pass all parts of the course  and
    did not complete it.

23.  Mr Tarlow asked whether the qualification he was  given  permission  to
    study for was the original  qualification  available  from  the  London
    College of Accountancy.   The  appellant  replied  that  this  was  so.
    Anglia Ruskin and the London College of Accountancy were the same body.



24.  In brief re-examination, the appellant said  that  he  studied  at  the
    London College of Accountancy and was awarded the certificate by Anglia
     Ruskin University, the awarding body.

25.  In submissions, Mr Tarlow  said  that  reliance  was  placed  upon  the
    adverse decision and reasons, dated 22nd November 2013.  The  appellant
    was given permission to take a course lasting for three years,  at  the
    London College of Accountancy.  He subsequently  changed  his  studies,
    without permission, taking a place at St Peter's College.  This was  in
    breach of a condition attached to his leave, in accordance with section
    50 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  The Secretary
    of State was entitled to refuse the application for further leave as no
    permission was sought and the appellant  had  breached  the  conditions
    attached to his leave.  The  application  was  properly  refused  under
    paragraph 322(3) of the rules.

26.  So far as Article 8 was concerned, mentioned briefly in the grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant arrived in the  United
    Kingdom as a student with no intention of doing more than studying.  He
    may have made friendships.  The decision to refuse to  vary  his  leave
    and to remove him was a proportionate response.

27.  Mrs Ahammed said that the appellant began his  studies  at  the  London
    College of Accountancy in 2010.  He then pursued parallel studies at St
    Peter's College.  He finished parts of the former course  but  not  the
    rest.  The accountancy course had been due to end  in  September  2013.
    In the meantime, the  appellant  studied  at  St  Peter's  College  and
    obtained his BTEC Diploma.  He obtained a CAS from  the  University  of
    Sunderland and told that body that he had successfully completed  seven
    modules in the London College of Accountancy Course.  He also told  the
    University of Sunderland that he completed his Level 5  Diploma.   Only
    that qualification was mentioned in  his  CAS.   The  Home  Office  had
    written advising the appellant that if they needed more documents, they
    would write to him.  They made no further contact  with  him,  as  they
    could have done under paragraph 245AA of the rules.  The  Secretary  of
    State had not acted fairly as she did not write to the appellant asking
    for more information from him.  He could have  submitted  the  document
    from Anglia Ruskin University recording  his  credit,  as  evidence  of
    progress.

28.  So far as Article 8 was concerned, the appellant wished to  finish  his
    current course at the University of Sunderland, London Campus.  He  had
    taken admission and had only three months left to complete.   This  was
    apparent from the CAS at page 21 of his bundle.  This was the course in
    relation to which he applied  for  further  leave.   If  the  appellant
    returned to Bangladesh now, he would not have completed the  course,  a
    BA Management "top-up" course running from October 2013 to August 2014.
     The appellant had to succeed in his last semester and  so  the  appeal
    should be allowed on Article 8 grounds as he was now in the  middle  of
    his studies and had paid fees.

Findings and Conclusions

29.  The  appellant's  application  for  further  leave  was  refused  under
    paragraph 322(3) of the rules.   This  is  a  discretionary  ground  of
    refusal.  The respondent has the burden of showing that the  ground  is
    made out, as a precedent fact.  The burden then passes to the appellant
    to show that discretion should be exercised in his favour:  JC  (China)
    [2007] UKAIT 00027.  So far as Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention
    is concerned, the burden of proof  lies  with  the  appellant  and  the
    standard of proof is that of a  balance  of  probabilities:  EH  (Iraq)
    [2005] UKIAT 00065.

30.  I have little hesitation in finding that the  Secretary  of  State  has
    indeed made out the ground of refusal.  The notice of decision is clear
    and the evidence before me  shows  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to find that the appellant had breached a  condition  attached
    to his student leave.  He began a  course  at  the  London  College  of
    Accountancy, leading to a degree  from  Anglia  Ruskin  University,  in
    January 2010.  On 12th November 2012, he was issued with a  certificate
    showing that he had managed to pass some papers, but not others, in the
    academic years 2010 to 2011 and 2011 to 2012.  He received  a  "credit"
    in September 2012.  The appellant did not receive any award from Anglia
    Ruskin University after that.

31.  Without seeking permission, he began a course at a  different  college,
    St  Peter's  College  London.   The  nature  of  the  course  was  also
    different, leading to a level 5 HND Diploma in Business,  below  degree
    level.  In  September  2013,  he  was  awarded  a  certificate  showing
    completion of the programme.

32.  There was an attempt to put the appellant's case on the basis  that  he
    retained  student  status  of  some  sort  at  the  London  College  of
    Accountancy or Anglia Ruskin University and so was not required to seek
    permission to change his course of studies and his college.  There  was
    no reliable evidence before me supporting this case.  On the  contrary,
    it is apparent from the appellant's own evidence that his status  as  a
    student at the London College of Accountancy (or at Anglia Ruskin) came
    to an end in the autumn of 2012.  The course  he  took  at  St  Peter's
    College was not a supplementary course at all.  It wholly replaced  the
    studies in accountancy.

33.  In commencing his course  at  St  Peter's  College,  unrelated  to  his
    earlier studies, the appellant breached a condition which was  attached
    to his leave in accordance with  section  50  of  the  2009  Act.   The
    Secretary of State was entitled to find that the  application  he  made
    for further leave, to pursue  studies  at  the  London  Campus  of  the
    University of Sunderland, fell to be refused under paragraph 322(3)  of
    the rules.  So far as discretion is concerned, the appellant has simply
    failed to show why the discretion available under the rules  should  be
    exercised in his favour.  There has been no  substantial  case  put  or
    explanation offered  for  the  failure  to  seek  permission  from  the
    respondent, save for the unsustainable argument  that  the  St  Peter's
    College studies were, in some way, parallel to the earlier studies.  In
    the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, reliance  was  placed
    upon evidential flexibility, paragraph  245AA  of  the  rules  and  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal (but not the judgment of  the  Court  of
    Appeal) in Rodriguez.  It was also asserted in  the  grounds  that  the
    adverse decision by the Secretary of State failed to  meet  common  law
    requirements of fairness.  Mrs Ahammed developed  this  aspect,  saying
    that the Secretary of State ought to have written to the  appellant  to
    give him an opportunity to provide further evidence of progress in  his
    studies.  These arguments have no merit at all.  They  fail  to  engage
    with the particular finding made by the Secretary  of  State  that  the
    appellant breached a condition attached to his leave.  The provision of
    further evidence of such progress as he made at the London  College  of
    Accountancy (which was, in any event, very modest progress) would  have
    made no difference.  There  is  no  evidence  in  this  case  that  the
    Secretary of State acted unfairly  in  receiving  the  application  for
    leave, making enquiries and then concluding that it fell to be refused.

34.   The  Secretary  of  State  properly  refused  the  application   under
    paragraph 322(3) of the rules and the  appellant  has  not  shown  that
    discretion should be exercised in his favour.

35.  So far as Article 8  of  the  Human  Rights  Convention  is  concerned,
    important guidance has been given by the Supreme  Court  in  Patel  and
    Others [2013] UKSC 72 and by the Upper Tribunal  in  Nasim  and  Others
    [2014]  UKUT  00025.   The  appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  the
    requirements of the rules were  met  in  his  application  for  further
    leave.  That application was based upon a qualification,  his  level  5
    diploma, which he obtained without seeking permission and in breach  of
    a condition attached to his student  leave.   The  appellant  has  been
    present here for only a short period of time, beginning his studies  in
    January 2010.  In the grounds of appeal, there is an assertion that  he
    has established a private life here "for few years  respectively".   He
    is described as wishing to pursue a course which "may  lead  either  to
    qualification or some other benefit in  the  United  Kingdom  may  well
    develop a  private  life  during  such  a  stay  which  should  not  be
    arbitrarily interfered with and requires justification  (sic)"  and  as
    being in the middle of his studies and so  not  removable  at  present.
    Mrs Ahammed said that the extent of  the  appellant's  ambition  is  to
    remain for three months after the hearing in May 2014, so that  he  can
    complete his NQF level 6 course, in August 2014.  He does not  wish  to
    return to Bangladesh without completing this course.  As  a  matter  of
    practical fact, he may well be able to achieve this limited  aim.   The
    grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal contain no detail  at  all
    regarding  any  private  life  ties  and,  as  noted  earlier  in  this
    determination, the appellant has failed to show any unfairness  on  the
    part of the Secretary of State in dealing with  his  application.   The
    witness statement he adopted before me also  contains  nothing  of  any
    substance regarding private life ties.  Overall,  any  such  ties  will
    have been established during periods of limited leave.  The appellant's
    breach of a condition  is  an  adverse  factor  of  some  weight.   The
    evidence  does  not  show  that  he  would  have  any  difficulty   re-
    establishing himself in Bangladesh or in maintaining any friendships or
    associations made here from abroad.  There is  really  very  little  of
    substance to place in the scales against the Secretary of State's  case
    that the public interest requires the appellant's removal.

36.  I find that Article 8 is engaged  in  the  private  life  context  (the
    threshold of engagement being  not  particularly  high).   The  adverse
    decisions were made in accordance with the law  and  in  pursuit  of  a
    legitimate aim, the maintenance of immigration control in the  interest
    of  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  United  Kingdom.   Weighing  the
    competing interests, noting the paucity of evidence of any  substantial
    ties here, the breach of condition and the limited success achieved  by
    the appellant in his studies while here, I conclude  that  the  balance
    falls clearly on the Secretary of State's side.  The decision to refuse
    to vary leave and the  decision  to  remove  the  appellant  manifestly
    amount to a proportionate response.

  37. In summary, the grounds of appeal have  not  been  made  out  and  the
      appeal is dismissed.

There has been no application for anonymity in these proceedings and I  make
no direction on this occasion.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal  is  set  aside.
The following decision is substituted: appeal dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



