
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA510222014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd May 2016                               |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MR HELIO FILIPE LIMA GONCALVES
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S McTaggart, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  However,
    I continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Portugal, born on 6 June 1979.  He claims
    to have entered the UK on 26 August 2000.  He has been convicted  of  a
    number of  criminal  offences.   His  latest  convictions  were  on  11
    September 2014 for offences  of  supplying  class  A  drugs  and  being
    concerned in the supply of  class  A  drugs.   For  those  offences  he
    received a year's imprisonment, concurrent, and a period of licence  of
    one year, again in respect of all offences.

 3. On 19 December 2014 the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant  pursuant  to  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  S.  Gillespie  on  13  August  2015.   Judge
    Gillespie ("the FtJ") allowed the  appeal  under  the  EEA  Regulations
    (although dismissed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR).

    The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

 5. The respondent's grounds may be summarised as follows.   It  is  argued
    that the FtJ mischaracterised the Presenting Officer's  submissions  in
    terms of the  level  of  protection  from  deportation  under  the  EEA
    Regulations that the appellant was entitled to.  It is  said  that  the
    FtJ was invited to conclude that the appellant was only entitled to the
    lowest level of protection, contrary to  what  the  FtJ  had  recorded.
    This, it is asserted, had led the judge into error in his findings.

 6. In addition, it is  said  that  the  FtJ  was  wrong  to  accede  to  a
    submission on behalf of the appellant to the effect that under the  EEA
    Regulations he only  needed  to  show  ten  years'  residence,  without
    needing to prove exercise of Treaty rights, in  order  to  achieve  the
    highest level of protection of 'imperative grounds of public security'.
     Reference is made to the decisions in Onuekwere [2014] EUECJ C-378/12,
    and MG [2014] EUECJ C-400/12.  The ten year period of  residence  must,
    in principle, be continuous and calculated backwards from the  relevant
    decision of the respondent.  On that calculation the appellant had  not
    accrued ten years' residence.

 7. Lastly, it is argued that in the light of  the  appellant's  offending,
    and the  view  of  the  Northern  Ireland  Probation  Service  that  he
    presented a medium risk of further offending,  the  FtJ  had  erred  in
    failing to consider whether his  offences,  his  imprisonment  and  his
    integration had broken his links to the UK.

 8. In submissions Mr Duffy relied on the grounds of appeal.  He relied  on
    the decision in Onuekwere in support of the proposition that  in  order
    to acquire relevant ten years'  residence  and  the  highest  level  of
    protection,  the  appellant  would  need  to  have  acquired  permanent
    residence first.  In any event, the key point is that  the  ten  years'
    residence is to be counted back from the date of the decision.

 9. Mr McTaggart submitted that even if the FtJ had "mischaracterised"  the
    Presenting Officer's submissions as suggested in the grounds,  that  is
    irrelevant if the appellant is indeed entitled to the highest level  of
    protection.  Neither Onuekwere nor MG support the  contention  advanced
    on behalf of the respondent to the effect that the appellant needed  to
    establish  permanent  residence  first  before  he  could  acquire  the
    relevant ten years' residence.  Reg 21(4) does not  say  that  the  ten
    years' residence needed to be in accordance with the  EEA  Regulations.
    That is in contrast to a person with a  permanent  right  of  residence
    acquired after five years.

10. It is apparent from [21] and [22] of the FtJ's  decision  that  he  was
    aware of the need to count backwards from the  date  of  the  decision.
    Realistically, in all cases of deportation under the  EEA  Regulations,
    it is always going to follow a period of imprisonment so the ten years'
    protection is "capable" of applying.  With reference to [37]  and  [38]
    of MG, it is clear that the period of imprisonment  is  "in  principle"
    "capable" of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence and
    of affecting the  decision  regarding  enhanced  protection.   The  ten
    years' residence needed to be taken into account overall.

11. So far as risk of re-offending is concerned and whether  the  appellant
    represented a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat, the FtJ
    had set out at [9] the appellant's convictions, his  work  history  and
    the licence period.

12. In reply, Mr Duffy relied on earlier submissions, adding that  the  FtJ
    did not deal with what integrating links the appellant has with the UK.
     Ten years' residence "alone" is  not  sufficient,  and  there  was  no
    analysis of this by the FtJ.

13. Integration could be shown by the  exercise  of  Treaty  rights.   Here
    there has been a lack  of  integration  evident  from  the  appellant's
    offending.  It was not enough for the FtJ at [22] to conclude that  the
    appellant had shown residence for ten years only, when  "in  principle"
    imprisonment breaks the continuity of residence.

    My conclusions

14. One of  the  respondent's  grounds  is  to  the  effect  that  the  FtJ
    "mischaracterised" or misunderstood the respondent's submissions before
    him in terms of the level of protection against deportation  under  the
    EEA Regulations that the appellant was entitled to.  The  FtJ  recorded
    at [15] that the  submission  was  that  the  appellant's  removal  was
    justified on serious grounds of public policy.

15. Aside from the extract from the  Presenting  Officer's  record  of  the
    notes of the hearing, as reproduced in the  respondent's  grounds,  and
    there  being  no  contrary  information  provided  on  behalf  of   the
    appellant, it seems to me that what the FtJ recorded at [15]  as  being
    the respondent's contention as to the level of protection available  is
    otherwise inconsistent with the factual propositions actually  advanced
    at [15].  It is recorded that the Presenting Officer submitted that the
    appellant had not  proved  continuous  residence,  and  that  any  such
    residence had to be in compliance with the  EEA  Regulations.   It  was
    also advanced that the  appellant  had  not  applied  for  a  permanent
    residence card and that there  were  gaps  in  his  employment  record.
    Reference was also made to his status as a worker only  being  retained
    where involuntary employment did not exceed six months.  It seems to me
    that those assertions clearly indicate that the  respondent's  position
    at the hearing was that the appellant was only entitled to  the  lowest
    level of protection, as recorded in the extract of the  minute  of  the
    hearing reproduced in  the  grounds.   Such  a  contention  would  also
    reflect the respondent's position in the decision letter.

16. In the light of the decisions in Onuekwere and MG, it is clear  that  a
    period of imprisonment is "in principle" capable both  of  interrupting
    the continuity  of  the  period  of  residence  and  of  affecting  the
    consideration of the grant  of  the  enhanced  protection  ("imperative
    grounds") where a person has resided in the EEA state for the ten years
    prior to imprisonment.  Whether integrating links have been  broken  is
    nevertheless still a fact to be determined.

17. Although it is submitted on behalf of the appellant before me that  the
    FtJ recognised that a period of residence should be  counted  backwards
    from the date of the decision, that is not in my judgement evident from
    his decision at [21] and [22].

18. The FtJ was not referred to the decisions in MG or Onuekwere.   He  did
    not therefore appreciate that a period of imprisonment is in  principle
    capable of interrupting the continuity of the period of residence,  and
    he did not assess the appellant's  "integrating  links"  with  that  in
    mind.

19. The FtJ's decision is based on the conclusion that  the  appellant  had
    resided in the UK for a period of ten years prior to the  date  of  the
    decision, without more.

20. I accept Mr McTaggart's submission that the ten years' period does  not
    have to be residence exercising Treaty  rights,  unlike  the  situation
    where a person claims a permanent right of residence.  The CJEU if  not
    expressly, then by implication, indicated that such is  the  case.   Mr
    McTaggart's submission is also consistent with the Citizens'  Directive
    (2004/38/EC).

21. I do not agree with the submission made on  behalf  of  the  respondent
    before me to the effect that in order to acquire the highest  level  of
    protection (imperative grounds) one needs  first  to  have  acquired  a
    permanent  right  of  residence.   No  authority  is  cited  for   that
    proposition and it is an argument which it seems to me is  inconsistent
    with the authorities.

22. Nevertheless, I  am  satisfied  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in  his
    assessment of the level of the protection against deportation  afforded
    to the appellant, as being imperative grounds.  That  assessment  fails
    to take into account the question of the breaking of the continuity  of
    residence by the appellant's imprisonment and the period of calculation
    being to count backwards from the date  of  the  deportation  decision.
    Whether or not the FtJ "mischaracterised" the submissions on behalf  of
    the respondent before him is not  in  the  circumstances  the  relevant
    issue.

23. Furthermore, I am also satisfied that the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in  his
    assessment of the question  of  whether  the  appellant  represents   a
    genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one  of  the
    fundamental interests of society (reg 21(5)(c)).  The  FtJ  dealt  with
    this matter rather cursorily at [26].  He stated that  given  that  the
    appellant was assessed by  the  Probation  Board  of  Northern  Ireland
    ("PBNI") as presenting a medium likelihood of further offending and was
    not assessed as meeting the criteria for significant  risk  of  serious
    harm, his exclusion was not justified on imperative grounds  of  public
    security.

24. In my judgement this is an inadequate assessment  of  the  question  of
    'genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one of  the
    fundamental interests of society'.  It is an assessment that  does  not
    engage with the respondent's case on  the  issue  as  set  out  in  the
    decision letter in several paragraphs.  The decision letter  refers  in
    detail to the harm done  by  the  trade  in  illicit  drugs  which  the
    respondent said "has a severe and negative impact on society".  Indeed,
    that very point was made in Tsakouridis [2010] Case C-145/09 which  the
    FtJ referred to at [20].

25. Although Mr McTaggart sought to defend the FtJ's decision on this issue
    in terms of the FtJ's reference at  [9]  to  the  appellant's  criminal
    offending, his reference  to  the  appellant's  work  history  and  his
    release on licence, I do not accept that this  remotely  represents  an
    informed assessment by the FtJ of  this  important  issue.   The  FtJ's
    recitation of the appellant's offending and employment history does not
    engage with that issue.  Regardless of the PBNI's assessment  that  the
    appellant "is not assessed as meeting the criteria for Significant Risk
    of Serious Harm" the FtJ's assessment is flawed.  The PBNI's conclusion
    in this respect is plainly not an assessment made  in  the  context  of
    deportation and the factors that need to be taken into account in terms
    of the undoubted harm that supplying drugs does to society.

26. In summary therefore, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law such  as
    to require his decision to be set aside.  As to the  re-making  of  the
    decision, I have taken into account the submissions made on  behalf  of
    the parties in terms of whether the decision should be re-made  in  the
    Upper Tribunal or remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.   Having  regard
    to the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement  at  paragraph  7.2  I
    consider that the appropriate course is for the matter to  be  remitted
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  rehearing,  based  on   a   correct
    appreciation of the legal framework and with a detailed  assessment  of
    the extent to which the appellant can be said to have  integrated  into
    UK society and whether those integrating links can be said to have been
    broken.

27. The FtJ made certain findings of fact but those findings  of  fact  are
    limited.  Accordingly, except insofar as agreed between the parties, no
    findings of fact are to be preserved.

    Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  hearing  de  novo  before  a
    judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge S. Gillespie.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 20/06/16
