

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/51123/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|on 5 October 2016                      |on 6 October 2016                   |
|                                       |                                    |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                USMAN FAROOQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Cecil Arthur

For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant's  representative  advised  that  he  was  assisting  the
    appellant as a family  friend,  otherwise  than  in  the  course  of  a
    business carried on (whether or not for profit) by him  or  by  another
    person, under reference to the 1999 Act, section 82(2) and to RK [2011]
    UKUT 00409.

 2. The respondent's representative is  a  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He  applied  for  a  residence
    card under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006  ("the  regulations")
    as a person in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national,  Ms  B  W
    Kulaga.  The respondent refused the application on the  view  that  the
    relationship was entered into "for the sole purpose of  being  able  to
    remain here in the UK and obtaining the benefits of EU law" (page 2  of
    letter dated 12 December 2014).  The  letter  and  accompanying  notice
    advised the appellant that he was entitled to appeal under  section  82
    of the 2002 Act and regulation 26.

 4. FtT Judge Wellesley-Cole dismissed the appellant's appeal  by  decision
    promulgated on 23 December 2015, finding that the appellant had  failed
    to establish that he is in a durable relationship.

 5. UT Judge Plimmer granted permission to appeal to the  UT  on  1  August
    2016.  She thought it was arguable that the FtT erred in  finding  that
    there were no bank statements  in  joint  names  when  there  had  been
    produced a statement from Barclays bank of an account in joint names, a
    mistake of fact which arguably caused such unfairness as to  amount  to
    error of law; and that the judge arguably  erred  also  by  failing  to
    consider whether the appellant genuinely believed he had leave when  he
    did not.

 6. The second point is relevant to  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
    intentions when entering into the relationship.

 7. The respondent  accepts  that  the  judge  overlooked  the  joint  bank
    account.

 8. Prior to the UT hearing the respondent acknowledged that curtailment of
    leave  was  not  served  directly  on  the  appellant.   However,   the
    respondent says that he could be  expected  to  have  known  about  the
    revocation of his college's licence, and Ms Isherwood said that he must
    have been aware that he had no leave before he applied further  to  the
    respondent.

 9. Mr Arthur referred to a gas bill in joint names which  was  before  the
    FtT.  I have also noticed a  council  tax  bill  in  the  name  of  the
    appellant and of the EEA national, to which the judge  does  refer;  it
    names also a third party.

10. The respondent's West London Arrest  Team  called  at  the  appellant's
    address on 11 December 2014.  He was there, and so was Ms Kulaga.   The
    team's report describes what was found,  including  "emails"  on  their
    respective mobile phones [Mr  Arthur  said  these  were  in  fact  text
    messages] "not what one would usually expect from a genuine couple  ...
    mostly over-sentimentalised love messages".

11. There was some force in Mr  Arthur's  argument  that  the  observations
    recorded in the report are not much of a foundation for the conclusions
    it so strongly expressed.  However, the judge was entitled to give  the
    report some weight against the appellant, and  she  correctly  reminded
    herself that she was to look at the matter independently.

12. Ms Isherwood  argued  that  such  error  as  could  be  identified  was
    immaterial.  She pointed out that the judge based her findings also  on
    the cross-examination of the witnesses.

13. The judge seems to have found this a finely balanced case.  She  refers
    to examining the documents "in the plausible context of  cohabitation".
    She then says incorrectly that none of the  documents  "were  in  joint
    names to suggest commitment to one  another",  which  was  obviously  a
    feature she found of some significance.  The cross-examination,  as  Mr
    Arthur pointed out, went to the  immigration  history  rather  than  to
    undermining the relationship directly.

14. I do not think it could safely be said that even if her  misconceptions
    about the facts had been corrected, the judge would  have  reached  the
    same conclusion.

15. If there were no more to the case, that would be  a  finding  of  legal
    error plainly requiring a fresh hearing in the FtT.

16. The further ingredient is that the respondent now seeks  to  rely  upon
    Sala [2016] UKUT 411, which is headnoted, "There is no statutory  right
    of appeal against the decision of the SSHD not  to  grant  a  residence
    card to a person claiming to be an extended family member".

17. That line taken by the SSHD is contrary to the terms  of  the  decision
    giving rise to these proceedings and to the SSHD's submissions in Sala;
    but if there is no right of appeal, that is the end of the case.

18. The appellant argued that Sala is wrongly decided and ought not  to  be
    applied, for these reasons:

   a) regulation 26(2A) has wider application than  just  to  a  person  who
      applied for a residence card as a durable partner;



   b) the UT applied too narrow a reading to regulation 2(1), and  ought  to
      have applied a purposive reading; and



   c) the UT failed to appreciate the principle  of  legitimate  expectation
      provided in EU law.

19. These points were elaborated at greater  length  in  written  and  oral
    submissions for the appellant, but with all respect to Mr  Arthur,  who
    did his  best  to  rise  to  this  challenging  test,  I  discerned  no
    sustainable line of argument that Sala is wrong.

20. The UT found the question it posed for  itself  in  Sala  difficult  to
    answer.  The crucial point was that a case such as the present involves
    a discretion not an entitlement, and so does  not  concern  a  person's
    entitlement to be issued with a  residence  card,  hence  no  right  of
    appeal in terms of regulation 26.

21. There  are  difficulties  arising  from  Sala.   It  may  be  that  the
    regulations cover other decisions by  the  respondent  which  at  least
    arguably involve an  exercise  of  discretion,  but  as  to  which  the
    existence of a right of appeal has never been disputed e.g.  regulation
    10(5)(d)(iv).  That might tend against the outcome in Sala.   Sala  has
    the unfortunate result that persons seeking  to  challenge  an  adverse
    decision of this  nature,  even  one  which  states  that  there  is  a
    statutory right of appeal, have only the remedy of judicial review;  in
    which it  might  be  suggested  that  they  should  first  exhaust  any
    possibility of a statutory appeal.

22. Sala is not binding upon me, but it is a reported  decision,  precisely
    in point, of a Vice-Presidential panel reached after long  and  careful
    consideration.  The appellant's challenge in this  case,  in  my  view,
    failed to identify the ratio of Sala or to provide any  reason  not  to
    apply it.

23. As explained above, if a different outcome had been reached in  respect
    of Sala, I would have remitted this case to the FtT.

24. Disposal: The appellant had  no  right  of  appeal.   The  FtT  had  no
    jurisdiction to decide the appeal.  It erred in law in doing  so.   Its
    decision is set aside.  The decision substituted is that there  was  no
    valid appeal before the FtT.

25. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            6 October 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman





