

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
IA/51525/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                        |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                   |Promulgated                          |
|On papers 3 June 2015              |            On 5 June 2015           |
|                                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DRABU CBE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MICHAEL ONYEMAEZE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr O Nwokeji, Solicitor

                            AMENDED DETERMINATION
        RULE 42 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination is issued under Procedure Rule 42 in relation to the
    appeal which was heard and decided with a determination promulgated  on
    3 February 2015.


 2. As a result of communications received from solicitor  who  represented
    the  respondent  at  the  hearing  before  me  and  upon  hearing   the
    electronically recorded record of proceedings I am  persuaded  to  make
    this amended determination to correct accidental errors in paragraphs 4
    and 5 of that determination.

 3.  I direct the removal of paragraph 4 of the  determination  promulgated
    on 3 February 2015. Paragraph 4 of the determination shall now read  as
    follows: At  the  hearing  before  me,  Mr  Nwokeji,  representing  the
    respondent readily conceded that the  determination  was  unsustainable
    for  reasons  identified  in  the  grounds  of  appeal  supporting  the
    application. Mr S Walker asked that the determination be set aside  and
    be remitted to the Secretary of State for her to reconsider and make  a
    fresh decision on the application which following her refusal  had  led
    to the appeal.

 4. I further  direct  that  the  last  sentence  of  Paragraph  5  of  the
    determination promulgated on 3 February 2015  is  amended  to  read  as
    follows:  I direct that the matter be  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of
    State to enable her to make a fresh decision on the  application  which
    had been made to her and which she had refused on 12 October 2013.

 5. And  finally  the  appeal  number  shown  on  pages  2  and  3  of  the
    determination promulgated on 3 February 2015 should be  and  is  hereby
    amended to be the same as it appears on page 1 of that determination.

 6. Only to the extent set out above, the determination  promulgated  on  3
    February 2015 is amended to cure errors. Delay in issuing  the  amended
    determination is regretted.  The  rest  of  the  determination  remains
    valid.




K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
3 June 2015















