
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51536/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 28th October 2014                            |On 5th November 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                               Ms Jainaba Jum
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEpartment

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Grubb, Counsel instructed by Gracelands
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ms Jainaba Jum date of birth 10th September 1977,  is  a
    citizen of Gambia. Having considered the circumstances I do not make an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the determination of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Britton promulgated on 28th July 2014.   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal of the  appellant  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 16 November 2013 to refuse the appellant  a  residence
    card.

 3. The appellant was seeking a residence card as confirmation of her right
    of residence under EEA law and the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006
    as the spouse of a qualified EEA national.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on 17 September 2014.

 5. The basis of the appellants claim is  that  she  is  married  to  a  Mr
    Babucar Jallow, a Swedish National. It is accepted that Mr Jallow is  a
    Swedish National. A copy of his Swedish passport has been submitted.

 6.  The appellant claims to have entered the United Kingdom on 23  January
    2007 on holiday and has remained here ever  since.  She  first  met  Mr
    Jallow in April 2012. By the 7 April 2013 the  parties  were  marrying.
    The marriage was celebrated by a proxy marriage carried out in Gambia.

 7. Both the appellant and Mr Jallow had been married previously. Mr Jallow
    has been married on at least two occasions. To prove that  the  parties
    were free to marry what are claimed to be "divorce  certificates"  have
    been produced in respect of one of Mr Jallow's former marriages and  in
    respect  of  the  former  marriage  of  the  appellant.  Those  divorce
    certificates appear at E in the Home Office bundle and at pages 103 and
    104 of the appellant's bundle.

 8. The documents, whilst headed "Divorce Certificate" under the Crest  and
    Area allegedly from which they emanate, are from a Notary  Public,  who
    certifies that the "Divorced Certificate" for Mr Jallow[ page 103]  and
    "Divorced Certificate"  for   Ms  Jainaba  Jum  [page  104]  are  legal
    documents.  The  documents  produced  are  not  the  original   divorce
    certificates but comments by a notary public on documents  produced  to
    him.

 9.  I would point out that the documents have been issued in the  city  of
    Banjul in the Republic of the GAMIBA. The bold type emphasis is mine.

10. I  would  also  note  that  the  dates  for  the  two  alleged  divorce
    certificate  issued  ostensibly  by  the  same  Notary   Republic   for
    Oaths/Affidavits [see bottom of  the  documents]  is  the  6th  day  of
    December 2012. Again the emphasis is mine. The actual documents do  not
    appear to be the divorce  certificates  but  aver  that  the  "DIVORCED
    CERTIFICATE" are legal documents.

11. Whilst the documents are headed divorce certificates it does not appear
    that they were issued by a court of law or government organisation  but
    have been issued by  a  notary  public  to  confirm  that  the  divorce
    certificates are legal documents. The original divorce certificates  do
    not appear to have been produced. No explanation has been given for the
    original divorce certificates not being produced.

12. There were other features of the two documents which also brought  into
    question their authenticity. Both appear to have  been  issued  by  the
    same person on the same day but relate to divorces carried out at other
    places at other times. One relates to a divorce in Bakau on 3 May  2009
    [page 103] and the other to a divorce at Churchill Town  on  2  January
    2008 [page 104].

13. The judge at paragraph 30 states that the original divorce certificates
    have not been produced. He concludes that he is not satisfied that  the
    parties were free to marry. He determines that he is not satisfied that
    the parties were legally married.

14. As set out above there appear to have been two  previous  marriages  in
    respect of Mr Jallow. At best a divorce certificate  for  only  one  of
    those marriages has been produced. In interview Mr Jallow claimed  that
    he had not seen the other divorce certificate for at least eight years.



15. However the judge was not  satisfied  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    presented that Mr Jallow had terminated his other marriage by  divorce.
    When exactly that marriage took place is also open to question.

16. The marriage referred to in the alleged divorce certificate took  place
    in 2006 in Bakau and the alleged divorce took  place  on  the  3rd  May
    2009. The appellant's representative referred  to  the  other  marriage
    having taken place in Sweden, although the exact  source  for  that  is
    unclear. There is reference to Mr Jallow having children in Sweden, who
    are living with his ex-wife. Admittedly the children are  aged  13  and
    15.

17. However the judge was not satisfied that a  valid  divorce  certificate
    had been produced in respect of the marriage in Sweden  or  Gambia.  At
    paragraph 30 of the  determination  the  judge  has  concluded  as  the
    sponsor had not produced the original divorce certificates,  the  judge
    was not satisfied that the sponsor was free to marry the appellant. The
    judge concluded that it had not been proved that the sponsor  was  free
    to marry and was  therefore  not  satisfied  that  this  was  a  lawful
    marriage in Gambia. Having regard to the evidence presented that was  a
    conclusion of fact that the judge was entitled to make.

18. That would be sufficient to dispose of this appeal.

19. It has to be noted that whilst the parties appear to  have  married  in
    April 2013 there was little or no evidence that the parties have  lived
    together. Certainly the evidence before the judge at the  date  of  the
    hearing was that the appellant was  living  in  Crawley  and  at  least
    looking for work in that region even at the time of the  marriage.  The
    sponsor by comparison was living in Plymouth.

20. There is  some  suggestion  that  he  was  not  working  by  reason  of
    depression or other medical problems. The only evidence with regard  to
    work appears to be set out in paragraph 5  of  the  determination.  The
    appellant appears to have been working for Sports Direct, although  the
    letter confirming  that  is  not  on  official  headed  notepaper.  The
    contract gives an address for  the  appellant  in  Manchester  but  the
    contract gives an address for the sponsor as Plymouth.

21. The sponsor and  appellant  were  interviewed  at  length  about  their
    relationship. Indeed full interview is set out in the papers. The judge
    has carefully considered that full interview. The judge has  identified
    in paragraphs 11 and 12 clear discrepancies between the accounts  given
    by the appellant and the sponsor. The judge  has  carefully  considered
    that interview and the evidence otherwise. such as the  photographs  of
    the wedding as at 12th April but the marriage certificate is  the  7th.
    No explanation has been given for the difference in dates.

22. Whatever else can be said the judge was not satisfied that this  was  a
    genuine marriage. Given  the  details  set  out  above  the  judge  was
    entitled to come to that  conclusion  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
    presented. The judge was entitled to conclude  that  it  had  not  been
    proved that the sponsor was free to marry.

23. Issues have been raised with regard  to  whether  or  not  this  was  a
    genuine proxy marriage. If the sponsor  was  not  free  to  marry  then
    clearly it is not a marriage that would be  recognised  in  the  United
    Kingdom. Whilst there is evidence with regard to the recognition  proxy
    marriages in Sweden there is no evidence that  Sweden  would  recognise
    polygamous marriages. Whilst it may be that there was  evidence  before
    the judge that the Swedish authorities would recognise proxy  marriage,
    given the finding by the judge that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    sponsor was free to marry such issue makes no difference.

24. Accordingly for the reasons set out there is no material error  of  law
    within the determination by the judge and I uphold the decision of  the
    judge to dismiss this appeal on all grounds.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure          3rd November 2014


