
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51728/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 18th August 2014                             |On 8th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS



                                   Between

                             MRS ROSANI KAYASTHA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P V Thoree (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge M R Oliver promulgated on 9th May 2014, following  a  hearing  at
    Richmond on 3rd April 2014.  In the determination,  the  judge  allowed
    the appeal of Rosani  Kayastha.   The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on  24th  April  1985.
    She appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 19th November
    2013, refusing her application for further leave to remain under Tier 4
    as a student  who  wished  to  embark  upon  a  new  course  at  a  new
    institution for which she had no CAS number.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that she joined EThames College in August 2013
    when she first arrived with her Tier 4 Student leave on 11th July 2010,
    which was valid until  31st  August  2013.   However,  matters  quickly
    deteriorated at college with teachers not turning up to run courses  on
    a regular basis.  She complained.  Things did not  change.   One  staff
    threatened to report her to the Home  Office  and  to  have  her  leave
    curtailed.  Finally she wrote to Immigration Services in February  2012
    with confirmation of her intention to change to an alternative college.
     The Home Office did not respond.  She wrote again on 19th  July  2012,
    but this was  after  she  had  already  changed  colleges.   Again  the
    Respondent Home Office did not reply.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had evidence before him of the letter  written  to  the  Home
    Office in July 2012.  He did not have evidence of the letter written in
    February 2012.  He adjourned during the hearing to have  this  evidence
    produced.   It  was  not  forthcoming.   He   heard   the   Appellant's
    explanation that she had given certificates of posting both letters  to
    her solicitors, but they could only produce  the  July  certificate  of
    posting.  The judge held  that  the  Appellant's  "attendance  and  her
    results show that she is a serious bona fide  student"  and  that  this
    case is not one where a person "is caught trying to extend his stay  in
    the United Kingdom by any means" (para 9).  He  concluded  that,  given
    the evidence before him  of  the  July  certificate  of  posting,  "the
    Appellant probably did send both letters" and in the circumstances that
    she should have been permitted to change  the  Sponsor,  especially  as
    there would be no reason  why  such  permission  would  not  have  been
    forthcoming from the Home Office had they replied.

 5. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application submit that there was  no  evidence  of  any
    fresh application having been made.  There was only the suggestion that
    two letters had been written, only one of which  was  proven  that  the
    Appellant intended to  change  her  college  of  study.   However,  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirement of  the  Rules  by  commencing
    studies with a different Sponsor, regardless of any  letters  that  she
    may have written, because she did not have a valid CAS.  When  she  did
    write in July 2012 she had already  commenced  her  studies  some  five
    months earlier.

 7. Second, the Respondent has always maintained that the  Appellant  could
    not meet the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules  if  she  switched
    Sponsors without a valid CAS, so that even if she could prove that  she
    contacted the Respondent in February as claimed, what she needed was an
    application backed by a valid CAS.

 8. On 18th June 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the  basis  that
    the Appellant could not change her Sponsor without a valid CAS.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 18th August 2014 Mr T Wilding, appearing as
    Counsel on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted  that
    there had clearly been an error of law in  this  case  in  the  judge's
    decision.  The findings reached, as to  whether  or  not  letters  were
    written in February and  July  2012,  are  irrelevant  to  whether  the
    Appellant is entitled to succeed under the Rules.  The  fact  was  that
    the Appellant did not have a CAS for the new business school  that  she
    was now intending to study at.  Moreover, this business school was  not
    a  highly  trusted  Sponsor.   All  she  had  to  do  was  to  make  an
    application.  This she did not do.  She only wrote to the Home  Office.
    That was to no avail because she did not have a CAS.  The judge at  the
    hearing treated this as an application under the old Rules, which  were
    changed in 2007, by giving her credit for being a  bona  fide  student.
    However, on the basis of the  recent  High  Court  decision  in  Afzaal
    [2014] EWHC 2215 the Appellant could not succeed.  It was still open to
    her to make a fresh application from within the UK, provided she did so
    within 28 days of the decision, or she could apply from overseas.

10. For his part, Mr Thoree submitted that he had taken the opportunity  to
    discuss the appeal with Mr Wilding and  it  was  unfortunate  that  the
    Appellant did not have a CAS when she changed colleges but he would ask
    me to exercise discretion in her favour.  He also relied upon Article 8
    with respect to the Appellant's private life.

11. In reply, Mr Wilding submitted that the Supreme Court judgment in Patel
    makes it clear that Article 8 does not extend as far as this because in
    this case the Appellant did not comply with the  Immigration  Rules  as
    she was expected to and chose wilfully herself to act  in  a  way  that
    went against the Rules.  She knew she had to have a CAS.  She  did  not
    have one and yet she changed colleges.  In fact, there was no  evidence
    that she even had the CAS in the summer of 2012 when  she  should  have
    made the application.  There was no issue of fairness involved.

Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should aside  the  decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  This is a case where the Appellant had to make an application
    with a new CAS for change of Sponsor.  She did not do so.  She chose to
    write to the Respondent Home Office.  There was  only  evidence  before
    the judge of the July letter, which  was  five  months  after  she  had
    commenced her course with an institution which  does  not,  apparently,
    have a highly trusted Sponsor status, in any event.  The judge erred in
    law in giving the Appellant credit  for  being  a  "serious  bona  fide
    student," as would have been open to him under the old Rules which were
    amended in 2007, because the current Rules do not provide discretion to
    a judge.  If the Appellant purported to act under the Immigration Rules
    she had to comply with the Rules.  This she did  not  do.   The  appeal
    could not have been allowed.

Re-Making the Decision

13. I have re-made the decision  on  the  basis  of  the  findings  of  the
    original judge, the evidence before him, and  the  submissions  that  I
    have heard today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the reasons  that  I
    have already given above.

14. The Appellant did not make an application for a change of Sponsor.  She
    did not have a CAS.  She could not comply with the  Immigration  Rules.
    The case of Afzaal [2014] EWHC 2215 (see  especially  paras  40  to  48
    which refer to a condition being imposed by the Rules).  In  this  case
    having a CAS was a condition of a valid application  for  a  change  of
    Sponsor.  This the Appellant  did  not  have.   I  am  aware  that  the
    Appellant wrote, at least once to the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,
    and there are cases (see Obienna per Mr Justice Simon)  to  the  effect
    that a failure to respond to reasonable communication by  a  government
    department is culpable.  Even so, that does not mean that the Appellant
    was absolved from making  a  proper  application  with  a  CAS  number.
    Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I re-make the decision as follows.  This appeal is
    dismissed.

16. No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th September 2014


