
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/51539/2013
                                                               IA/51544/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Upper Tribunal            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2015                            |On 5 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                            AA (FIRST appellant)
                            KY (SECOND appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Schwenk instructed by Legal Rights Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, AA  and  KY,  are  citizens  of  Pakistan.   The  first
    appellant applied for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the
    basis of his relationship with the second appellant KY  who,  in  turn,
    has applied to remain  on  the  basis  of  her  relationship  with  her
    children.  I shall hereafter refer  to  the  first  appellant  as  "the
    appellant".

 2. The appellants had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M Davies)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 14 August 2014, dismissed  the
    appeals.  The appellants now appeal,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3.  The  first  issue  in  the  appeal  concerns  an  alleged   procedural
    irregularity.  In his determination [6] Judge Davies recorded "Mr Brown
    [Counsel for the appellants] indicated he would be  pursuing  only  the
    Article 6 and 8 matters.  He also indicated  that  the  appellant  [KY]
    rights under Article 6 also form part of her private life under Article
    8".  In the same paragraph, the judge recorded that Mr Dillon [the Home
    Office Presenting Officer] had argued that the appellant [AA]  was  not
    entitled to permanent residence because he had not completed ten  years
    of lawful residence in the United Kingdom;  it  was  accepted  by  both
    parties that the appellant had changed employers without notifying  the
    Home Office, thereby not complying with the terms of his work permit.

 4. The grounds (supported by a witness statement  from  Mr  Brown)  assert
    that the judge had inaccurately  recorded  what  had  happened  at  the
    hearing.  Mr Brown claims that he had not abandoned the long  residence
    (paragraph 276B) claim before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  He  did  not
    accept that the appellant had failed  to  complete  10  years'  "lawful
    residence" within the meaning of the Immigration Rules  simply  because
    he had changed his employer without notifying the Home Office.

 5. I was concerned that the Tribunal file had not been returned  to  Judge
    Davies for his comments.  However, I was greatly assisted by  the  fact
    that Judge Davies had kept a typed Record of Proceedings of the hearing
    on 5 August 2014.  This records Mr Brown as having pursued the issue of
    paragraph 276B ("Mr B: [appellant} did  not  terminate  leave  so  here
    lawfully") Immediately following this, the judge has written: "INDICATE
    THAT  AS  DID  NOT  SEEK  PERMISSION  TO  CHANGE  EMPLOYMENT  WAS  HERE
    UNLAWFULLY SO CAN SATISFY TEN YEAR CONTINUOUS RESIDENCE RULE".   It  is
    clear that "can" is a misprint for "cannot".  It is also clear that the
    passage in block capitals records what Judge Davies  himself  said  (or
    rather indicated); they are not the words of Mr Brown.  Following  that
    "indication" the record  then  states  that  "Article  6  issues  still
    pursued.  Article 8"; not surprisingly in the light of  the  indication
    from the judge, Mr Brown did not press the matter  of  long  residence.
    However, there is nothing in the Record of Proceedings which  indicates
    that Mr Brown withdrew the appellant's appeal under paragraph 276B.

 6. I have no doubt whatever that Judge Davies  has  inadvertently  made  a
    genuine mistake as regards the long residence issue  when  he  came  to
    write  up   his   determination.    The   only   consequence   of   the
    misunderstanding  is  that  Mr  Brown  should  have  been   given   the
    opportunity to make full submissions regarding paragraph 276B  and  the
    issue should have been  determined  by  Judge  Davies.   Moreover,  the
    judge's error would, in turn, only justify the  setting  aside  of  the
    determination if the long residence issue had any merit.   Mr  Schwenk,
    who appeared for the appellant before the Upper Tribunal,  argued  that
    it did.  Paragraph 276B (requirements for indefinite leave to remain on
    the grounds of long  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom)  provides  as
    follows:

         "276B.   The requirements to be met by an applicant for  indefinite
                leave to remain on the  ground  of  long  residence  in  the
                United Kingdom are that:

                (i)(a) he has  had  at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
                    residence in the United Kingdom.

                (ii)   having regard to the public  interest  there  are  no
                    reasons why it would be undesirable for him to be  given
                    indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  the  ground  of  long
                    residence, taking into account his:

                    (a) age; and

                    (b) strength of connections in the United Kingdom; and

                    (c)  personal  history,  including  character,  conduct,
                        associations and employment record; and

                    (d) domestic circumstances; and

                    (e) compassionate circumstances; and

                    (f) any representations received on the person's behalf;
                        and

                (iii)  the applicant does not fall  for  refusal  under  the
                    general grounds for refusal

                (iv)   the applicant has demonstrated  sufficient  knowledge
                    of the English language and sufficient  knowledge  about
                    life in the United Kingdom, in accordance with  Appendix
                    KoLL.

                (v)    the applicant must not be in  the  UK  in  breach  of
                    immigration laws except that any period  of  overstaying
                    for a period of 28 days or less will be disregarded,  as
                    will any period of overstaying between periods of  entry
                    clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain of up to 28
                    days  and  any  period  of   overstaying   pending   the
                    determination of an application made within that 28  day
                    period".

 7. It is not disputed that the appellant has been in  the  United  Kingdom
    continuously for 10  years.   The  question  is  whether  he  has  been
    "lawfully resident" here.  Lawful residence  is  defined  at  paragraph
    276A(b)  as  "residence  which  is  continuous  residence  pursuant  to
    existing leave to  enter  or  remain  or  temporary  admission  (within
    Section 11  of  the  1971  Act  where  leave  to  enter  or  remain  is
    subsequently granted) or an exemption from immigration control where an
    exemption ceases to apply if it is immediately followed by a  grant  of
    leave to enter or remain."  In the case of the appellant, the  question
    is whether he has been "lawfully resident" in the  sense  that  he  has
    been continuously resident in the UK  pursuant  to  existing  leave  to
    remain.  In NM (No retrospective cancellation of leave) Zimbabwe [2007]
    UKAIT 00002, the Upper Tribunal found that there was no power under the
    Immigration Acts to cancel leave retrospectively, even if it  had  been
    obtained by deception.  Leave which has been granted may  be  curtailed
    but only with prospective effect.  The present appeal does not  involve
    any  attempt  by  the   respondent   to   curtail   or   cancel   leave
    retrospectively.  However, it is clear from NM  that  leave  to  remain
    will be valid and therefore lawful until such time as it  is  cancelled
    or curtailed.  Continuous residence in the United Kingdom subject leave
    to remain which has not been cancelled or curtailed,  therefore,  falls
    within the definition of "lawful residence"  in  paragraph  276A.   The
    appellant may have breached one of the conditions of  his  work  permit
    such that the respondent might have grounds to curtail  his  leave  but
    she might do so only with prospective  effect.   On  the  face  of  the
    evidence, therefore, this appellant complies with paragraph  276A(i)(a)
    because he has had "at least ten years' continuous lawful residence  in
    the United Kingdom."  The reason given by Judge Davies  for  indicating
    that that aspect of the appeal could not succeed was wrong in law.  For
    that reason, I set aside his determination.  I allow the appeal of  the
    appellant on the basis that the decision was not in accordance with the
    law.  I can go no further than that because there  is  nothing  in  the
    refusal letter to indicate that the respondent has ever considered  how
    the appellant should be assessed by reference to remainder of paragraph
    276B, in particular the factors appearing  at  276B(ii)  I  return  the
    matter to the Secretary of State  to  consider  the  appellant's  claim
    under paragraph 276B.  I have set aside the determination in respect of
    the  appeals  of  both  appellants  given  that  the  outcome  of   the
    appellant's claim for indefinite leave to remain on the basis  of  long
    residence may, in turn, have a material influence upon  the  appeal  of
    his wife.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 14 August  2014  is
set aside.  The appeals are allowed on the basis that the decisions  of  the
respondent were not in accordance  with  the  law.   The  first  appellant's
claim for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of
long  residence  is  returned  to  the  Secretary  of  State   for   further
consideration.



Signed                              Date 2 February 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

