
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51139/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd September  2015                        |On 1st October 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                        MR Vipulkumar Bhogilal PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Demello
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1.  The Appellant born on 29th September 1980 is a citizen of India.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by  Mr  Demello  of  Counsel.
    The Respondent  was  represented  by  Miss  Johnstone,  a  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant on 24th September 2014 had applied for a permanent  right
    of residence in the UK under the EEA Regulations 2006.  The  Respondent
    had refused that application on 11th December 2014.  The Appellant  had
    appealed that decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Levin sitting at Manchester on 22nd April 2015.  The  judge  had
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was made on a number  of  grounds.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
    Hutchison on 13th July 2015 on the basis that the matters raised within
    the Grounds  of  Appeal  disclosed  arguably  an  error  of  law.   The
    Respondent opposed the Appellant's appeal by a letter dated  17th  July
    2015.  The matter comes before me firstly to decide whether an error of
    law was made or not, by the First-tier Tribunal.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Demello adopted the Grounds of Appeal within  the  application.   He
    expanded upon those  grounds  in  oral  submissions.   Firstly  it  was
    submitted that the judge had erred in holding that  the  Appellant  was
    not a worker under the EEA Regulations.  It was further said the  judge
    had wrongly calculated the period of employment and should  have  found
    that the Appellant was working for  over  five  years  and  would  have
    qualified for permanent residence.  It was further said the  judge  was
    wrong in requiring the Appellant to show at the date of hearing he  was
    still in employment.

 5. Secondly it was said the judge erred in holding that medical  insurance
    did not assist the Appellant.  Thirdly it was said  that  he  erred  in
    holding the Appellant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of  Regulation
    15(1)(b) or Article 16(2).  It was also submitted that the judge  erred
    in holding that the First-tier Tribunal did not have the power to refer
    the case to the ECJ or to adjourn the appeal to await the  decision  in
    NA v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 995.  It was submitted that  was  a  practice
    being adopted by the Upper Tribunal.  It was also said the judge should
    have invited the Respondent  to  make  enquiries  to  see  whether  the
    Appellant's former wife was working as at the date of  decree  absolute
    and that the Appellant had not had a fair trial.

 6. The submissions before me  were  somewhat  lengthy  and  to  assist  in
    summary the main thrust of the submissions appear  to  be  as  follows.
    The  essential  Regulation  to  consider  was  Regulation  10(5).   The
    Appellant would succeed if  his  ex-wife  had  been  exercising  treaty
    rights as at the date of the divorce namely 31st  July  2014.   In  the
    absence of evidence that she was so exercising  treaty  rights  it  was
    submitted that firstly there was an obligation  on  the  Respondent  to
    make enquiries if she was still  working  or  alternatively  the  judge
    should have remitted the case to the ECJ on  the  question  of  whether
    interpretively it was necessary for the wife to be working  as  at  the
    day of the divorce or alternatively the case should have been adjourned
    to await the decision in the case referred to above.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 7. Miss Johnstone relied upon the Respondent's letter of 17th  July  2015.
    It was said that the judge had dealt with the matters properly.

 8. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to  consider  the  submissions
    raised and the documents.  I now present that decision with my reasons.





Decision and Reasons

 9. The background and chronology in this case is largely undisputed and is
    as follows.  The Appellant is a citizen of India  and  entered  the  UK
    lawfully in April 2007 as a working holidaymaker on  a  temporary  visa
    valid until 23rd March 2009.  Whilst in the UK he met an  EEA  national
    (Portuguese), Miss Serra, in June 2008.  They married on  17th  January
    2009 in the UK.  On 25th September 2009 he was granted an EEA residence
    card valid until 25th September 2014, as the family member  of  an  EEA
    national.  The marriage broke down around  September/October  2013  and
    the decree absolute was granted on 31st July 2014.

10. The Appellant's right to remain in the UK since the end of his  working
    holidaymaker visa in 2009 has been dependent upon his  marriage  to  an
    EEA national.  His application on  24th  September  2014,  some  months
    after the end of his marriage was for a permanent right of residence in
    the UK.

11. The Respondent had correctly  looked  at  the  Appellant's  case  under
    Regulation 10 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, being a family
    member who had retained the  right  of  residence,  and  Regulation  15
    permanent right of residence.   It  was  necessary  for  the  Appellant
    firstly to  demonstrate  he  had  a  retained  right  of  residence  in
    accordance with Regulation 10 and secondly if he had a  retained  right
    of  residence  whether  he  qualified  for  permanent  residence  under
    Regulation 15.

12. Specifically given his circumstances the Appellant  needed  to  satisfy
    the requirements of Regulation  10(5).   In  particular  he  needed  to
    demonstrate:

      i) He had ceased to be a family member  of  an  EEA  national  with  a
         permanent right of residence on the termination of the marriage.

     ii) He was residing in the UK in accordance with these  Regulations  at
         the date of termination.

    iii) The marriage had lasted for three years and that the Appellant  and
         former spouse resided in the UK for at least one  year  during  the
         course of that marriage.

     iv) Evidence that the Appellant  was  currently  in  employment,  self-
         employed or self-sufficient as if he was an EEA national.

      v) Further  in  order  to  satisfy  Regulation  15  and  this  was  an
         application for permanent residence the Appellant had to show  that
         he had resided in the UK in accordance with the Regulations  for  a
         continuous period of five years and that meant he had to  show  his
         former spouse had been exercising treaty rights up to the point  of
         divorce and thereafter  the  Appellant  had  been  employed,  self-
         employed or self-sufficient and that the collective period of  time
         was a continuous period of at least five years.

13. The judge had correctly noted the legal requirements of the Regulations
    and at paragraph 5 had identified the central  concern  in  this  case,
    namely the Respondent had not been satisfied  that  the  ex-spouse  had
    been exercising treaty rights as at the date of divorce.

14. The judge had concluded that some of the evidence was  not  in  dispute
    and he found that the ex-spouse was an EEA national, they  had  validly
    married and the Appellant had therefore been a family member of an  EEA
    national.  He found that they had been married for a period  in  excess
    of three years and that at least one year had been resident in the  UK.
    However having considered the evidence the judge found at paragraph  19
    that the Appellant's ex-spouse had only been exercising  treaty  rights
    in one form or another from February  2009  until  May  2013.   He  was
    entitled to reach that conclusion for the reasons provided.

15. The judge, it appears did make a mathematical error  at  paragraph  20.
    He accepted the Appellant had himself been working from 30th June  2009
    until 31st August 2014 describing that as being a period of  just  over
    four years.  In fact that is a period of just  over  five  years.   The
    judge gave clear reasons why he found the Appellant  had  been  working
    for that period and why he did not accept that the Appellant  had  been
    in work beyond  July  2014.   However  the  question  is  whether  that
    mathematical error constituted a material error of law in that had  the
    judge correctly calculated that period as being five years would  there
    have been any other conclusion reached.

16. It would not, if the judge was correct in concluding that there was  no
    evidence  of  the  ex-spouse  exercising  treaty  rights  as   at   the
    termination of the marriage and that was an  essential  requirement  in
    proving  retained  right  of  residence  under  Regulation  10(5).   As
    indicated above the judge gave proper reasons for  concluding  that  it
    could not be shown to the required  standard  that  the  ex-spouse  was
    exercising treaty rights  beyond  May  2013.   In  submissions  it  was
    conceded there had been no evidence produced to show  she  was  working
    beyond that date.  Whilst the ex-spouse had been working  at  the  same
    firm as the Appellant, it was conceded she had left that firm.  It  was
    submitted that  given  the  parties  separated  shortly  thereafter  in
    September 2013 it had proved difficult or impossible for the  Appellant
    to produce evidence that she continued or  not,  to  exercising  treaty
    rights.  Indeed it was conceded the Appellant did not even know if  she
    remained within the UK.

17. The Grounds of Appeal essentially focussed on this aspect of  the  case
    in these ways:

      i) It was not necessary to  show  she  was  working  at  the  date  of
         termination of marriage.

     ii) The Respondent should have undertaken enquiries himself to find out
         whether she was or not exercising treaty rights.

    iii) The judge should have adjourned the case to allow  this  and  other
         cases concerning this issue to be resolved by the ECJ.

     iv) The judge should on his own volition have adjourned the matter  and
         referred the case specifically and directly to the ECJ.

18. Before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  submissions  raised  by  Counsel
    appeared somewhat different and focussed on the EC directives  and  how
    it was said the EEA Regulations were incompatible with  the  directives
    and how the Appellant succeeded under the directive.  The  judge  dealt
    fully  with  those  submissions  and  his  reasons  are  contained   at
    paragraphs 24 to 32.  The judge dealt correctly with those  submissions
    for the reasons provided.  Submissions raised at  paragraph  33  within
    the determination appeared to encapsulate the thrust of the matters  in
    the Grounds of Appeal as summarised above.  Those matters can be  dealt
    with as follows.

19. Reference needs to be made to the following cases:

      i) Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552.

     ii) LV June 2011.

    iii) Ziolkowski v Land Berlin C-424/10, C-425/10 CJEU February 2012.

20. The Court of Appeal  in  Amos  held  that  a  divorced  spouse  had  to
    establish that he had  the  right  of  residence  before  the  question
    whether, notwithstanding the divorce, that right had been  retained  by
    Article 13 of the Citizen's Directive could be determined.   That right
    was subject to Article 16(2) or Article 18 of the Citizen's  Directive.
    The form of provision applied to family members of  EEA  nationals  who
    must have resided with the  EEA  national  in  the  host  member  state
    legally for a continuous five year period.  The question  of  legality,
    meant by exercising treaty rights.  The requirements of  the  Citizen's
    Directive were that at all  times  while  residing  in  the  UK,  until
    divorce, the spouse  had  to  be  a  worker,  self-employed  etc.   The
    marriage needed to have lasted for three years including  one  year  in
    the UK and satisfy the penultimate paragraph  of  Article  13(2).   The
    2006 Regulations were found to be  consistent  with  those  provisions.
    Provided that the  conditions  in  Regulation  10(5)  continued  to  be
    satisfied after five years' continuous residence in the  UK  a  non-EEA
    national  was  entitled  to  a  permanent  right  of  residence   under
    Regulation 15(1)(f).  OA (Nigeria) had held that in  those  five  years
    the EEA national must have been living in the UK  for  five  years  and
    exercising treaty rights  at  the  point  of  divorce  but  also  after
    divorce.  The Court of Appeal held  that  on  that  last  point  (after
    divorce) OA was wrong.  The EEA  national  must  have  been  exercising
    treaty rights up to the point of divorce only.   What  is  required  is
    that after divorce the  non-EEA  national  must  be  exercising  treaty
    rights (Regulation 10(6)).  If he does that up to the five  year  point
    then he is entitled to a permanent right of residence under  Regulation
    15(1)(f).

21. Lord Justice Burton rejected the argument that the Home  Office  should
    assist to obtain  missing  information  concerning  the  ex-spouse  (as
    suggested in this case).  LJ Burton stressed  the  difference  between
    adversarial nature of appeals as opposed to the inquisitorial nature of
    welfare benefit adjudications.  Under EEA Regulations the  Home  Office
    could not be expected to ask HMRC, DWP etc.  if  an  EEA  national  was
    still working.  However he alluded to the possibility  of  the  non-EEA
    national applying for a witness summons under Rule 50 of the  Procedure
    Rules.  That was not done so far as I can see by Counsel at the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  Further he ruled that applying to seek  for  directions
    under Rule 45 for the Home Office to provide information  necessary  to
    the appeal was no use as the Home Office could not be forced to  obtain
    information from other government agencies.

22. In the case of Ahmed [2013] UKUT 89 the spouse of an EEA national  does
    not acquire a right of retained residence upon divorce unless  the  EEA
    national was exercising treaty rights at the date of divorce.  That can
    also be seen in Amos above and  Jamsan  [2011]  UKUT  00165.   The  law
    therefore appears clear on this crucial issue in this case.   In  terms
    of whether the judge should have adjourned sine  die  or  referred  the
    case himself to the ECJ the following could be said.   Firstly  it  was
    conceded by Counsel there is no  presidential  note  recommending  such
    cases are adjourned.  Secondly the practice of adjourning cases because
    potentially at some unknown date a superior court may change the law is
    a bad practice, not in the interests of  justice,  nor  the  overriding
    objective or the manner in which English courts generally operate.   It
    runs the risk of almost no cases being  decided  particularly  if  that
    approach  to  justice  was  operated  by  both  sides.    Further   the
    requirement for a spouse to be exercising treaty rights at the date  of
    divorce to allow the non-EEA national to  fulfil  one  requirement  for
    retained rights is good sense.  If  the  EEA  national  was  exercising
    treaty rights as at that date, then but for  the  divorce  the  non-EEA
    national would be able to remain.  Given that it would  be  undesirable
    and very difficult to apportion  blame  in  divorce,  the  Rule  fairly
    sympathises with the non-EEA national and takes the question of divorce
    out of the picture when looking at his position.   However  if  at  the
    date of the divorce the EEA national spouse was not  exercising  treaty
    rights then it is questionable whether she  would  have  had  a  lawful
    basis for remaining in the  UK  in  any  event  and  thus  the  non-EEA
    national would also have a questionable basis.

23. In summary the judge  dealt  with  all  matters  of  evidence  and  law
    properly in this case save and except the mathematical  error  referred
    to above which in the circumstances of this case was not material given
    the proper findings that the Appellant did  not  fulfil  the  necessary
    requirements of Regulation 10(5) of the EEA Regulations.

Notice of Decision

24. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

25. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

