
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51671/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31 March 2015                             |On 14 April 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                    G H K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REMITTAL

 1. On the application  of  the  appellant,  which  was  unopposed  by  the
    respondent, I make an anonymity direction under rule 14 of the Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended).   This
    order prohibits the disclosure directly or indirectly (including by the
    parties) of the identity of the appellant.  Any disclosure in breach of
    this order may amount to a contempt of court.  This order shall  remain
    in force unless revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Malawi who was born  on  30  March  1967.
    She first arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 July 2003 on a visit  visa
    valid for six months.  Her leave was subsequently extended as a student
    on a number of occasions until 31 August 2009.  A  further  application
    made on 19 October 2009 for leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student was refused on 26 November 2009.  The  appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed on 2 February 2010 and a reconsideration was refused  by  the
    High Court on 19 February 2010.  The  appellant  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 3 March 2010.

 3. On 18 October 2013 the appellant was informed of her  liability  to  be
    removed as an overstayer.  She made further representations seeking  to
    remain in the UK under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.  That application  was
    refused on 15 November 2013 and a decision made to remove her by way of
    directions under s.10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

The Appeal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  2  September  2014,  Judge   Mathews   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and under Arts 3  and  8
    of the ECHR.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  On  9
    October 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  E  B  Grant)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.

 6. On 17 October 2014, the Secretary of State made a response  under  rule
    24 of the Procedure Rules seeking to uphold the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me.

The Judge's Decision

 8. In dismissing the appellant's appeal under Art 8, the judge  considered
    the appellant's health which was a central feature of  her  claim.   In
    particular, the appellant had been diagnosed as HIV  positive  and  had
    other health problems including with her pancreas  and,  as  the  judge
    pointed out, had had "a difficult medical history".

 9. The appellant and her sister  gave  evidence  before  the  judge.   The
    evidence was that the appellant had been diagnosed as HIV  positive  in
    2005 and she had received hospital treatment which had "stabilised" her
    position (see para 12 of the determination).   The  evidence  was  also
    that she was emotionally supported  by  her  sister  and  had  a  close
    relationship  with  a  Mr  F  (although  the  judge   considered   this
    relationship  was  of  "very  good  friends"  rather  than   "long-term
    partners").

10. As regards the appellant's treatment, the  judge  recognised  that  the
    drug used to treat her pancreatic condition and one  of  her  antiviral
    drugs were not available in Malawi At para 19, he went on to state:

         "I do note though that HIV treatment is available there,  though  I
         find that it may be less effective for this lady than the treatment
         she is presently receiving in the UK."

11. At para 34 the judge noted that:

         "A decision to remove her from the United Kingdom will separate her
         from her current medical treatment.  The particular implication  is
         that she is likely to be unable to receive the medication presently
         prescribed, and that will cause her health to deteriorate."

12. At para 35, the judge concluded:

         "That finding must though set against the context of the fact  that
         such a disparity in health  care  provisions  between  the  UK  and
         Malawi,  is  outweighed  by  the  public  interest  in  the  UK  in
         preserving health care facilities for  those  intended  to  benefit
         from them."

13. Then at para 37 the judge made this important finding:

        "I find that the appellant is presently in stable health  and  that
        she has skills that will allow her to generate income should she so
        wish, she also  has  a  sister  in  the  UK  capable  of  providing
        financial support to ease the transition to life back in Malawi.  I
        also accept that in  Malawi,  life  as  an  HIV  sufferer  will  be
        difficult  but  the  objective  evidence  showing  availability  of
        medical  assistance  is  clear,  she  can  seek  and  will  receive
        assistance."

14. At para 40, the judge again noted that the appellant:

         "is at present stable and the UK is not to be obliged to  undertake
         her continued health care."

15. In the light of those findings, the judge concluded that the  appellant
    had failed to establish both a breach of Art 3 and Art 8 of the ECHR.

The Issues

16. Mr Hodgetts,  who  represented  the  appellant,  submitted  a  detailed
    skeleton argument based upon a number  of  grounds  some  of  which  he
    recognised were not raised in the appellant's own  handwritten  grounds
    of appeal and would require permission.

17. However, ground 1 did not fall into that category.  It was  the  ground
    upon which Judge E  B  Grant  granted  permission.   Essentially,  that
    ground amounts to this.   The  judge's  finding  that  the  appellant's
    condition was "stable" was based upon a mistake of fact which  amounted
    to an error of law.

18. The basis for that mistake of fact  is  set  out  in  medical  evidence
    contained in the appellant's bundle which, although  it  postdates  the
    hearing, is relevant to the error of law and I admit it  in  accordance
    with the appellant's application (not opposed) under rule 15(2A) of the
    Procedure Rules.

19. Mr Hodgetts referred me to the report of Dr  Venkatesan,  a  Consultant
    Physician in Infectious  Diseases  at  Nottingham  University  Hospital
    dated 6 January 2015 (pages 5-10 of the bundle).  That  evidence  shows
    that on the day of the hearing, namely 15 August 2014, the  appellant's
    health deteriorated dramatically such that she was admitted to hospital
    on that date.  As I understand it, apart from  one  occasion  when  the
    appellant left hospital to "sign on", after which  she  had  to  return
    because she became extremely unwell including vomiting,  the  appellant
    has remained in hospital ever since.  The medical evidence is that  her
    HIV condition has dramatically  deteriorated.   Further  correspondence
    from Dr Venkatesan dated 5 December 2014 (at pages 41-42 of the bundle)
    certifies that the appellant is unwell and unfit to travel to a hearing
    centre at Stoke-on-Trent or in Newport.  The evidence shows that on the
    date  of  the  hearing  the  appellant  suffered  a  DVT   (deep   vein
    thrombosis).  Mr Hodgetts  also  relied  upon  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant's sister that the appellant was actually  feeling  unwell  at
    the time of the hearing.

20. Mr Hodgetts relied upon the Court of Appeal's decisions in E & R v SSHD
    [2004] EWCA Civ 49 and Ladd v Marshall [1954] 1 WLR 1489.  He submitted
    that this medical evidence established that the judge had proceeded  on
    a mistaken basis of fact, namely that  the  appellant's  condition  was
    "stable" when it was not.  He submitted  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements  for  admitting  such  evidence  under  Ladd  v   Marshall
    principles:  the evidence could not with reasonable diligence have been
    obtained prior to the hearing; it  would  probably  have  an  important
    influence on the result as her medical condition was central to her Art
    8 and indeed her Art 3 claim; and that evidence was credible.

21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that the  judge  had
    made a perfectly sustainable finding on the evidence before him.  There
    was no evidence that the appellant had complained to the judge  on  the
    day of the hearing that she was unwell.  His finding that her condition
    was "stable" did not exclude the possibility  of  a  sudden  subsequent
    deterioration in her condition.  Mr Richards submitted that the judge's
    finding was, as a consequence, sound, and the  appellant's  remedy  lay
    outside of these proceedings by making fresh representations.

Discussion

22. In E & R at [91] the Court of Appeal summarised the relevant principles
    as follows:

         ".....

         (ii) .... an  appeal  may  be  made  on  the  basis  of  unfairness
             resulting  from   'misunderstanding   or   ignorance   of   an
             established and relevant fact' ...;

         (iii)    The admission of new evidence on such an appeal is subject
             to Ladd v Marshall principles, which may be departed  from  in
             exceptional  circumstances  where  the  interests  of  justice
             require."

23. The Ladd v Marshall principles may be summarised  (per  Denning  LJ  at
    page 1491) as follows:

         "(1) The new evidence could not with reasonable diligence have been
             obtained for use at the trial (or hearing);




         (2)  The new evidence  must  be  such  that,  if  given,  it  would
             probably have had an important influence on the result of  the
             case (though it need not be decisive);

         (3)  The new evidence was apparently credible although it need  not
             be incontrovertible."

24. In my judgment, the evidence relied upon by Mr Hodgetts set out in  the
    appellant's bundle - some of which I have explicitly  referred  to  and
    summarised above - does demonstrate that in assessing  the  appellant's
    medical condition the judge did proceed on the basis of a  "mistake  of
    fact".  The evidence of the appellant's sudden deterioration on the day
    of the hearing, when the evidence  also  shows  that  she  was  feeling
    unwell at the hearing, is wholly inconsistent with the judge's  finding
    that her condition was "stable" at the time of the hearing.  It clearly
    was not.  This is not a case where the evidence merely shows  a  change
    of circumstances after the hearing which would not fall within E  &  R.
    Rather, the immediacy of  the  "deterioration"  following  the  hearing
    reflects inexorably upon the appellant's health  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing itself.   Although there was no fault on the part of the  judge
    in reaching the finding he did on the evidence that was before him, E &
    R demonstrates that nevertheless proceedings may be unfair and  involve
    an error of law where evidence  admitted  in  accordance  with  Ladd  v
    Marshall principles demonstrates a factual mistake by the judge.

25. Here, I am satisfied that the evidence relied  upon  does  satisfy  the
    Ladd v Marshall principles.  First, clearly  this  evidence  could  not
    with reasonable diligence have been obtained before  the  hearing.   It
    relates to evidence of the appellant's  medical  condition  immediately
    following the hearing.  Secondly, this evidence wholly  undermines  the
    judge's factual finding that her HIV condition and her health generally
    was "stable" at the time of the  hearing.   That  finding  was,  in  my
    judgment, material to the judge's adverse  finding  under  Art  8  and,
    quite  possibly,  in  relation  to  Art  3.   Certainly,  Mr  Hodgetts'
    submission that the evidence showing that the  appellant  cannot  leave
    hospital raises at least the possibility that to remove  her  in  these
    circumstances  would  amount  to  inhuman  and   degrading   treatment.
    Thirdly, the medical evidence is  undoubtedly  credible  and  reliable.
    Indeed, the contrary was not suggested before me.

26. At the conclusion of the representatives' submissions  on  the  E  &  R
    point, I enquired what the respondent's position was if this ground was
    made out.  Mr Richards candidly accepted that if the  ground  made  out
    then the judge's decision could not stand and  the  appropriate  course
    was for the appeal to be reheard de novo with no preserved findings.

27. In the light of that, it is not necessary for me to consider any of the
    other grounds raised in Mr Hodgetts' skeleton argument and upon which I
    did not hear oral submissions from the representatives.  The  error  of
    law I have identified  was  material  to  the  Judge's  decision  which
    cannot, as a consequence, stand.



Decision and Disposal

28. For the reasons I have given, the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR  involved
    the making of an error of law, namely a mistake of fact amounting to an
    error of law.  The decision cannot stand and is set aside.

29. Having regard to the factual issues and  new  evidence  concerning  the
    appellant's  health,  applying  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements and the nature of the error of law  (see,  e.g,  MM
    (Unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 (IAC) at [26] per McCloskey
    J (President)), this is an appropriate case to be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other  than  Judge
    Mathews.




                                                                      Signed




                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal


