
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-MP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51935/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 October 2014                           |On 31 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                  ABID KHAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Haji of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Abid Khan, is a citizen of  Pakistan  born  on  18  July
    1981.  He appealed against the respondent's  refusal  dated  4  October
    2014 to refuse him leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) under the
    PBS as he failed to satisfy paragraphs 245DD(b) and Appendix  A.   That
    was because he had failed to submit the specified  evidence  as  listed
    under paragraph 41 of Appendix A.

 2. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's refusal was allowed  by
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Oakley  (the  judge)  in  a  determination
    promulgated  on  7  July  2014.   The  grounds  claim  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself because the bank  letter  the  appellant  produced,
    fell within the parameters  of  paragraph  245AA,  that  is,  that  the
    document was in the wrong format.  See Akhter (Paragraph  245AA:  wrong
    format) [2014] UKUT 00297 (IAC), Fayyaz (Entrepreneurs:  paragraph  41-
    SD(a)(i)-"provided  to"   [2014]   UKUT   00296   (IAC)   and   Durrani
    (Entrepreneurs:bank letters; evidential flexibility) [2014] UKUT  00295
    (IAC).

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge T R P Hollingworth in granting permission  to
    appeal on 11 September 2014 said  this:  "The  grounds  raised  by  the
    respondent were all arguable, in particular that inadequate reasons had
    been given by the judge for reaching his decision."

Submissions on Error of Law

 4. There was no skeleton argument from either side.  Mr Bramble  asked  me
    to consider how the judge approached paragraph 245AA.   He  produced  a
    copy of the Rules relevant at the date of  the  decision  which  was  4
    September 2013.  At  [13]  of  the  determination  the  judge  set  out
    paragraph 245AA incorrectly as he included "[iv] a  document  does  not
    contain all  the  specified  information."   That  provision  had  been
    deleted from the Rules in force as of the date of the decision.

 5. Mr Bramble referred me to [17] of Akhter which I will set out in full:

         "[17]    We proceed to re-make the decision of the FTT.   The  sole
                question  is  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's   refusal
                decision was not in accordance with the law by reference  to
                paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules, which  applied  at
                the  time  when  the  appellant's  joint   application   was
                determined.  We have  reproduced  paragraph  245AA  in  [14]
                above.  It provides that UKBA 'may' request the applicant to
                supply 'the correct documents' in any of three  cases,  that
                is to say where:


                (a)    a document has been (or documents have been)  omitted
                    from a sequence of documents; or


                (b)     a document is in the wrong format; or


                (c)    a copy,  rather  than  original,  document  has  been
                    furnished.


         See sub-paragraph (b)."

 6. [18] of Akhter considered  the  material  defects  in  the  appellants'
    application which were that the bank letter did not state the names  of
    the appellants and did not specify the postal address,  landline  phone
    number and any  e-mail  address  of  the  account  holders.   Paragraph
    245AA(b) should be accorded its ordinary and natural meaning such  that
    it was not engaged in those particular appellants' circumstances.   The
    Tribunal  considered  that  an   application   suffering   from   those
    shortcomings, did not fall within any of the three categories  set  out
    in paragraph  245AA(b)  such  that  the  appellants  could  not  invoke
    paragraph 245AA in support of a contention that they should  have  been
    given an opportunity to rectify the deficiencies in their applications.
     That being the case, the judge did not err in the manner in  which  he
    approached the material before him.

 7. Ms Haji submitted that the appellant met the requirements of the Rules.
     She took me to 41-SD which describes the specified documents in  Table
    4 and paragraph 41 in terms of  whether  an  applicant  has  access  to
    funds.  There was a letter from  Bank  Al-  Habib.   It  was  from  the
    appropriate officer of that institution on official headed paper.   The
    judge  referred  to  that  documentation  at  [15]  and  [16]  of   his
    determination.   Bank  Al-Habib  was  listed  at  Appendix  P  of   the
    Immigration Rules as a financial institution whose financial statements
    were accepted.  See pages 15-16 of the appellant's bundle.

 8. The appellant could show he had the specified  documents  under  41-SD.
    Ms Haji submitted that  Akhter  was  dealing  with  quite  a  different
    situation  where  the  bank  letter  was  not  acceptable  because  the
    entrepreneurial team were not  mentioned  and  there  were  no  contact
    details for the third party.  Fayyaz referred to at [13] of Akhter made
    clear that "provided to" must  take  into  account  the  whole  of  the
    context which included Appendix A, Table 4, which  repeatedly  employed
    the terminology "access to" a  minimum  sum  of  money.   Further,  the
    language at paragraph 41(b) and (c) included  "permission  to  use  the
    money to invest in a business in the UK" and "transferable to the  UK".
    In paragraph 41(d) the phraseology was "available  to".   The  Tribunal
    was satisfied that the words "provided to" denoted "available to".

 9. Ms Haji submitted that all of the information was there,  it  was  just
    put in a different manner.   It  was  true  that  245AA(iv)  the  judge
    referred to, was not in force at the  time  of  the  decision  but  the
    guidance on PBS evidential flexibility version 2.0 (see page 24 of  the
    appellant's bundle) was in force, valid from 9 May 2013.  That guidance
    was before the judge which is why he said that the required particulars
    could have been requested.  See [14] of the determination.

10. Ms Haji also asked me to take into account documentation at pages 27-30
    of the determination showing that the respondent had applied her policy
    to other appellants but not to this appellant.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. The judge found that the  bank  letter  did  not  confirm  the  details
    required, that is, it did not confirm that Bank Al-Habib was  regulated
    by the appropriate regulatory body and it did not confirm the amount of
    money being available to the appellant from the  third  party's  funds,
    could be transferred  to  the  UK.   He  found  under  245AA  that  the
    respondent could and should have requested  other  documents  from  the
    appellant. See [12]-[14] of the determination. I find the  shortcomings
    in the appellant's application did not fall within  any  of  the  three
    categories of paragraph 245AA I have set out at [5] above such that the
    judge erred in finding that paragraph 245AA(b)(iv) was relevant. I will
    consider whether that error was material.

12. The judge also found at [16] of the determination that  the  respondent
    would have been aware that the bank was a financial  institution  whose
    financial statements were accepted by the respondent.

13. Paragraph 41 provides that an applicant will only be considered to have
    access to funds if the  specified  documents  in  paragraph  41-SD  are
    provided.  Inter alia, 41-SD provides that specified documentation must
    be produced to show evidence of the money  available  to  invest.   The
    appellant comes within 41-SD(a)(i).  The letter must inter alia:

         "(5)     confirm  that  the  institution  is   regulated   by   the
                appropriate body."

    Ms Haji would have me accept that because Bank Al-Habib  was  contained
    within a list of financial institutions whose financial statements were
    accepted (see page 16 of the appellant's bundle)  that  would  suffice,
    particularly because she submitted that the  appellant  could  met  the
    other requirements of paragraph 41-SD(a)(i) (1)-(11).

14. Appendix P at page 15 sets out "lists of financial institutions that do
    not satisfactorily verify  financial  statements,  or  whose  financial
    statements are accepted".   It  might  be  that  Bank  Al-Habib  was  a
    financial institution whose financial statements were accepted  by  the
    respondent but I find  that  did  not  match  the  requirement  of  41-
    SD(a)(i)(5).  There was no evidence before the judge or  before  me  to
    show that Bank Al-Habib was regulated by the appropriate body.

15. In such circumstances, there is  no  necessity  for  me  to  go  on  to
    consider (11) but which I will address nevertheless.  Each letter (from
    financial institutions holding the funds) must:

         "(11)    confirm that if (my emphasis)  the  money  is  not  in  an
                institution regulated by  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority
                (FCA) and the Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (PRA),  the
                money can be transferred into the UK."

16. The letter from Bank Al-Habib dated 15 July 2013 that  Ms  Haji  relies
    upon, merely said that the money was available.  It  does  not  say  it
    could be transferred into the UK and I do not  accept  that  the  third
    party declaration at page 13 of the appellant's bundle which said  "the
    whole amount is available and will remain available until its  transfer
    to the UK ......" remedied the defect as it was not a letter  from  the
    financial institution holding the funds anticipated by 41-SD(a)(i).

17. In such circumstances, I do not accept that Durrani, Fayyaz  or  Akhter
    assisted the appellant. Construed reasonably and sensibly in  its  full
    context, the appellant did  not  produce  documentation  sufficient  to
    satisfy 41-SD(a)(i). It was not as  Ms  Haji  submitted  that  all  the
    information was there, just in a different manner.

18. Taking into account my findings at [11]-[17] above, I do not accept the
    policy guidance PBS version 2.0 assisted  the  appellant  in  terms  of
    Rodriguez [2014] EWCA  Civ  2.  Further,  I  do  not  accept  that  the
    documentation at pages 27-30 of the appellant's bundle  which  Ms  Haji
    said was an  indication  of  how  the  respondent  dealt  with  missing
    documentation  in  other  cases,  was  evidence  that  such  additional
    documentation should have  been  requested  from  the  appellant;  each
    appeal is inevitably  case  specific  in  that  regard.  There  was  no
    obligation  on  the  respondent  to  point  out  the  defects  in   the
    application or to  seek  additional  information  or  documentation  to
    remedy such defects.

Conclusion

19. I find the judge materially erred in law.  I  set  aside  the  original
    decision and remake it by dismissing the appeal.

Decision

20. Appeal dismissed.  He


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date: 28 October 2014


Judge Peart

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 28 October 2014


Judge Peart

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
