
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51002/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th February 2016                |On 26th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                              Mr Zahidul Islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Laughton, Counsel instructed by Zahra & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Pakistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department of 10th December 2014 refusing his application for leave  to
    remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) under the points-based system.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge I Ross dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 19th August 2015.The  Appellant  appeals  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal against that decision with permission.

 2. The Appellant's Grounds  of  Appeal  contend  that  the  judge  made  a
    procedural error. It is contended that, at the end of the questions and
    answers at the hearing, the Appellant's  representative  made  a  brief
    submission and the judge immediately indicated that the  Appellant  had
    given satisfactory answers to  his  questions  and  that  he  would  be
    allowing the appeal.  However, in judge's written  decision  signed  on
    29th July 2015, he actually dismissed the appeal.  It is contended that
    the effect of the judge pronouncing his decision at the hearing is that
    he has issued a final  decision  and  that  Rule  29  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules
    2014 has the effect that the decision is that pronounced by  the  judge
    at the end of the hearing  rather  than  the  written  decision  served
    subsequently.  The Appellant relies in the grounds on the  decision  in
    SK (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2008] EWCA
    Civ 495 where the Court of Appeal  considered  the  construction  of  a
    similar provision in the Asylum and  Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)
    Rules 2005.

 3. It is further contended that the judge acted unfairly by not  convening
    a further hearing if he genuinely believed after the  hearing  that  he
    was wrong to have allowed the appeal.  The third  ground  is  that  the
    judge's decision was taken without proper consideration of all  of  the
    evidence.  It is submitted that the judge put forward three reasons for
    dismissing the appeal and that these were not properly  reasoned  based
    on the evidence before him.

 4. The judge granting permission to appeal noted that there is nothing  in
    the Record of Proceedings to record that the Appellant's  evidence  was
    found credible and the  appeal  allowed  but  noted  that  the  grounds
    strongly assert that this was the case and concluded that  the  grounds
    disclosed an arguable error of law.

 5. Prior to the hearing  before  me  this  issue  was  put  to  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ross, who responded  in  writing  to  indicate  that  he
    regarded it as "inconceivable" that he would have indicated that he was
    going to allow the appeal in the circumstances of this particular case.
     He indicated that it was not his practice to make indications in  open
    court unless the merits are totally  overwhelmingly  in  favour  of  an
    Appellant and that had he given an oral indication he would have  noted
    that on the Record of Proceedings so as to remind him when he wrote  up
    the determination.  He noted that this case was written  up  relatively
    quickly after the hearing and if he had given an oral  indication  this
    would still have been on his mind and would have been recorded as such.

 6. The Appellant's solicitor, Mr Hussain,  made  a  statement  about  this
    issue. In his statement Mr Hussain said that after the judge asked  the
    Appellant a number of questions he turned to Mr Hussain as if he wished
    him to make submissions and that after  Mr  Hussain  began  making  his
    submissions "he turned to the Appellant and said words  to  the  effect
    that I am satisfied with your explanations.  I will  be  allowing  your
    appeal". Mr Hussain went on to say that upon hearing this  he  made  no
    further submission other than to express his gratitude  to  the  court.
    Mr Hussain produced a copy of his contemporaneous notes which indicated
    that after the record of the evidence he made a submission that he  was
    relying on the evidence and noted that the decision was that the appeal
    was allowed.

 7. It is clear therefore that there  is  a  significant  dispute  of  fact
    between the judge and the Appellant's representative  as  to  what  was
    said at the hearing.  There was no Presenting Officer  present  at  the
    hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  therefore   the
    Secretary of State was unable to case any light on what happened at the
    hearing.

 8. At the hearing before me Ms Laughton initially requested an adjournment
    of this case so that oral evidence could be called from the Appellant's
    solicitor as there is clearly a conflict between the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's solicitor and of the First-tier Tribunal Judge. Ms Laughton
    sought an adjournment so that the  representative  could  be  given  an
    opportunity to give oral evidence as to this issue. She indicated  that
    as he is a  fee  paid  First-tier  Tribunal  (IAC)  Judge  he  requires
    permission from the President of that Chamber to give oral evidence.

 9. She further pointed out that, even if factual findings were not made as
    to whether the appeal was allowed orally at the hearing, the  statement
    from the solicitor indicates that he made no  further  submissions  and
    that is supported by his contemporaneous notes and the judge's decision
    which shows one sentence of submissions at paragraph 7.  She  therefore
    submitted that it is clear that the Appellant's solicitor was under the
    impression that the judge was allowing the appeal  and  on  that  basis
    made no further submissions.  There was no skeleton argument before the
    First-tier Tribunal so she submitted that oral submissions  were  going
    to be the crux of the appeal.

10. Ms Laughton relied on the case law which, she submitted, supported  the
    Appellant's case that where the Appellant  had  been  deprived  of  the
    opportunity to be heard the case should be remitted.  She relied on the
    cases of MM (unfairness; E & R)  Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  00105  (IAC),  in
    particular paragraphs 17 and 18 where the Tribunal quotes from the case
    of R v Chief Constable of Thames Valley Police, ex parte  Andrew  Brett
    Cotton [1990] WL 753309.  She also relied on the case of R v  Leicester
    City Justices, ex parte Barrow and Another [1991] 2 QB 261 and the case
    of Kanda v Government of the Federation of Malaya [1962] HLPC 322.  She
    submitted that it  was  not  necessary  to  show  that  there  was  any
    materiality to the  error  but  the  procedural  error  in  itself  was
    sufficient to lead to the case being set aside.

11. However she submitted that there were a number of substantive errors in
    the judge's decision as highlighted in the third ground of  appeal.  Ms
    Laughton submitted that the judge gave three reasons for dismissing the
    appeal.  The first was that he  rejected  the  business  plan  and  she
    submitted that  he  gave  insufficient  reasons  for  his  findings  in
    relation to that matter.  She highlighted paragraph 10 where the  judge
    referred to the Appellant having a contract with  an  individual  whose
    company was based in the same  building  as  the  Appellant's  business
    ignoring evidence from Companies House which clarified this issue.  She
    also submitted that the judge failed to have  regard  to  the  evidence
    before him in relation to the Appellant's funds.   She  submitted  that
    these issues would have been highlighted in the submissions.

12. Mr Whitwell submitted that Grounds 1 and 2 as outlined by  Ms  Laughton
    proceeded on the basis that it is established that the judge  indicated
    at the end of the hearing that he was allowing the appeal whereas  this
    matter is still in dispute and there no factual finding in that regard.
     In relation to Ground 3 he referred to the reasons for refusal  letter
    which detailed the reasons why the Appellant's application was  refused
    with reference to paragraph 245DD(h) and (i) of the Immigration  Rules.
    He submitted that it was open to  the  judge  to  assess  the  evidence
    before him and to determine that the Appellant could not succeed on the
    evidence.   He  submitted  that  Ms  Laughton  had  not  detailed  what
    submissions would have been made and what difference  they  could  have
    made to the judge's findings.

13. In response Ms Laughton relied on her primary submission which was that
    the proceedings should be adjourned for oral evidence  in  relation  to
    what happened at the hearing.  She submitted that in his submissions Mr
    Whitwell had relied on issues raised in the reasons for refusal  letter
    whereas the judge had only made three  findings  in  relation  to  this
    appeal.  She submitted that she had highlighted three areas  where  the
    judge could have come to different findings had he heard submissions on
    the issue.

Error of Law

14. I have considered all of the evidence and the submissions before me.  I
    accept on the basis of the conflicting evidence in terms of the judge's
    statement about what  happened  at  the  hearing  and  the  solicitor's
    statement and contemporaneous notes that there has been  a  significant
    misunderstanding in this case.

15. Although it is  not  established  how  this  misunderstanding  arose  I
    nonetheless accept on the basis of his statement  and  notes  that  the
    Appellant's solicitor was under the  impression  that  the  appeal  was
    allowed and that as a result he  did  not  make  full  submissions.   I
    accept that there is a possibility that those submissions may have made
    a difference  to  how  the  judge  proceeded  with  the  case.  I  take
    particular account of the fact that it appears that the judge  may  not
    have taken full account of all of the evidence before him, for  example
    the evidence from Companies House contained in the Respondent's bundle.
     This was a matter that the judge found against the Appellant and it is
    possible that submissions may have clarified this issue to  the  extent
    that the judge may have come to a different finding in relation to this
    matter.

16. In these circumstances I accept Ms Laughton's  submission  that,  given
    the potential procedural unfairness arising from the  misunderstanding,
    it is appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be
    heard afresh.

17. In light of the  potential  procedural  unfairness  arising  from  this
    misunderstanding I am satisfied that the appellant  has  not  therefore
    had his case properly considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  am
    satisfied that in these circumstances the  nature  and  extent  of  the
    judicial fact finding which is necessary in order for the  decision  to
    be remade is such that (having regard to the  overriding  objective  in
    Rule 2 of the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules 2008) it is appropriate to
    remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The judge made an error of law in relation to this appeal and  I  set  aside
the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  I remit the appeal to  the  First-
tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 23rd February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable because the  Appellant  has
not had his appeal properly considered by the First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
reasons set out above.


Signed   Date: 23rd February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

