
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51825/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 July 2014                                  |On 31st July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               Stanley Atueyi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant, the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, as the respondent and to the respondent (Stanley Atueyi) as
    the  appellant  (as  they  were  respectively  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal).  The respondent, Stanley Atueyi, was  born  on  11  February
    1979 and is of uncertain nationality; he claims that he does  not  know
    where he was born but lived in Nigeria until he  was  a  teenager.   It
    appears he came to Europe from Nigeria in 1991 or 1992.   In  1999,  he
    met a Ms Howson, who is a British citizen.  Ms Howson  was  working  in
    Spain until January 2005 and she returned to the United Kingdom in  the
    summer of that year and had a child  by  the  appellant.   In  November
    2005, the appellant and Ms Howson married.  It  appears  the  appellant
    entered the United Kingdom  illegally  in  2007.   In  October/November
    2010, the appellant and Ms Howson separated.

 2. On 12 September 2013, a decision was  taken  to  refuse  to  issue  the
    appellant with a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence
    as the  family  member  of  a  British  citizen  (Ms  Howson)  who  was
    previously working or  self-employed  in  another  Member  state.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Agnew) which, in a
    determination promulgated on 27 March 2014,  dismissed  the  appeal  in
    respect of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the 2006 Regulations") but allowed  the  appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR
    grounds.  The Secretary of State now  appeals  against  that  decision,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant has not cross-appealed against the decision to refuse his
    application under the 2006 Regulations.  I do not propose to  refer  to
    the complex  litigation  history  in  which  this  appellant  has  been
    involved in which it is discussed  in  some  detail  in  Judge  Agnew's
    determination [7-16].  Both parties accept that the appellant was  able
    to appeal against this decision on Article 8 ECHR grounds although  the
    respondent asserts in the grounds of appeal that the judge erred in law
    by failing to have proper regard to relevant  jurisprudence,  including
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).  Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the grounds  of
    appeal read as follows:

         (v)  It is respectfully submitted that the Tribunal has  failed  to
             provide adequate reasons why the appellant's circumstances are
             either compelling or exceptional [see Gulshan].  At paragraphs
             47-50 the Tribunal has found that it  would  be  in  the  best
             interests of the children to remain in the UK.  However, it is
             submitted the Tribunal has failed to provide adequate  reasons
             for their findings (sic) given that  at  paragraph  35-39  the
             appellant is not and does not intend to continue  to  take  an
             active  role  in  their  upbringing.   It  is  submitted   the
             appellant has  limited  contact  with  the  children  and  the
             Tribunal has failed to provide adequate reasons why he  cannot
             maintain contact with them from abroad and via visits.  It  is
             submitted that the appellant has shown no commitment to  being
             a part of his children's lives and their best  interests  will
             continue to be served by remaining with their  mother  who  is
             their primary carer.

         (vi) It is submitted that had the Tribunal taken these issues  into
             consideration they [sic] would have found that the decision to
             remove is proportionate.

 4. However, before I deal with that matter, Ms Khan,  for  the  appellant,
    has raised both in her Rule 24 notice and also in her oral  submissions
    a problem concerning the grant of permission by Judge  Cox  on  12  May
    2014.  The  application  for  permission  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    included this explanation for the late submission of the application:

         It is respectfully asked that the Tribunal extend  the  time  limit
         for making this application.  The main reason for delay was because
         of an unexpected illness.  I was allocated this work on Thursday  3
         April 2014, unfortunately I was taken ill the same day and did  not
         return to work until Monday 7 April 2014.  In my  absence  my  work
         was not covered.  On my return to work I dealt with  this  case  as
         soon as possible.  An extension of time is respectfully requested.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal determination was received by the respondent on
    29 March 2014.  The author of the grounds was one David Neale.

 6. The grant of permission incorrectly states [1] that the application for
    permission was made "in time".  The parties agree that it was not.   Ms
    Khan relies on the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Boktor  and  Wanis
    (Late application for permission) Egypt [2011]  UKUT  442  (IAC).   The
    headnote reads:

    Where permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted,  but
    in circumstances where the application is out of time,  an  explanation
    is provided, but that  explanation  is  not  considered  by  the  judge
    granting permission, in the light of AK (Tribunal appeal - out of time)
    Bulgaria [2004] UKIAT 00201 (starred) and the  clear  wording  of  rule
    24(4) of the Asylum and Immigration (Procedure) Rules 2005,  the  grant
    of permission to appeal is conditional, and  the  question  of  whether
    there are special circumstances making it unjust not to extend time has
    to be considered.

 7. Ms Khan submitted there had been no explanation why the  case  had  not
    been reallocated to another caseworker during Mr Neale's  absence  from
    work.

 8. I find that time should be extended.  The application for permission to
    appeal should have been submitted by 4 April 2014; it was submitted  on
    8 April 2014.  Given the short period of the delay and the lack of  any
    significant prejudice caused to the appellant and the unexpected nature
    of Mr Neale's illness, I find  that  there  are  special  circumstances
    which render it unjust not to extend time.  Whether  the  Secretary  of
    State's procedures are adequate for  dealing  with  the  illness  of  a
    member of staff is not material; the fact remains that Mr Neale's  work
    was not reallocated to another officer and that is the explanation  for
    the delay.  I notified the representatives of my decision at the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.  I therefore proceeded to consider their  submissions
    in respect of the merits of this appeal.

 9. I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law  such  that  its
    determination falls to be set aside.  I have  reached  that  conclusion
    for the following reasons.

10. In a thorough and detailed determination, Judge Agnew has, in  relation
    to  Article  8,  first  considered  whether  the  appellant   met   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules (in particular, E-LTRPT2.4).   At
    [39], she wrote:

         I do not find it has been established that the appellant is  taking
         and intends to continue to take an active role  in  the  children's
         upbringing.  He may play some role in that he is their  father  and
         he sees them occasionally, but I  do  not  find  it  is  active  in
         relation  to  their  upbringing.   The  appellant  has  failed   to
         establish he meets the requirements of ELTRPT2.4.

11. The judge then went on [40] to consider Gulshan  recording,  correctly,
    that for Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules to be considered, "the
    appellant has to show he has a good arguable  case".   She  found  that
    "given that there are children in the family I find  that  there  is  a
    good arguable case to proceed to Article 8".   The  grounds  of  appeal
    take issue with the judge's decision to consider Article 8 outside  the
    Rules in the light of her findings at [39] which I have  quoted  above.
    E-LTRPT2.4 provides:

    (a)  The applicant must provide evidence that they have either -

         (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child or that  the  child
             normally lives with them; or

         (ii) access rights to the child; and

    (b)  The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking or intend
         to continue to take an active role in the child's upbringing.

12. The judge did not seek to resile from her earlier finding at [39]  when
    she proceeded to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  At [44], in the
    course of her Article 8 analysis, the judge found  that,  if  the  only
    reason the appellant did not visit the children as much as she  did  so
    previously, "he would have found a way  to  live  much  nearer  to  the
    children than he does".  What appears to have  been  uppermost  in  the
    judge's mind is the fact that, as  she  says  more  than  once  in  her
    determination, "there are children involved" [48].   That  approach  is
    problematic. The Immigration Rules are predicated upon the  basis  that
    there children are likely to  be  "involved"  as  is  evidenced  in  E-
    LTRPT2.4 (see above).  It is not clear how the  very  same  "compelling
    circumstances"  which  fall  squarely  into  the  provisions   of   the
    Immigration Rules may justify a determination of an appeal on Article 8
    ECHR grounds outside the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Immigration  Rules
    incorporate domestic and Strasbourg jurisprudence relating to Article 8
    and strike a balance between the  rights  of  the  individual  and  the
    public interest; they are  intended  to  provide  a  complete  code  as
    regards Article 8 ECHR (see MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1192).   Had
    the appellant been able to show that he had access rights to the  child
    (which it appears, informally, he does have) and that  he  could  prove
    that he was taking or intended to continue to take an  active  role  in
    the children's upbringing, then he may have satisfied the  requirements
    of the Rule.  The judge expressly found that he could not  satisfy  the
    second part of that requirement and yet she went on  to  find  that  it
    would not be in the best  interests  of  the  children  "that  they  be
    deprived of their father wherever he may choose to go hereafter for  an
    indeterminate length of time" whilst  "it is difficult to see  how  the
    children could visit and keep in contact with a person  who  claims  he
    does not know his nationality and appears to be determined to remain in
    Europe regardless of the authorities' desires  to  exclude  him"  [48].
    Although I accept Ms Khan's submission that  some  of  the  Immigration
    Rules constitute a more complete code as  regards  to  Article  8  [for
    example, the provisions concerning deportation] than other parts of the
    Rules, the problem here is  that  the  judge  has  found  a  compelling
    circumstance to exist where the Rules fairly and squarely address  that
    same circumstance.  The impression given by the determination is  that,
    in any case involving children, it will be necessary for  the  Tribunal
    to consider Article 8 outside the Rules even  where  the  existence  of
    children and their best interests have been fully addressed within  the
    context of the Immigration Rules. To put it another way, a circumstance
    which causes an application to be refused under the Rules cannot per se
    constitute a "compelling circumstance" justifying a grant of Article  8
    ECHR leave outside the Immigration Rules.  The judge  has,  in  effect,
    embarked upon the very kind of "free-wheeling" analysis  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules specifically discouraged by the Tribunal in  Gulshan.
    By doing so, I find that she has erred in law.     I  find  that  there
    were no compelling circumstances in this case which required the  judge
    to consider Article 8 outside the Rules.  It follows that I should  set
    aside the judge's determination and remake the decision dismissing  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

    DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  have
    remade the decision. The appeal against the immigration decision  dated
    12 September 2013 is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 25 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

