








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51839/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 3 November 2014                           |On: 20 November 2014         |
|Prepared:  12 November 2014                   |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                        Mrs Sherene Thayalini Hubert
                         no anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, of counsel (instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant appeals with leave against the determination  of  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Higgins promulgated on 6  August  2014  dismissing
      her appeal against the respondent's refusal of her  application  dated
      22 November 2013 for further leave to remain.
   2. The background to the appeal was that the appellant is married  to  Mr
      Anton Devanakyam who has been  granted  exceptional  leave  to  remain
      until 21 November 2016. He and the  appellant  made  their  respective
      applications on the same day. The appellant's application was  refused
      by the same  person  who  granted  Mr  Devanakayam's  application  for
      exceptional leave to remain.
   3. He had at an earlier date been granted discretionary leave to  remain.
      Accordingly, it was contended that he would be entitled to  indefinite
      leave to remain once he has 'held' his  leave  for  a  period  of  six
      years. That will coincide with January 2016.
   4. Both Mr Devanakyam and the appellant are Sri Lankan nationals. He  has
      been resident here since 2000 having originally been granted a visa as
      a student with the intention of securing an accountancy qualification.
      He has been in employment since 2001.
   5. He completed parts 1 and 2 of the  ACCA  programme  by  2008.  He  was
      required to satisfy the requirements of part 3.  Although  he  had  to
      acquire  some  practical  experience,  he  was  unable  to   find   an
      appropriate position. He has worked for Sainsbury's throughout.
   6. The appellant came to the UK as a student on 27 August 2009. For  most
      of her life, she has lived and worked in Sri Lanka apart from a period
      of four years when she worked in Bangladesh.
   7. She came to the UK to obtain an MBA. She has secured that  degree  and
      was subsequently granted leave to remain as a post-study work  migrant
      until 4 April 2013.
   8. Mr Devanakyam and the appellant married  on  1  February  2011.  Their
      daughter was born in the UK on 11 October 2013.   The  respondent  was
      aware of the change in their circumstances at the date of decision.
   9. The Judge found that the appellant had been aware from the outset that
      her husband was a student with no permanent right of  residence  here.
      He had been unable to secure a further grant of leave to remain  as  a
      student and had been advised  to  apply  for  discretionary  leave  to
      remain. He had no leave to remain for about five months, until he  was
      granted discretionary leave to remain in the UK in January 2010 [9].
  10. The Judge noted that  her  husband's  discretionary  leave  to  remain
      expired on 26th January 2013. He made an application for further leave
      and the appellant applied at the same time for leave to remain as  his
      dependant.
  11. Although Mr. Devanakyam was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain
      until 21st November 2016, the Judge found that it was  unclear  as  to
      what factors might have led the respondent to extend his leave.
  12. He found that the appellant's application was refused because she  did
      not meet the requirements for a grant of leave to remain  in  Appendix
      FM of the rules. Nor were there exceptional circumstances warranting a
      grant of leave outside the rules. Her daughter was still  a  baby  and
      would be able to adapt to life in Sri Lanka. There did not  appear  to
      be any insurmountable obstacles preventing her husband from  returning
      to Sri Lanka with her and their daughter and  continuing  family  life
      there [15].
  13. The appellant was reasonably confident that if returned to Sri  Lanka,
      she would be able to find work. She was currently on  maternity  leave
      and would resume the job with Sainsbury's later in 2014.
  14. Her husband had returned to Sri Lanka on four occasions  since  coming
      here in 2000. His last visit with the appellant was in 2011 [18].
  15. The Judge noted that the parties accepted that the appellant could not
      succeed under the rules [21].
  16. Mr Martin accepts that the Judge had in the circumstances been correct
      to go on to consider the case under Article 8 outside of the rules and
      to decide that the case turned on the question of proportionality.  He
      accepted that the Judge properly identified the issue to be whether or
      not the appellant's removal constituted a  proportionate  response  to
      the public interest in effective immigration control [29].
  17. At paragraph 30, the Judge noted that it is  "generally  open  to  the
      spouse of a non-EEA national to apply for leave to remain  as  his  or
      her dependant" [30]. If leave to remain were granted, her leave  would
      ordinarily not extend beyond that of her partner's.
  18. Mr Martin referred him to the decision  in  FH  (Post-flight  spouses)
      Iran [2010] UKUT 275 which he relied on  [19].   He  pointed  out  the
      lacuna in the Rules [19].
  19. The Judge stated [30] that he had received no evidence on  the  issue,
      but suspected  that  no  provision  was  made  in  the  rules  for  an
      application to be made by the spouse of a  person  with  discretionary
      leave '.....because of the variety of circumstances which  might  give
      rise to a grant of limited leave to remain outside of the  rules.  The
      policy considerations which might justify a grant of limited leave  to
      remain in such circumstances could vary so widely that each case would
      be better addressed on its particular merits.'
  20. He then proceeded to consider the extent of private  life  enjoyed  by
      the appellant's partner over the course of 14  years.  He  noted  that
      this was a factor which weighed heavily against  the  removal  of  his
      wife, which the Judge had no doubt would lead to his leaving with  her
      [31].
  21. However, the "principal respects" in  which  his  private  life  found
      expression in the UK were on the basis of his relationships  with  his
      two brothers as well  as  relationships  developed  through  his  long
      employment with Sainsbury's. The nature of these latter  relationships
      is such that they could be replicated in Sri Lanka. His  relationships
      with his brothers would be devalued to the extent that direct personal
      contact would be considerably rarer were he living in Sri Lanka [31].
  22. He found at paragraph 32 that a factor which weighed in favour of  the
      appellant's removal was that both she and her husband were aware  when
      they embarked on the relationship that in neither of their  cases  was
      their continued  residence  in  the  UK  guaranteed.  She  anticipated
      returning to Sri Lanka once she had secured her  MBA.  She  was  aware
      that her husband had come here as a student, whether or  not  she  was
      aware when he met her at the airport that he  had  at  that  point  no
      leave at all. When they  subsequently  married  they  did  so  in  the
      knowledge that he only had discretionary leave [32].
  23. He noted that Mr. Devanakyam's discretionary leave  had  been  renewed
      [33]. He stated that the appellant might still have had to  resort  to
      Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention even if her husband had  been
      a British citizen.
  24. His findings are summarised at paragraph 34.  The  appellant  and  her
      husband could enjoy family life satisfactorily  in  Sri  Lanka.  Their
      daughter's  best  interests  would  not   be   harmed.   He   attached
      "considerable weight" to the fact that each  of  them  knew  from  the
      outset that the other's continued presence here  was  precarious.  The
      appellant's husband would be unable to complete part  3  of  the  ACCA
      programme, but six years after completing Parts 1 and 2, the Judge was
      "entitled to conclude that there is little real possibility of him now
      doing so." [34]
  25. He therefore concluded that the balance came down on the side  of  the
      public interest in removal.
  26. On 25th September 2014, First-tier Tribunal Judge De Haney granted the
      appellant permission to appeal. It was arguable that the  Judge  erred
      in law ".....in  that  his  analysis  of  the  policy  principles,  in
      assessing why there is a lacuna in the rules relating to leave for the
      spouse of  a  person  given  discretionary  leave,  [was]  flawed  and
      speculative".
  27. Mr Martin submitted that although the Judge accepted that there is  no
      provision in the rules for an application made  by  the  spouse  of  a
      person with discretionary leave, his consideration  of  whether  there
      are sound policy  reasons  was  entirely  speculative.  There  was  no
      evidence on that point. Nor was it explicable as to  why  somebody  in
      the position of Mr. Devanakyam should be in a worse  position  than  a
      person who is here on limited leave as a student.
  28. Although acknowledging that FH (Post-flight spouses) Iran [2010]  UKUT
      275 concerns spouses of refugees might have had stronger arguments  in
      their favour, there was nevertheless no  principled  reason  that  the
      respondent had advanced as to  why  people  with  discretionary  leave
      should not be in a similar position to other individuals with  limited
      leave. He submitted that it was 'beholden' on the respondent  to  show
      why there was no provision in the rules to deal with a person  in  the
      position of the appellant.
  29. He noted - without contradiction - that there are no IDIs and there is
      no policy document that informs the situation. It was  the  respondent
      who is required to show some justification for  the  failure  to  deal
      with a person in the position of the appellant.
  30. He submitted that insofar as there is a  gap,  this  would  be  highly
      relevant when assessing proportionality under  Article  8.  The  Judge
      should have considered whether this appellant and her  husband  should
      be in a  worse  position  than  those  with  limited  leave  who  were
      studying, for example, for a degree.
  31. Mr Martin also criticised the Judge's analysis at paragraph 33,  where
      the Judge stated that  much  had  been  made  of  the  fact  that  Mr.
      Devanakyam's discretionary leave had been renewed. The Judge then went
      on to state that the appellant "might still have had resort to Article
      8 of the ECHR had her husband been a British citizen."
  32. He submitted at paragraph 5 of his grounds that the Judge had accepted
      that the appellant and her husband had  been  entirely  truthful  [3].
      Part of their evidence was that their combined earnings were at  least
      �28,300. Accordingly, he submitted that it is difficult to see why the
      appellant would need to rely on Article 8 if her husband was British.
  33. Furthermore, he submitted that the decision of the respondent had been
      irrational. On the very day that her husband had been granted leave to
      stay in the UK for three more years, she at the same time refused  his
      wife's application, '....effectively deciding that her husband  should
      leave the UK with his wife'.
  34. However, it appears that Mr Devanakyam had been  allowed  to  stay  on
      account of his ties in the UK and the life he  had  established.  That
      should all the more include the life he had established with his  wife
      and daughter.
  35. The reality is that he would face a real dilemma - either to  continue
      staying here alone or being split up from his family.  Yet he wants to
      stay here. He is entitled to stay here. He  is  working.  He  has  the
      expectation of settling here after three years.  It  was  not  "right"
      that when assessing the best interests of the child,  they  should  be
      "forced to separate".
  36. Accordingly, he submitted that the Judge had not dealt  properly  with
      the  "lacuna  point"  and  had  not  dealt  appropriately   with   the
      "irrationality point."
  37. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Whitwell submitted in conformity  with
      the Rule 24 response that the Judge had directed himself appropriately
      and  made  sustainable  findings.  In  effect,  the  grounds  advanced
      disclosed no material error of law and are  "mere  disagreements  with
      the negative  appeal  outcome."  There  were  no  exceptional  factors
      advanced that could weigh against the public interest of removal.
  38. Mr Whitwell pointed to the chronology in this case.  The  sponsor  had
      obtained discretionary leave before  the  marriage.  It  was  also  of
      relevance that they are  both  Sri  Lankan  nationals.  Neither  is  a
      refugee. He submitted that were Mr Devanakyam and  their  daughter  to
      move to Sri Lanka with the appellant, there would,  as  found  by  the
      Judge at paragraph 26, be no interference with the  family  life  they
      enjoy together.
  39. He referred to the decisions in Nasim and Others  (Article  8)  [2014]
      UKUT 00025 as well as Patel and Others v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  72.  This
      focuses attention on the nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and  in
      particular recognises the limited utility of the  Article  in  private
      life cases which is far removed from the protection of an individual's
      moral and physical integrity.
  40. He submitted that both are in employment. The sponsor  had  previously
      embarked on his accountancy course and had failed to complete  it.  He
      had regard to the extent of his relationship with his two brothers  as
      well as those developed through long employment. That was  the  extent
      of his private life evidence in the UK. It could be replicated in  Sri
      Lanka.
  41. Furthermore, both were aware of the precarious nature of the situation
      when they  embarked  on  their  relationship.  Neither  had  continued
      residence in the UK guaranteed. When they married, they did so in  the
      knowledge that Mr Devanakyam had only discretionary leave.
  42. FT (Iran) is a different  case.  That  involved  refugees.  There  the
      sponsor would not be able to return with the appellant.
  43. He submitted that had they been married before discretionary leave was
      granted to the sponsor, "this may have been different." That  was  not
      the case however.
  44. In reply, Mr Martin submitted that there had been  no  answer  to  his
      submission  that  if  her  husband  was  settled   and   had   British
      citizenship, the appellant would not need to rely on  Article  8.  The
      maintenance requirements under the rule would clearly be satisfied.
  45. Moreover, if her husband had had leave as a student or was in  any  of
      the other categories in respect of which  provision  is  made  in  the
      rules for a wife to join  the  sponsor,  she  would  comply  with  the
      relevant requirements as a spouse. Accordingly, paragraph  33  of  the
      determination does not provide an answer but is entirely speculative.
  46. Her husband 'had a daughter' while he was lawfully in the  UK,  albeit
      that he was  not  settled.  Under  the  relevant  IDIs  applicable  to
      discretionary leave, he had every expectation that his status would be
      renewed. Accordingly, it is not correct to assert that  he  was  in  a
      precarious situation when he married the appellant.
  47. He repeated his submission that the Judge had not dealt properly  with
      the lacuna. Unless there is a good reason for the appellant not  being
      entitled to apply in these circumstances, there is no principled basis
      upon which she should  be  in  a  worse  position  compared  to  other
      applicants who are able to join their spouses in the UK as dependants.
     Assessment
  48. The facts in this case are not in dispute. The Judge had no hesitation
      in accepting their evidence without qualification. [3]
  49. Mr Whitwell contended that this is a  case  where  Nasim,  and  Patel,
      supra, ought to be applied.
  50. He submitted that 'if you take out the issue relating to lacuna,  this
      is a relatively straightforward  case'.  However,  Mr  Martin  has  in
      effect submitted that the lacuna issue was at the centre of the case.
  51. I find that there is no route provided under the rules with regard  to
      the appellant's or her husband's circumstances. Nor  were  any  policy
      reasons identified on behalf of the Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department as to why a person who has discretionary  leave  to  remain
      should not in principle also be allowed to  have  their  spouses  with
      them.
  52. I recognise that the situation is not entirely analogous  to  that  in
      FH, supra,  where the rules made no provision  for  the  admission  of
      post flight-spouses of refugees with limited leave. The Tribunal  held
      that the rules should be changed. In the meantime, the Tribunal  found
      that it is most unlikely that it will be proportionate to  refuse  the
      admission of a spouse of a  refugee  where  all  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 281 are met save that relating to settlement.
  53. The position here is that the appellant and his spouse  appear  to  be
      the subject  of  particularly  disadvantageous  treatment.  No  public
      interest justifying such treatment has been identified or relied on.
  54. It appears that the treatment of the appellant infringes Article 14 of
      the Human Rights Convention and  is  discriminatory  when  taken  with
      Article 8, and Article 12, concerning the freedom to marry.
  55. The First-tier Tribunal Judge stated without  evidence  or  submission
      made on behalf of the respondent, who was represented  by  counsel  at
      the hearing, that he "suspects" that  no  provision  is  made  by  the
      spouse of a person with discretionary leave "because of the variety of
      circumstances" that might give rise to a grant  of  limited  leave  to
      remain outside  the  rules.  The  Judge  speculates  that  the  policy
      considerations which might justify a grant of limited  leave  in  such
      cases could vary so widely that each case would be better addressed on
      its particular merits.
  56. The obligation to provide justification for the lacuna  in  this  case
      rested with the respondent. The appellant is unable to  qualify  under
      the Immigration Rules, as her situation is not provided for, with  the
      result that she is accordingly treated differently from the spouses of
      others who have only been granted temporary  leave  in  the  UK.  This
      includes the  spouses  of  students,  workers,  businessmen,  artists,
      ministers of religion and others  who  may  obtain  leave  in  the  UK
      pursuant to the rules -(paragraph 11 of FH).
  57. In particular, there was no explanation provide as to why  the  person
      who might have got married during the currency of  his  limited  leave
      must be prevented by the rules from  being  joined  by  his  dependant
      spouse.
  58. I find that the  consequences  of  the  asserted  lacuna  should  have
      weighed  substantially  in  the  proportionality  assessment  in   the
      appellant's case.
  59. Furthermore, I accept that there is an  unexplained  conflict  between
      the decisions made at the same time by the same  officer  in  deciding
      that Mr Devanakyam would be allowed to stay in the UK for  three  more
      years, but at the same time refusing the appellant's application.  The
      effect of that second decision  has  the  effect  of  undermining  the
      benefit entailed by that leave, resulting in a decision that he should
      leave the UK together with his wife if he wishes to enjoy family  life
      with her. It is not  explained  why,  given  that  Mr  Devanakyam  was
      allowed to stay on account of  his  ties  in  the  UK,  including  the
      private life ties he  had  established  here,  that  should  not  have
      included the life he had established with his wife and child.
  60. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of material errors on a point of law.
  61. Both parties agreed that if such  finding  was  made,  that  I  should
      proceed to remake the decision.
  62. In re-making the decision, there is, as noted, no substantial  dispute
      relating to the facts. Both parties  are  Sri  Lankan  nationals.  The
      appellant's husband has been resident in the UK for over 14 years.  He
      has remained here lawfully throughout. He has been in employment since
      2001. He has completed Parts 1 and 2 of the ACCA programme by 2008. He
      was however unable to acquire an  appropriate  position  in  order  to
      obtain practical experience.
  63. The appellant arrived as a student in August 2009. There  had  been  a
      connection between the two families. They  had  met  when  her  family
      visited the area on holiday. Her husband was  asked  to  meet  her  on
      arrival in the UK in order to help her settle in. They  fell  in  love
      and married.
  64. Mr. Devanakyam had been unable to obtain a further grant of  leave  to
      remain as a student and was advised to apply for discretionary  leave.
      For a period of some five months, he had no leave until  discretionary
      leave was granted in 2010.
  65. They married on 1 February 2011. The appellant obtained an MBA and was
      granted leave to remain as a post-study work  migrant  until  4  April
      2013.  Mr. Devanakyam's discretionary leave to remain expired on  26th
      January 2013. He made an  application  for  further  leave  before  it
      expired, as did the appellant, who applied for leave to remain as  his
      dependant.  Their daughter was born in October  2013.  The  respondent
      was aware of  the  change  in  circumstances  when  considering  their
      applications in November 2013.
  66. On the very same day that her husband was granted discretionary  leave
      to remain until 21 November  2016,  the  appellant's  application  was
      refused.
  67. The appellant is currently on maternity leave; she will resume her job
      later in 2014. She would be able to  find  work  if  returned  to  Sri
      Lanka.
  68. Her husband  has  plans  to  obtain  the  ACCA  qualification.  He  is
      determined to find a position in which he  can  secure  the  practical
      experience he requires to realise his ambitions.  The parties are able
      to maintain and accommodate themselves in the  UK  without  additional
      recourse to public funds.
  69. I bear in mind that a Tribunal should not  ordinarily  use  the  Human
      Rights Convention to address  perceived  defects  in  the  immigration
      rules (FH, supra).
  70. I find however that there is no proper justification identified by the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department for treating this appellant
      differently from other categories of persons where the rules cater for
      the husband being joined by his dependant spouse.
  71. I also take into account the fact  that  on  the  same  day  that  the
      appellant's application was refused, her  husband  was  told  that  he
      could stay in the UK for three years. I find that to be a  significant
      factor in weighing up the respective interests of  the  appellant  and
      respondent.
  72. I have also had regard to Lord Bingham's opinion in EB (Kosovo) [2008]
      UKHL 41 where he stated that  it  would  rarely  be  proportionate  to
      uphold an order for removal of a  spouse  if  there  is  a  close  and
      genuine bond with the other spouse, and that spouse cannot  reasonably
      be expected to follow the removed spouse to the country of removal.
  73. The  respondent  has  implicitly  recognised  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable for Mr. Devanakyam to return to Sri Lanka,  having  granted
      him discretionary leave to remain. I find that it  would  not  in  the
      circumstances be reasonable for him to have to return  to  Sri  Lanka,
      which would then result in  his  separation  from  the  appellant  and
      child.
  74. Finally, Mr Martin sought to rely on  authorities  such  as  Chikwamba
      [2008] UKHL 40 and the Court of Appeal's decision in Hayat. Article  8
      cases can be determined without the appellant  and  others  having  to
      leave the country to apply for  entry  clearance.  See  further  Zhang
      [2013] EWHC 891 (Admin).
  75. I have had regard to the public interest considerations  under  s.117B
      of the 2014 Act. I find that the appellant will not be a burden on the
      taxpayer. Further, I find that the parties commenced a relationship in
      the UK when they had leave to remain here. Moreover, the appellant has
      been employed. There is no suggestion that she is not  able  to  speak
      English.
  76. Having regard to the  circumstances  as  a  whole,  I  find  that  the
      decision  of  the  respondent  does  not  constitute  a  proportionate
      interference with their right to respect for private and family  life.
      The demand for respect for the Article 8 rights of the  appellant  and
      her husband require that she be granted leave to remain in the  UK  as
      the dependant of her spouse at least until 27th November 2016.




     Decisions
      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law.  Having set aside the decision, I  remake  it
      allowing the appellant's appeal on Article 8 grounds.


     No anonymity order made.

                               Signed        Dated  12/11/2014


                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer




