

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Numbers: IA/51715/2013
                                                               IA/51730/2013
                                                               IA/51733/2013
                                                               IA/51735/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |                  Decision   |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 28th January 2015                          |                  On 9th     |
|                                              |February 2015                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  MRS L O I
                                 MISS A O I
                                MASTER A O I
                                MASTER A O I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents: Ms E L Cantor

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Details of the Parties


  1. The Secretary of State is the appellant in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The
     respondents are referred to hereafter as the claimants.  Their  details
     are as follows.  The first listed claimant, Mrs I, is the mother of the
     remaining three claimants; she was born on 1st June 1972; her  daughter
     was born on 5th July 2007; her older son  A O  was born on 24th  August
     1998, and her second son A O on 26th March 2001. They are all  citizens
     of Nigeria. They applied to the Secretary of State for further leave to
     remain in the United Kingdom on Article 8 ECHR grounds.


  2. In a determination promulgated on 28th October 2014 First-tier Tribunal
     Judge Camp (the Judge) allowed the appeals of the claimants on  Article
     8 ECHR private life grounds having found that  there  were  exceptional
     circumstances to warrant consideration outside the  Immigration  Rules.
     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  that  decision  was
     granted to the Secretary of State on 17th December 2014 on the arguable
     grounds that the Judge erred in his assessment  of  proportionality  by
     failing to give proper consideration to  the  public  interest  and  by
     failing to have proper  regard  to  section  117  of  the  Nationality,
     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.   The matter accordingly  came  before
     me to determine whether  the  making  of  the  decision  by  the  judge
     involved the making of a material error of law.


Background Information

  3. The background facts are as follows. The first claimant was married  to
     Mr A A I, a citizen of Nigeria, present in the United Kingdom with Tier
     1 leave as a Migrant; he was the father of all the children.  Mrs I was
     first granted entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a  visitor  from
     10th July 2000 until 10th January 2001. She  then  entered  the  United
     Kingdom on 22nd August 2002 with entry clearance  as  a  visitor  valid
     from 13th March 2002 until 13th September 2002. She  was  then  granted
     entry clearance as a visitor from 25th  April  2003  until  25th  April
     2005.  She entered again on 11th August 2008 with valid entry clearance
     as a visitor until 17th July 2010.

  4. On 4th April 2010 Mrs I entered the United Kingdom with entry clearance
     as a Tier 1 partner from 1st February 2010  until  1st  February  2013.
     The  claimant  children  were  variously  granted  entry  clearance  as
     visitors  with  their  mother  until  they  were  granted  leave  entry
     clearance as Tier I dependants from 4th April 2010 until 13th  February
     2013. The claimants have remained in the United Kingdom since then, but
     on 26th December 2012 Mr A A I died.   The  claimants  applied  on  1st
     February 2013 for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  Article  8
     grounds. The applications were refused by the  Secretary  of  State  on
     20th November 2013.  This was the  decision  appealed  against  by  the
     claimants in the First-tier Tribunal before the Judge at a  hearing  on
     3rd October 2014.


My Consideration of the Submissions


  5. Mr Kandola made submissions to me on behalf of the Secretary  of  State
     in accordance with the grounds  of  appeal  as  follows.  Having  found
     reasons to consider the appeal on a free standing Article 8 basis under
     the ECHR on private life grounds the Judge erred in  paragraph  of  his
     determination by finding that there was "no  evidence  that  the  first
     appellant would be able to support herself and her children" on  return
     to Nigeria.  In doing so the Judge has misapplied the burden  of  proof
     because it was for the claimant to show that to be  the  case;  if  she
     asserts that the family would find life difficult in Nigeria  the  onus
     is upon her to corroborate the assertion.

  6. The Secretary of State submits that there  was  no  evidence  that  the
     claimant could not support herself and her children in Nigeria.  On the
     contrary, the evidence showed that she could because at paragraph 11 of
     the determination it was evident that the claimant  has  a  mother  and
     sister in Nigeria and that she has a house in the United Kingdom  which
     is mortgage-free and could be sold. This evidence is  submitted  by  Mr
     Kandola to undermine the findings of the Judge which led him  in  error
     to allow the appeal.

  7.  Mr  Kandola  submitted  that  the   Judge   further   erred   in   the
     proportionality assessment which is fundamentally  flawed.   The  Judge
     took account of disruption to the education  of  the  children  but  he
     failed to take into account that they are not qualifying children under
     the Immigration  Rules  or  under  section  117B  of  the  Nationality,
     Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  Their 4-year length of  residence  in
     the United Kingdom is insufficient to engage the Immigration Rules  and
     this must be a weighty public interest matter in favour of removal. The
     Judge did not weigh this properly  in  the  balance  against  the  best
     interests of the children.

  8. I do not accept the submission that the Judge erred in this  aspect  of
     his decision-making.  The Judge did not make a  specific  finding  that
     the children were not qualifying children under the  Rules  because  he
     reached an overall  conclusion  that  the  Immigration  Rules  did  not
     adequately  address  the  exceptional  circumstances  of  any  of   the
     claimants.  The exceptional circumstances identified by the  Judge  are
     clearly set out in paragraph 28 of the determination  as  the  terminal
     illness and death in the  United  Kingdom  of  Mr  A  A  I.  The  minor
     claimants' 4-year  length  of  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom  was
     specifically  considered  by  the  Judge  at  paragraph   40   of   the
     determination before he found that their education would  be  disrupted
     by their removal, particularly in relation to the older two children.

  9. The Judge did not move to an Article 8 consideration before considering
     the relevant case law and finding that the decision of  the  respondent
     represented an interference with the moral integrity of the  claimants.
     The Judge directed himself properly in accordance with section 117B  at
     paragraph 36 of his determination and I find no error in the absence of
     a finding that the children were not qualifying children under  section
     117B(6).  That provision is that the public interest does not require a
     person's removal where there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
     relationship with a qualifying child. It does  not  necessarily  follow
     that that the public interest is served by removal because the child is
     not a qualifying child.  It was  still  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to
     assess the best interests of the children and to weigh in  the  balance
     whether the decision of the respondent ran counter to those  interests;
     he was satisfied that it did.
 10. Mr Kandola further submitted  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his  failure
     properly to apply section 117B(5) of the 2002 Act, namely  that  little
     weight should be given to a private life established  at  a  time  when
     that person's immigration status is precarious. He submitted  that  the
     immigration status of the claimants was precarious at the relevant time
     because it was in effect finite and dependent upon the position of  the
     Tier I Migrant; the leave of the claimants would always have ceased  at
     the end of Mr A A I's leave and their private life must accordingly  be
     given little weight.

 11. I find no error in the Judge's approach to this issue in the  balancing
     exercise.  He properly directed himself in law and thereafter it was  a
     matter for him to determine the weight to be  attributed  to  competing
     factors.  The weight to be attached to the claimants' private lives was
     in his view sufficient to outweigh the  public  interest.   It  is  not
     suggested that the Judge reached a decision which was perverse and I am
     satisfied that he was entitled to reach  the  conclusion  he  did.   He
     found exceptional compassionate elements in the private  lives  of  the
     claimants, including their sudden bereavement, the  consequent  absence
     of an adult male family member in their  lives  and  their  potentially
     vulnerable  situation  on  return  to  Nigeria,  over  and  above   the
     disruption to the education of the children.


 12. The Judge did not reach his favourable  conclusions  to  the  claimants
     without first specifically weighing in the balance, at paragraph 36  of
     his determination, that section 117B specifies the weight to  be  given
     to private life when immigration status is unlawful or  precarious  and
     the Judge quite properly directed  himself  that  "precarious"  is  not
     defined for these purposes. The Judge took proper account in  paragraph
     41 of the weight to be accorded to the public  interest  but  he  found
     that under section  55  the  welfare  of  the  children  would  not  be
     adequately safeguarded by their removal to Nigeria in their  particular
     circumstances. The evidence before the Judge on behalf of the  children
     included their inability to visit their father's  grave  if  they  were
     removed to Nigeria.


 13. Having taken account of the claimants' circumstances the Judge moved to
     a free-standing Article 8  consideration  in  respect  of  which  I  am
     satisfied that he correctly directed himself in law.  The Judge was  in
     my finding entitled to move to such a consideration  having  determined
     that there were factors which could not be adequately considered in the
     context of the Rules which could lead to a successful Article 8  claim,
     as indeed they did.


 14. Having taken account of all the grounds of appeal and submissions I  am
     satisfied that the decision of the Judge does not contain any error  of
     law. Ms Cantor drew my attention at the outset of her submission to the
     Judge's central finding at paragraph 38 that he found all the witnesses
     to be credible. The Judge was  in  my  view  entitled  to  reach  these
     credibility  findings  from  which  his  favourable  findings  to   the
     claimants under Article 8 flowed. He gave clear reasons to explain  why
     the particular circumstances of the claimants amounted  to  exceptional
     compelling circumstances in the context of Article 8 and I am satisfied
     that the proportionality balance as drawn has paid due regard  both  to
     the individual circumstances of the claimants' rights in the context of
     the public interest and to that public interest as set out in paragraph
     34 of the determination. The Judge identified the  public  interest  as
     including the enforcement and maintenance of  immigration  control  and
     the protection of the economic interests of the United Kingdom.


 15. Following correct self-direction, where the balance falls is a  finding
     of fact to be made by the Judge hearing the evidence absent perversity.
     I have found correct self-direction and the Secretary of State does not
     rely on grounds of perversity; I find no perversity.  I take account of
     the submission for the Secretary  of  State  that  there  could  be  no
     legitimate expectation on the part of the claimants to  remain  in  the
     United Kingdom or to avail themselves of services  here.   However,  at
     paragraph 40 the Judge took account in considering the public  interest
     the fact that had Mr A A I not died it would have been his  expectation
     to return with his family to Nigeria.


 16. The appeal of the Secretary of State cannot in my  finding  succeed  on
     the ground asserting that the Judge has misapplied the burden of  proof
     in relation to his finding that there was no evidence  that  the  first
     claimant would be able to support herself and her children on return to
     Nigeria.  The submission by the Secretary of State  that  the  claimant
     had a house she could sell enters the realms of disagreement  with  the
     factual findings in the case and is in any event a  factor  taken  into
     account by the Judge at paragraph 11 of the determination.


 17. The Judge in my view reached a sustainable conclusion about the  likely
     financial situation of the claimants on return to Nigeria. The evidence
     before him was, in paragraph 10 of the determination,  that  the  first
     claimant received moral and financial support for the  children  whilst
     on holiday; in paragraph 13 Pastor E gave evidence of financial support
     provided by the church members to the claimants in the  United  Kingdom
     and of the difficulty in continuing such support beyond the  claimants'
     possible return to Nigeria.  The witness Mr  P  gave  evidence  of  his
     financial support to the claimants.


 18. If there was error, although I find  there  was  not,  in  the  Judge's
     approach to the issue of the claimants' financial situation  on  return
     to Nigeria I find that it was not material.   The  Judge  took  a  wide
     range of other factors into account in making his decision to which  he
     attached weight.  He found the claimants' overall circumstances  to  be
     tragic, as stated in paragraph 24 of the determination; in paragraph 28
     he set out the exceptional circumstance  of  terminal  illness  and  in
     paragraph 38 he found that the children would  be  vulnerable  with  no
     adult male in Nigeria; in paragraph 39, having considered  section  55,
     the Judge found that the children's welfare  would  not  be  adequately
     protected if returned to Nigeria. The Judge further took  into  account
     the good intentions and behaviour of  the  claimants  in  making  their
     claim  and  their  good  immigration  history.  The  Judge  found   the
     compassionate circumstances to be persuasive and found the  balance  to
     fall in the claimants' favour for all the reasons set out in  paragraph
     43 of the determination.


 19. The Judge is submitted to have failed to have sufficient regard to  the
     cost to the taxpayer of an education for the children and to the public
     interest in the economic well being of  the  United  Kingdom.  In  this
     regard I find that the Judge took proper account, in  paragraph  43  of
     his determination, of the public interest in  relation  to  immigration
     control and the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom. At  paragraph
     42 of his determination the Judge stated: "I bear firmly  in  mind  the
     need to protect the United Kingdom's  economic  interests.   Access  to
     free education comes at a cost to the taxpayer."


 20. I find that the making of the previous decision  did  not  involve  the
     making of a material error on a point of law and it  follows  that  the
     Judge's decision stands and  this  appeal  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
     dismissed.


Decision


 21. I find that the making of the previous decision  did  not  involve  the
     making of a material error on a point of law and it  follows  that  the
     Judge's decision stands and this appeal by the Secretary  of  State  in
     the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made no  direction  regarding  anonymity  under
    Rule 13 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014.  However, in the light of the status of
    three of the respondents as minors I make an anonymity  order  pursuant
    to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI
    2008/269). Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise,  no
    report of these proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof  shall
    directly  or  indirectly  identify  the   respondents   (the   original
    appellants). This direction applies to, amongst  others,  all  parties.
    Any failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
    of court proceedings.

Signed:  J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 8th February 2014


Fee Award

The position remains that the First-tier tribunal made no fee award  in  the
absence of any record of payment of fees.

Signed: J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 8th February 2014
