
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/51828/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 August 2014                             |On 3 September 2014          |
|Prepared 21 August 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                            edward opoku agyemaN

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Awal, Legal Representative instructed by Law
Clinic
     (Birmingham)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant a national of Ghana,  date  of  birth  28  October  1972,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision dated 20  November  2013  to
    refuse to issue a residence card with reference  to  Regulation  7  and
    8(5) of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006  (the
    2002 Regulations).

2.   An appeal against that adverse decision was made and came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hanley, the judge, who, on 11 June 2014,  dismissed
    the appeal under the EEA Regulations  and  decided  that  no  anonymity
    order should be made.


3.   Permission to appeal the judge's decision  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne on  30  June  2014.   There  was,  although  its
    contents were in effect of no assistance, a reply under Rule 24 of  the
    Upper Tribunal (Procedure) Rules from the Secretary of  State  and  for
    the reasons given within that letter it is  clear  why  there  was  the
    general objection but no more or less than that.

4.   Mr Awal submitted that the grounds of appeal disclosed  errors  of  law
    by the judge in dealing with the validity of the double proxy  marriage
    performed in Ghana on behalf of the Appellant and  his  Dutch  national
    wife, Dorothy Amar Duker.  Their marriage, said to have taken place  on
    25 November 2012, was attended in Ghana by, it would seem, the  members
    of  their  respective  families.   Mr  Awal  says  that  the   evidence
    demonstrated that there was, together with the supporting  documents  a
    valid  customary  marriage.  The  marriage  was  lawful   because   the
    Appellant's first marriage had been dissolved on 30 October 2008, there
    was appropriate evidence of that fact and thus he was free to marry.

5.    The judge rejected the Appellant's case on the primary basis that  the
    Appellant had not adduced evidence to show that a double proxy marriage
    is a valid marriage in the law of the  member  EEA  state,  namely  the
    Netherlands.  At paragraphs 44 to 46 of  the  determination  the  judge
    identified parts of the  judgment  of  Kareem  [2014]  UKUT  24  (IAC),
    although paragraph 18 which  was  not  cited  was  also  material,  and
    concluded that there was no evidence to  show  that  the  EEA  national
    sponsor was exercising free movement rights nor that  the  law  of  her
    country demonstrated that there was a recognised marriage  under  Dutch
    law.

6.   The judge also in looking at this  matter  addressed  the  question  of
    whether or not there was a subsisting relationship  which  was  durable
    and   brought  the  Appellant  within  Regulation  8(5)  of  the   2006
    Regulations.

7.   His findings on that matter  are  contained  in  paragraph  51  of  the
    determination and there is no challenge in the grounds of appeal or  in
    the submissions made to the findings made or the conclusion  the  judge
    derived there from.   As  Mr  Awal  candidly  accepted,  the  case  had
    essentially been argued by reference to the validity  of  the  Ghanaian
    marriage in 2012 and the dissolution of the earlier marriage in October
    2008.

8.   It is clear from the judgment in  Kareem,  particularly  paragraph  18,
    where the Tribunal led by a Vice President stated:

         ..."Therefore, we perceive EU law as requiring  the  identification
         of the legal system in which  a  marriage  is  said  to  have  been
         contracted in such a way as to  ensure  that  the  union  citizen's
         marital status is not at risk of being  differently  determined  by
         different  Member  States.   Given  the  intrinsic   link   between
         nationality of a Member State and free movement rights, we conclude
         that the legal system of the nationality of the Union citizen  must
         itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted."


9.   It is of course to be noted that in the head note and  to  the  summary
    at paragraph 68 that it might be read as being disjunctive in the sense
    that once a valid marriage was established in Ghana then there  was  no
    need to consider the issue of the recognition of the marriage under the
    laws of the EEA country of the EEA national.

10.  However it is clear from paragraph 18 of the decision  in  Kareem  that
    it is not in fact constrained on a disjunctive and separate basis.

11.  Mr Awal helpfully identified that before the judge and before me  there
    is nothing as yet by way of any evidence to  show  that  the  marriage,
    assuming all other things being equal and it was being a valid marriage
    in Ghana, had been one that was or would be recognised under Dutch law.



12.  In the circumstances  therefore  I  find  the  judge  in  the  original
    Tribunal made no  error  of  law  in  the  assessment  of  that  issue:
    Accordingly the appeal was  doomed  to  fail.   The  issues  raised  in
    relation to Kareem were further considered by the Upper Tribunal in the
    case of T & Others (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT  316  (IAC).
    From that again it is clear as expressed by  Senior  Immigration  Judge
    O'Connor that it was difficult to see how  the  conclusion  could  have
    been made clearer in  Kareem,  that  when  consideration  is  given  to
    whether an applicant has undertaken a valid marriage for  the  purposes
    of the 2006 Regulations, such  consideration  has  to  be  assessed  by
    reference to the law of the legal system  of  the  nationality  of  the
    relevant union citizen. On the cases recited by Mr Awal I see no reason
    not to follow the cases of Kareem or TA.

13.  The gravamen  of  the  second  basis  of  the  appeal  grounds,  on  an
    alternative basis, was  the  question  of  whether  the  Appellant  had
    undergone a dissolution of  his  first  marriage;  said  to  have  been
    recorded on 30 October 2008.  It is common ground that if such a  court
    order was made but it has not been produced.  What has been produced is
    in effect the product of representations  being  made  to  the  Circuit
    Court in Kumasi-Ashanti in a suit number A11/308/13 seeking the court's
    confirmation that the marriage was dissolved on 30 October 2008.

14.  That document was obtained by a  joint  affidavit  of  the  Appellant's
    father, Opoku Agyeman and the mother of the Appellant's ex-wife used in
    support of an ex-parte motion seeking confirmation of the order of  the
    dissolution of marriage.  The  form  therefore  identifies  that  those
    persons making the affidavit were  heard  although  whether  they  were
    actually heard in a hearing is difficult to say. On the  basis  of  the
    court order it was confirmed that the marriage contracted  was  validly
    dissolved on 30 October 2008 and that either party to the marriage  was
    then at liberty to marry anyone else thereafter.

15.  The judge said of this document:

         "I also find it  unsatisfactory  that  the  document  refers  to  a
         marriage in 2003 without any more precise date,  which  contradicts
         the Appellant's evidence that the 2003 marriage was registered.   I
         am  not  satisfied  that  I  have  been  provided  with  any   good
         explanation as to why the court order of 30 October 2008 cannot  be
         produced and in the absence of that order I am  not  satisfied  the
         Appellant is divorced.  What the consequences  of  that  are  under
         Ghanaian law are wholly unclear."


16.  The confirmation obtained by the court order of 15  February  2013  was
    therefore, it would seem, in all likelihood, in the possession  of  the
    Appellant or his representatives at an  early  date  in  2013  yet  for
    reasons which are unexplained no one has returned to the original court
    or the court records the dissolution of the marriage on 30 October 2008
    to produce a record or copy which would have been contemporaneous  with
    the dissolution. Nor was there any explanation  why,  between  February
    2013 and May 2014 such a document was not produced.   It  may  be  that
    someone thought that was good enough and that the order  of  the  court
    from 15 February 2013 was sufficient.  In  the  relatively  short  time
    since the judge's decision in May 2014 that has not led to  either  any
    request so far as I am aware to that court for  a  copy  of  the  court
    records relating to 30 October 2008. Nor was I informed as to why there
    was no document provided previously  or  in  support  of  the  grounds,
    bearing in mind the point taken by the judge.

17.     In the circumstances it seems to me that when the issue was   raised
    in the appeal, putting aside whether the marriage by the  Appellant  to
    Ms Duker was one that has been lawfully entered into in  Ghanaian  law,
    it seemed to me that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  take  that  point.
    Provided, as he did, he gave reasons for the conclusion he reached  was
    entitled to take the view that that was a subsisting issue and that  he
    could not conclude on the documentation provided that the Appellant was
    free to marry.

17.  I might well have reached a different decision on that point but it  is
    not open to me to interfere with another judge's decision in the First-
    tier Tribunal simply because I might have come to a different view.  On
    the face of it the judge's findings does not demonstrate in relation to
    the reasoning any material error of law.

18.   The original Tribunal's decision stands. The appeal is dismissed.




Signed                                  Date 27 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

