
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51100/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Magistrates' Court    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 September 2016                      |On 17 October 2016                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                 franco [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel instructed by Western
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before me following a hearing on 21  March  2016
    which resulted in my finding that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  ("the
    FtJ") who allowed the appellant's appeal  against  an  EEA  deportation
    decision had erred in law.  I set aside his decision for it to  be  re-
    made in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. That error of law decision is attached as an Annex to this decision and
    reference should be made to it to the full background and circumstances
    of the appeal.  I repeat  certain  paragraphs  of  that  error  of  law
    decision as an introduction to this,  my  re-making,  of  the  decision
    under appeal.

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Italy  born  on  20  October  1969.   The
    respondent made a decision on 15 December 2014 to  make  a  deportation
    order, pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006 ("the EEA Regulations").

 4. The following paragraphs of the  error  of  law  decision  provide  the
    further context to the resumed hearing:

    "7.  The FtJ's findings included the following.  He concluded that  the
         appellant arrived in the UK on a  date  before  20  May  2005.   He
         accepted that the appellant was in employment and exercising Treaty
         rights in the UK as an EEA citizen from 21 December 2007.  He noted
         however, that his employment came to  an  immediate  end  when  the
         appellant admitted his offending.

    8.    At  [40]  the  FtJ  noted  the  respondent's  concession   in   a
         supplementary decision letter to the effect that  it  was  accepted
         that the appellant had acquired a permanent right of  residence  in
         the UK, having exercised Treaty rights for a continuous  period  of
         five years.

    9.   Dealing with the appellant's convictions in the UK from [42],  the
         FtJ referred to the appellant having  first  come  to  the  adverse
         attention of the UK authorities when he was arrested in  connection
         with offences committed between 1 June 2011  and  5  October  2012.
         This was a series of sexual activities with a  vulnerable  29  year
         old male with severe learning difficulties, that the appellant  was
         trusted to care for.  The victim was suffering from cerebral  palsy
         and dysphasia.  The sexual activities engaged in by  the  appellant
         included masturbation, oral and anal intercourse.   The  FtJ  noted
         that the appellant told his manager  about  his  sexual  activities
         with the victim and his employment was terminated.   The  appellant
         also notified the police of his actions, which led to  his  arrest,
         interview, charge and conviction.

    10.  At [43] the FtJ quoted from the pre-sentence report, in summary as
         follows.  The appellant had said that he did  not  see  the  victim
         every day as he only worked part-time and was not  able  to  recall
         how many times the sexual activity took place.  He said that  there
         were gaps of between two to three months when no activity occurred.
          Following the offences the appellant had apparently spoken to  his
         pastor who suggested that the appellant attended an  addiction  day
         at a church in St. Albans, and he was put in touch with Sex Addicts
         Anonymous who identified  him  as  having  a  sex  addiction.   The
         appellant is reported as having said that he was previously unaware
         of that addiction, thinking that he simply had a  high  sex  drive.
         The appellant is said to have expressed remorse and regret for  his
         offending behaviour.

    11.  The extract from the pre-sentence report continues to  the  effect
         that the author of it considered that the appellant had  sought  to
         minimise his actions by maintaining that the  victim  was  able  to
         give consent to the sexual activity.  The medical  report  however,
         stated that the doctor found it hard to imagine the  victim  having
         the capacity to consent to sexual relations.  The author of the pre-
         sentence report said that in his assessment the appellant was in  a
         professional relationship with the victim as his carer and had  the
         balance of power and  control  within  the  relationship.   He  had
         regular access to the victim's apartment, including sleeping in the
         victim's room.  It was  his  assessment  that  the  appellant  took
         advantage and exploited the victim's vulnerability to  satisfy  his
         own sexual urges.  There may also have been an element of grooming.



    12.  The FtJ also quoted from the sentencing remarks which refer to the
         appellant being in a position of trust as  a  carer  and  that  the
         victim also regarded the appellant  as  a  friend.   The  appellant
         would have known from his professional position that the victim was
         not in a position  to  give  informed  and  full  consent  and  the
         appellant took advantage of that.  The matter was aggravated by the
         number of times the activity took place.  The sentencing judge  had
         said that as far as can be ascertained there was no damage done  to
         the victim and there was very substantial mitigation in  that,  but
         for the appellant's conscience and telling  the  authorities  about
         his crimes, none of this would have come to light.

    13.  The appellant received  a  sentence  of  two  and  a  half  years'
    imprisonment."

 5. It is apparent therefore, that the appellant was convicted  of  serious
    offences on three counts of sexual activity in the presence of a person
    with a mental disorder/learning disability.  However, he has also  been
    convicted of criminal offences in Italy.  These are  summarised  in  my
    error of law decision as follows:

    "38. It is clear that the appellant  has  been  convicted  of  criminal
         offences in Italy.   These  are  set  out  at  [26]  of  the  FtJ's
         decision, reflecting the  document  described  as  the  UK  Central
         Authority for the Exchange of Criminal Records, in the respondent's
         bundle that was before the FtT.  The appellant has  been  convicted
         on four occasions, between 16 August 2001 and  2  July  2004.   The
         offence titles are given as, illicit sale of  drugs,  bodily  harm,
         unlawful possession of weapons and ammunition, and  insubordination
         with injury (at the Appeal Military Court).  The last is  described
         as an offence against military obligations.  Some  explanation  was
         given by the appellant in relation to those  offences  in  evidence
         before the FtT.  It appears that at the time of the offence of  the
         sale of drugs, the appellant was a police officer, and had  been  a
         police officer for nine years.  The drugs in question are  said  to
         have been cannabis."

 6. I indicated that the parties must be  in  a  position  at  the  resumed
    hearing to make submissions as to what findings of fact made by the FtJ
    can be preserved.  Mr Bellara was content for me to decide that  issue.
    Mr Mills invited me to conclude that what the FtJ said at [75]  of  his
    decision about the appellant's relationship  with  his  girlfriend  not
    being a relationship akin to marriage is a finding that  should  stand.
    However, as I explained with reference to the error of law decision,  I
    do not consider that that finding can stand.

 7. Mr Mills also invited me to preserve the finding at [86] of  the  FtJ's
    decision which is that the appellant's links  to  Italy  are  still  in
    existence, including in terms of his mother who still lives  there.   I
    agree that that finding is preserved.

 8. In the absence of any further submissions on preserved findings, I also
    consider that the following findings of fact made  by  the  FtJ  should
    stand:

       . The appellant arrived in the UK on a date before 20 May 2005 [30].

       . The appellant had acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK
         by virtue of residing and exercising Treaty rights in the UK for  a
         continuous period of five years [40].

       . The appellant's sister and girlfriend reside in the UK [77].

       . The appellant is fluent in English [82].

       . Other findings which are not infected by the error of  law  reflect
         the basis of the appellant's convictions in the UK for  the  sexual
         offending to which I  have  referred  and  the  sentencing  judge's
         remarks.

 9. At the resumed hearing I heard further oral evidence as follows.

    The Oral Evidence

10. The appellant adopted his most recent witness statement in examination-
    in-chief.  In cross-examination he  said  that  he  accepted  that  the
    victim of his crimes in the UK had not consented to  the  relationship.
    It was put to him that the Pre-Sentence Report ("PSR")  said  that  the
    appellant  maintained  that  the  relationship  was  consensual.    The
    appellant  said  that  he  realised  that  the  relationship  was   not
    consensual a few weeks after the PSR.

11. Asked about his convictions in Italy, he said that  all  the  sentences
    were suspended sentences, although he spent one week in detention after
    his arrest for the first offence.  In relation  to  the  first  offence
    described as illicit sale of drugs, he said that  he  admitted  to  the
    sale of drugs although in fact he was only in possession of the  drugs.
    When he was arrested he trusted the solicitor that represented him  who
    said that if he accepted the sale of drugs charge he would be  out  the
    same day but if he maintained that it was for  personal  use  he  would
    spend months in prison pending investigation.  He accepted  the  charge
    in order to avoid spending time in prison but in  reality  he  was  not
    guilty of supplying drugs.

12. He was sacked from the police force six months after  that  conviction,
    in about 2002.

13. The second offence, described as bodily harm, arose  because  where  he
    was working as a police officer was in Sicily, far away from his  home.
    People in that area do not like police officers, and in particular they
    did not like him because of his drugs conviction.  One evening  he  was
    off duty outside a bar when he was attacked by  a  group  of  men.   He
    defended himself.  His colleagues however saw this as a way of  getting
    rid of him from the police  force.   He  had  reacted  because  he  was
    attacked  first  but  it  was  his  ex-colleagues  who  undertook   the
    investigation.  He did not know any better and should have asked for  a
    different force to investigate.  Nevertheless,  he  feels  remorse  for
    reacting as he did.  In answer to a question from me as to what  injury
    was caused, he said that he had a glass in his hand and he slapped  the
    person with the glass.  This resulted in a cut to the person's cheek.

14. As regards the third conviction, for unlawful possession of weapons and
    ammunition, this was the result of him having more  ammunition  at  his
    home than he was supposed to.  He was allowed as a  police  officer  to
    have a gun and some ammunition.  It was  as  a  result  of  the  police
    search of his premises on the same day as the drugs offence.  Normally,
    police officers receive a big punishment for losing even one  piece  of
    ammunition and therefore they used to keep spare ammunition at home  in
    case some got lost.  Almost everybody did it.  Although that was not an
    excuse, that was the reality.

15. The fourth offence, an offence of  insubordination  with  injury  dealt
    with at a military court, arose as a result of an argument with one  of
    his superiors.  The appellant had realised that they had undertaken the
    investigation in relation to the fight  when  he  was  acting  in  self
    defence.  He was taken to a  military  court  because  he  was  in  the
    Caribinieri.  He had argued with his  superior.   The  injury  that  is
    referred to is probably just a "moral" injury but there was no  contact
    and no fight between them.

16. As regards the assistance he was receiving from Sex  Addicts  Anonymous
    ("SAA"), that started before he went to prison.  Nothing of  that  kind
    was available in prison.  He applied to take part in a  sex  offenders'
    treatment programme but he was told that he could not take part because
    of his immigration status.  He has evidence of that in his file.  It is
    true that none of his certificates relate to his  taking  part  in  sex
    offenders' courses.

17. In re-examination he was asked about the assessed medium  risk  of  re-
    offending.  The appellant said that his actions in  going  to  see  his
    manager and reporting himself to the police  to  confess  speak  louder
    than words.  He wished to be rehabilitated in all senses and  to  be  a
    model person to others.  He believes that the assessment  of  a  medium
    risk is too high.  He saw himself as below  a  low  risk,  although  he
    still needed help to achieve a better life.  He is  surrounded  by  the
    right people who can support him and help him to lead a better life.

18. As to whether he would commit offences again if in a position of trust,
    he said that what was pointed out in the error of law decision in terms
    of the potential for  positions  of  trust  in  his  private  life  was
    something that he had not seen.  He said that he would rather  work  as
    the "lowest person" to avoid any risk.

19. As to organisations in Italy such as in the information provided by the
    respondent ("the SLAA"), his mother  lives  close  to  Naples  and  the
    meeting groups in Milan and Rome are a very  long  way  away  from  his
    mother's house.

20. As to whether he had ever lived with his partner as husband  and  wife,
    they did for two days but his pastor told him that it was nicer to wait
    until they were married.  She had visited him in prison regularly.   If
    he is allowed to remain in the  UK  they  are  ready  to  get  married.
    However, her parents have traditional views and prefer her to  marry  a
    Korean man rather than a European.

21. His sister was not able to attend the hearing today.

22. In answer to my questions he said that his girlfriend  visited  him  in
    custody at least once a month.

23. [JS] gave evidence, adopting her witness statement and  examination-in-
    chief.  She said that she and the appellant had never  lived  together.
    This is because it was against their religious beliefs.

24. Asked as to how she felt about her relationship with the  appellant  in
    view of all that had happened,  she  said  that  there  had  been  many
    challenges but through it she came to know the appellant  much  better.
    She knows what to do to support him to come back to a normal life.  She
    visits him in custody about once a month.

25. As to the assessment of a medium risk of re-offending,  she  said  that
    she did not really think that he was a medium risk to  society.   Since
    the offences he had shown "best efforts"  to  rehabilitate  himself  by
    telling her everything that had been going on.  He had attended the sex
    addicts group to overcome his fundamental addiction which  led  to  the
    offences.  By bringing attention to himself in relation to the offences
    he showed that he would not do what he did again.

26. If he remains in the UK they are ready to get married.  During her last
    visit to him he said that he would propose to her once he  is  released
    and if he is allowed to stay.  They are ready to form a  family  and  a
    life together.

27. If he returned to Italy it was true that she would be able to visit him
    but there is no possibility of having a married  life  there  together.
    She would need to leave the UK and she cannot speak Italian.  She  only
    has the right to remain in the UK.  Practically speaking, if he returns
    to Italy, their relationship would end.

28. In cross-examination she said that she was a Korean national.  She came
    to the UK in  2006  as  a  student.   She  has  recently  been  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.  She does not have family in the  UK.   Her
    parents are in Korea.

29. As to how her parents feel  about  the  relationship,  in  her  culture
    intercultural relationships are still a very challenging subject.   Her
    parents still need some time to think about her relationship  with  the
    appellant.  As to whether or not they approve of the relationship,  she
    said that she did not know what is going to happen.  She  respects  the
    fact that they need some time to consider her  relationship  with  him.
    Asked again whether or not they approve of the relationship,  she  said
    that it was very difficult to conclude that they are not  happy.   They
    just need some time to think  about  what  it  means  for  the  family.
    Ideally, she would like their blessings but if she feels she  is  ready
    then she would go ahead and get married.  If they were married  and  he
    had to return to Italy, it would be nearly impossible for her to obtain
    a job in Italy and sustain herself financially.  She  has  a  full-time
    job in the UK.  All her friends and her church are here.  It would be a
    big challenge for anybody to speak a different language.   It  is  true
    that she came to the UK and learnt English but she  had  been  learning
    English before she came to the UK, since  the  age  of  7  years.   Her
    employment is  as  a  researcher  in  higher  education.   She  studied
    international relations at the London School of Economics.

30. She probably would be able to learn Italian but not as well as English.
     She started her English education quite early.

31. In re-examination she said that the appellant's intentions towards  her
    are clear from the fact that he said that he was planning to propose to
    her when she last visited him.

32. She had been working since 2010.

33. In answer to my questions she said that before the  appellant  went  to
    prison she saw him nearly every day.  Just prior to his sentence he had
    recovered from cancer and he needed her attention on a daily basis  for
    at least half a year.  She provided him with  emotional  and  practical
    support.  She helped to get  him  dressed,  and  dealt  with  practical
    matters such as banking issues.

34. He was in hospital for one or two months and she visited  him  four  or
    five times a week.  At first he was in Homerton Hospital  and  then  in
    St. Barts.  She went with him to chemotherapy sessions when he  was  an
    outpatient.  His hospital treatment was in 2013, up to the beginning of
    2014.

35. A witness who I shall identify as AB adopted his witness  statement  in
    examination-in-chief.  He said that the appellant was doing very  well.
    He had been sponsoring and mentoring people for a  long  time  and  the
    appellant showed dedication and commitment from the start.  He has been
    abstinent since he has been in the SAA programme.

36. He has contacted him since he has been in prison.  As to the assessment
    of medium risk of re-offending, he thought that that was very  unlikely
    given the appellant's commitment to the programme.  Given that  he  had
    sponsored a lot of people he is usually able to tell  those  who  would
    succeed.

37. So far as organisations in Italy are concerned, he understood that  the
    appellant's mother lived in Naples which is two to  three  hours  drive
    away from the groups mentioned.  The group which he  described  as  the
    "Fellowship" was not well-established in Italy and France and  is  much
    more established in the UK.  He himself had attended the Fellowship and
    would not recommend it to  the  appellant.   He  would  be  urging  the
    appellant to stay in the UK from that point of view.

38. In cross-examination he said that he had not visited him in prison, but
    had only had contact over the phone.  He had not been able to visit him
    in prison at Moreton Hall because he is unemployed and  is  financially
    limited.  He speaks to him on the phone once every few weeks.

39. [GR] adopted his witness statement  in  examination-in-chief.   If  the
    appellant were allowed to remain in the UK he would still be an  active
    member of the congregation.  He had known the appellant since 2005  and
    he had been a member of the  congregation  since  2006.   He  became  a
    treasurer.  He still keeps in touch with him and fully supports him.

40. He would say that the appellant's risk of re-offending  was  very  low.
    He has his support and that of SAA.  That would carry on until  he  was
    fully recovered.  His behaviour  had  changed  and  he  does  not  have
    flashbacks anymore.  He would say that he is 80 to  90%  recovered  and
    free of his weaknesses.  He has done very well and that is  why  he  is
    here to support him.

41. In cross-examination he said that he had visited the appellant  once  a
    month but he was not able to visit him in prison at Lincoln because  of
    the distance.  When he was in Cambridgeshire he went once a month.

42. His church does not have branches in Italy.  As to whether he would  be
    able to obtain similar  support  from  another  Pentecostal  Church  in
    Italy, it is true that there were Pentecostal Churches in Italy  but  a
    person attends a particular congregation because of  the  relationships
    that they have with the people there.  He said that he believed God had
    called the appellant to remain with their congregation.

    Submissions

43. Mr Mills submitted that the appellant does represent a genuine, present
    and sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting  one  of  the  fundamental
    interests of society.  His deportation is justified on serious  grounds
    of public policy.  It was necessary to look at the appellant's  history
    of offending holistically.

44. The OASys and PSR both assessed the risk of re-offending  as  a  medium
    risk.  There are significant  convictions  in  Italy.   Although  those
    convictions are not for sexual offences, they relate to poor  behaviour
    when the appellant was in a position of authority.  In the  UK  he  had
    one-to-one care of a vulnerable person.  He was in a position of trust.
     The evidence indicates a pattern in the appellant  of  offending  when
    not closely monitored.

45. It was true that the assessments of  risk  of  re-offending  date  from
    2014.  However, the appellant could have produced more  recent  reports
    which he had not done.  The only report, at page 37 of the  appellant's
    bundle, in terms of his attitude  and  behaviour  (enhanced  status  in
    prison)  just  reflects  the  appellant's  approach  in  that  he   was
    previously able to obtain a responsible position as a  police  officer,
    and in the UK as a carer.  Enhanced status in prison adds  very  little
    to the assessment.

46. In terms of evidence from the witnesses of rehabilitation,  the  pastor
    Mr [R] refers to the appellant as always having demonstrated himself to
    be a person of integrity, but the  appellant's  criminal  offending  is
    inconsistent with that assessment.  The appellant was given the trusted
    position of a treasurer in the  church  congregation  but  his  actions
    showed that he was not trustworthy.  Mr  [R]'s  evidence  needs  to  be
    considered with those matters in mind.

47. In the appellant's private life, in terms of relationships with family,
    friends or the church, the risk would arise.  It does not  matter  that
    he would not be able to find work of the same sort as he  did  when  he
    offended.

48. AB who gave evidence about the  appellant's  involvement  in  SAA,  was
    involved with him in 2013 for a relatively brief period before he  went
    to prison.  He had not seen him since.  He was not in a position to add
    a great deal to the assessment of the issues.  He is not a professional
    witness with experience and qualifications.

49. So far as his girlfriend's evidence is concerned, she is convinced that
    he has changed.  However, she was in a relationship with him at a  time
    when he was abusing a man in his care.  He had lied to  and  duped  her
    before.

50. It was not sought to be argued that the appellant had  not  changed  at
    all, but he had not changed enough to say that there was  no  longer  a
    medium risk of re-offending.

51. He does not have family life in the UK.  His sister does not live  with
    him and did not attend the hearing.  His ties to the UK are  relatively
    limited.  He would be able to attend a similar church in Italy.  He has
    ties in Italy as explained by the FtJ in a finding that is preserved.

52. Again, in relation to his girlfriend, they have not cohabited and  they
    are still not committed to marriage.  There  was  a  vagueness  in  the
    evidence about when they would be married.  The appellant said that  it
    would not be until her parents approved but that was not  her  account.
    Theirs is not a relationship akin to marriage.

53. There were no obstacles to her going  to  Italy,  where  she  would  be
    admitted,  especially  if  they  were  married.   Any  difficulties  of
    integration for her should not be overstated.  She is  intelligent  and
    came to the UK from South Korea.  Even accepting that  there  would  be
    difficulties for her, that does not make the decision disproportionate.



54. Mr Mills referred me to the decision in  MC  (Essa  principles  recast)
    Portugal  [2015]  UKUT  520  (IAC).    Even   if   the   prospects   of
    rehabilitation are far higher in the UK, that is still only one factor.
     There are support services in Italy, about  which  some  evidence  has
    been produced.  It may be that they are in a different area from  where
    the appellant's mother lives but there is likely to be support in other
    areas.  In any event, the appellant does not  need  to  live  with  his
    mother in Naples.

55. Mr Bellara submitted that in terms of genuine, present and sufficiently
    serious threat etc, the oral evidence was significant.   The  witnesses
    had all travelled some distance to give evidence and some had  appeared
    before the FtJ.

56. It was true that the appellant had been convicted of  serious  offences
    but he had expressed remorse.  There was also a  'back  story'  to  the
    offences in Italy.

57.  The  most  striking  feature  of  the  evidence  is  the   appellant's
    determination to "get  better".   He  had  confessed  and  put  himself
    forward and shown a real determination to get over his "sickness".

58. There was very cogent evidence as to the influence that his  girlfriend
    is able to exert on him.  She gave evidence about the level of  support
    she offered him when he was unwell, suffering  from  cancer.   Although
    they  had  not  lived  together,  she  visits  regularly  and  provides
    emotional and practical support.  She is determined to make  sure  that
    he overcomes his weaknesses and is determined to marry him.

59. So far as her private life is concerned, she is  in  steady  employment
    and has been for a number of years.  It would be unreasonable to expect
    her to relocate.

60. So far as the evidence from AB is concerned, he had had  experience  of
    cases such as that of this appellant.  He was very confident  that  the
    appellant had almost completed his  rehabilitation.   Mr  Bellara  also
    relied on the decision in MC in various respects.

61. There was evidence as to why he was not  able  to  seek  assistance  in
    Italy, including in terms of the distance of the  group  meetings  from
    his home area.  He has integrated into the present plan  and  it  would
    not be beneficial for him to be sent back.

62. He was also supported in evidence by Mr [R].  He is an active member of
    the  congregation,  which  is  relevant  to  his  social  and  cultural
    integration into the community.

63. In terms of the assessment of a medium risk of re-offending,  that  has
    been objectively determined but one needed to look at the  evidence  of
    the witnesses which was to the effect that he was not such  high  risk.
    One  needed  to  assess  whether  he  was  still  a  medium   risk   in
    circumstances where his rehabilitation was almost complete.

64. The appellant had also asked that it be pointed out that he would  have
    been classed as a low risk of  re-offending  had  he  been  allowed  to
    attend the Sex Offenders' Programme, but he  had  been  prevented  from
    doing so because of his immigration status.

    Conclusions

65. At [36] of the error of law decision I set out the provisions of reg.21
    of the EEA Regulations.  It is accepted that the appellant has acquired
    a permanent right of residence.  Accordingly, he can only  be  deported
    on serious grounds of public policy or public security.

66. I have considered and taken into account reg.21(5) which, to summarise,
    states  that  the  decision  must  comply   with   the   principle   of
    proportionality, must be based exclusively on the personal  conduct  of
    the individual, that the person concerned  must  represent  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests  of  society,  that  matters  isolated  from  the
    particulars of the case or relate to general prevention do not  justify
    the decision and previous criminal convictions  do  not  in  themselves
    justify the decision either.

67. Reg.21(6) refers to the variety of personal considerations that must be
    taken into account.

68. I have considered everything that the  appellant  has  said  about  the
    offences committed in Italy.  Those offences all occurred in August and
    September 2001 and so  it  is  important  not  to  overemphasise  their
    significance.  The appellant's evidence about ammunition being found at
    his premises in a search on the  same  day  as  the  drugs  offence  is
    consistent with the dates.  The appellant was not cross-examined on his
    account of why it was that he pleaded guilty to what  is  described  as
    the illicit sale of drugs, whereas he claimed that  he  was  guilty  in
    fact only of possession.

69. However, the appellant's explanation of the fourth  conviction  for  an
    offence of insubordination with injury is not consistent with  what  he
    said was the circumstance of that offence.  He said that it involved an
    argument with one of his superiors  when  he  realised  that  they  had
    undertaken the investigation of the fight that he had been involved  in
    which had resulted in the second conviction  noted  on  the  record  of
    bodily harm.  That was a matter in  which  he  said  he  was  defending
    himself and hit a person with a glass causing a cut to his cheek.   The
    appellant said  that  he  accused  his  superior  of  not  being  just.
    However, the date of the bodily harm  incident  (self  defence  causing
    injury with a glass) is given as 27 September 2001.  The  date  of  the
    insubordination with injury offence is given as 17 September 2001.  The
    date of that last offence therefore, preceded the bodily harm  offence.
    On that basis it could not be that the appellant was aggrieved about an
    investigation into an offence that had not by then  occurred.   It  has
    not been suggested at any time that the dates given for those  offences
    are incorrect in any respect.  This also casts doubt on the appellant's
    contention that although the offence is  described  as  insubordination
    with injury, there was in fact no physical contact and no actual bodily
    injury.

70. In addition, it also casts doubt on the appellant's explanation for the
    conviction of illicit sale of drugs, albeit that it was not put to  him
    that his account was not true.  It is nevertheless a matter to be taken
    into account.

71. Above all, it is to be remembered that the offences were all  committed
    in Italy whilst the  appellant  was  a  serving  police  officer.   The
    explanation of self defence involving the  appellant  striking  another
    person with a glass is also questionable  in  terms  of  self  defence,
    because he was convicted of the offence.

72. Both the PSR and OASys  Report  assess  the  risk  of  re-offending  as
    medium.  The PSR made that assessment in a report dated 12  June  2014.
    The OASys Report is dated 10 December 2014.  It is to be borne in  mind
    that those are  professional  assessments.   The  only  other  official
    document pertaining to risk is that which appears at  page  37  of  the
    appellant's bundle that was before the FtT in terms of  his  assessment
    for enhanced prisoner status, dated 6 March 2015.  However, it seems to
    me that  the  observations  made  by  Mr  Mills  in  relation  to  that
    assessment have merit.  That  is  a  one  page  document  completed  in
    manuscript entitled "Incentive and earned privilege scheme level review
    summary".  It is nothing like a professional risk assessment.  I accept
    what it says about the appellant's attitude and behaviour on  the  wing
    in prison, but that does not advance the issue in terms of risk of  re-
    offending at all.

73. All the witnesses who gave evidence on behalf of the appellant are,  to
    a greater or lesser extent, committed to him on a personal level.  Both
    AB and Mr [R], I accept, gave honest evidence in  terms  of  what  they
    thought was the extent to which  the  appellant  was  at  risk  of  re-
    offending.  I bear in mind that the appellant  had  completed  the  SAA
    programme and that both  AB  and  Mr  [R]  are  willing  to  offer  him
    continued support.  I bear in  mind  what  they  both  said  about  the
    appellant's commitment and dedication not to re-offend.

74. However, again the submissions made on behalf of  the  respondent  have
    merit in terms of what Mr [R] says at [8] of his witness  statement  to
    the effect that the appellant had demonstrated himself to be  a  person
    of integrity.  That plainly is not the case in terms of his  offending.
    The misjudgement of the appellant's character by  the  congregation  to
    which he belonged is evident in his having been appointed treasurer  of
    the church's finances.

75. I also take the view that AB's evidence that it was very unlikely  that
    the appellant represented a risk  was,  with  respect  to  him,  rather
    na�ve.  He must be aware that since his convictions he has remained  in
    custody and his commitment has not been tested in the community.  I  do
    not doubt his commitment to the appellant, and indeed to the  cause  of
    rehabilitation of persons who offend in  the  way  the  appellant  has,
    generally.  I do not however, accept that his evidence has much bearing
    on my assessment of the appellant's risk of re-offending.

76. Similarly, whilst I accept that Ms  [S]  genuinely  believes  that  the
    appellant is no longer a medium risk to society, again  his  commitment
    has not been tested in the community.  The offences are  said  to  have
    taken place between 1 June 2011 and 5 October 2012.  Ms [S] says in her
    witness statement that the first impression she had  of  the  appellant
    when she met him in 2010 was that he  was  a  God-fearing,  caring  and
    thoughtful individual.  After spending more time together they realised
    it was much more than a friendship and they started a  relationship  in
    2011.  She states that in 2012 their  relationship  grew  stronger  and
    that he decided to introduce her to his mother in Italy and he proposed
    to her shortly afterwards.  Again however, as submitted  on  behalf  of
    the respondent, it was during this period of time  that  the  appellant
    committed the offences.  His relationship  with  Ms  [S]  involved  her
    being deceived.  What is relevant about that is  that  it  demonstrates
    that Ms [S], understandably,  is  prepared  to  see  the  best  in  the
    appellant which, in my judgement, leads her to view his future  conduct
    with a degree of unreality or lack of objectivity.

77. I am prepared to  accept  that  the  appellant  himself  wishes  to  be
    rehabilitated and does  not  want  to  re-offend.   I  accept  that  he
    confessed to his employer and to the police and has shown remorse.   In
    the community I do accept that he will have the support of AB,  Mr  [R]
    and Ms [S].  All that will assist in terms of rehabilitation but  I  do
    not accept that the evidence can presently be said to reveal that there
    is much, if any, basis from which to conclude that the assessment of  a
    medium risk of re-offending has diminished.  As I have  indicated,  his
    resolve has not been tested in the community.  As the appellant himself
    said in evidence, he would wish to undertake employment  that  did  not
    involve any risk.  That, it seems to me, is an  acknowledgment  by  the
    appellant himself that the risk remains.

78.  In  the  circumstances,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  still
    represents a medium risk of re-offending.  I would have  come  to  that
    view even if the appellant had not committed the offences in Italy. The
    likely seriousness of an offence, bearing in mind the offences  in  the
    UK for which he has been convicted, are such as to lead me to  conclude
    that he does represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious
    threat, affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.   Lest
    there be any doubt about it, it is a fundamental  interest  of  society
    that vulnerable individuals, or persons in a relationship of trust, are
    entitled to be protected against physical, sexual and emotional abuse.

79. I do accept that the prospects of the  appellant's  rehabilitation  are
    greater in the UK than in Italy.  I do not accept the proposition  that
    the appellant would not  be  able  to  obtain  guidance,  mentoring  or
    assistance in Italy from a similar group to the SAA whose programme the
    appellant undertook in the UK.  Not  only  is  there  some  information
    about such assistance provided by the respondent  in  the  document  to
    which I have referred, it is reasonable to assume that in  an  advanced
    western  democracy  such  as  Italy,  such  help  would  be  available.
    However, in the UK the appellant has a support network to which I  have
    referred and such is likely to enhance his prospects of  rehabilitation
    given the close relationships that he has with the individuals who  are
    part of his support network in the UK.  I have taken into  account  the
    prospects of rehabilitation as part of the proportionality  assessment.



80. Again, for the avoidance of doubt, I do not accept that  rehabilitation
    of the appellant is complete.  Even in his  optimistic  assessment,  Mr
    [R] did not suggest so.  He thought that he had "80 to 90%  recovered".
    Given the observations I have made about the need for the appellant  to
    be tested in the community, I do not accept that optimistic  assessment
    in any event.

81. In terms of proportionality under the EEA Regulations, I bear  in  mind
    that the appellant has a private life in the UK, established since  his
    arrival at the latest in 2005.

82. As regards his relationship with Ms [S], I am not satisfied  that  they
    have family life together.  They are not married, do  not  cohabit  and
    could not be said to be unmarried partners.  I do accept  that  she  is
    committed to the appellant and accept her evidence about the  practical
    and emotional support she has provided to him.   I  have  reflected  on
    whether there is any 'unfairness' in the conclusion that  they  do  not
    have family life together when the reason that they do not  cohabit  is
    because of  religious  beliefs.   I  do  not  believe  that  there  is.
    Whatever their reasons for not cohabiting it is nevertheless a fact.

83. Regardless of the appellant's offending, I am also prepared  to  accept
    that he is committed to Ms [S].  The evidence is that they have spent a
    considerable amount of time together and he has  proposed  marriage  to
    her.  I bear in mind what she says in her witness statement  about  him
    having decided to introduce her to his mother in Italy in 2012 and that
    he proposed to her shortly afterwards.  It seems he has proposed  again
    whilst being in custody.  I do not see that in 2012, albeit at the time
    the appellant was committing offences, he had any  ulterior  motive  in
    pretending a commitment to Ms [S] that he did not have.  Such  pretence
    can of course  arise  in  circumstances  where  an  individual  resists
    deportation, but his relationship with  her  preceded  any  deportation
    proceedings.

84. Whilst I do not accept that  they  have  family  life  together,  their
    relationship is a strong feature of the appellant's private  life.   In
    any event, I do not  see  that  it  matters  particularly  whether  his
    relationship with Ms [S] is characterised as family or private life  in
    the circumstances of this appeal, but I consider it to be private  life
    only.

85. It is true to say, and I accept, that if the appellant is  returned  to
    Italy it would involve considerable disruption to Ms [S]  were  she  to
    leave the UK to live there with him.  I cannot see  however,  that  his
    return to Italy would in any way prevent them being  married.   Ms  [S]
    made it clear that even without the approval of  her  parents,  if  she
    wished to do so, which it seems she does, she would marry the appellant
    in any event.  It was not suggested, and it is not  likely  to  be  the
    case, that she would not be admitted to  Italy  as  the  spouse  of  an
    Italian citizen.

86. It is the case that she would have to give up her employment in the  UK
    if she wanted to live with him in Italy.  I would expect that it  would
    be difficult for her to find employment in Italy given  that  she  does
    not speak Italian.  She could learn Italian but that  inevitably  would
    take some considerable period of time, particularly before she  got  to
    the position whereby she could replicate the level  of  employment  she
    has in the UK in Italy.

87. I do nevertheless consider that it is proportionate for  the  appellant
    to be removed to Italy bearing in mind the risk of re-offending and the
    potential consequences to a victim of that re-offending.  The appellant
    would be able to continue his rehabilitation in Italy, albeit that  the
    process of rehabilitation would be more difficult, for  the  reasons  I
    have given.  There would be considerable disruption for Ms [S] in terms
    of her own private life were she to go to  Italy  with  the  appellant.
    However,  there  is  no  basis  from  which  to  conclude  that   their
    relationship could not continue, given their commitment to each  other.
    The  significant  disruption  to   her   life   must   be   judged   in
    proportionality terms against the threat posed by the appellant and the
    interests of society.

88. It was not submitted that in terms of  the  factors  to  be  considered
    under reg.21(6) the  appellant's  state  of  health  militates  against
    removal.  I accept that he was suffering from cancer and had to undergo
    chemotherapy.  However, no submissions were made to me in  relation  to
    his health in terms of that being a factor to be taken into account.  I
    have already referred to his family situation, his length of  residence
    in the UK and to issues relating to his social and cultural integration
    here.  I have also referred to the extent of his links with his country
    of origin.  It is not that many years since he has been out  of  Italy,
    and he came to the UK when he was an adult.  He plainly speaks  Italian
    and he has his mother there.

89. Taking into account all relevant considerations, I  am  satisfied  that
    the appellant's deportation is justified on serious grounds  of  public
    policy.

90. A consideration of Article 8 of the ECHR would not demand  a  different
    outcome.  The Article 8 Rules to which I was referred on behalf of  the
    respondent have no relevance.  If they did, in the light of my analysis
    those Rules could not avail the appellant.

91. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

    Decision

92. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision by dismissing the appeal.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 14/10/16
                                  APPENDIX


                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51100/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              | Promulgated                  |
|On 21 March 2016                              |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 FRANCO [M]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam, Counsel instructed by Western Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Although the appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,
    I refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Italy  born  on  20  October  1969.   He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("the FtT") against a  decision  by
    the respondent dated 15 December 2014  to  make  a  deportation  order,
    pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006
    ("the EEA Regulations").

 3. The appellant's appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer
    ("the FtJ") on 9 November 2015, the FtJ allowing the appeal  under  the
    EEA Regulations and on human rights grounds (with reference to  Article
    8 of the ECHR).

 4. The respondent's grounds before me in relation to  the  FtJ's  decision
    can be summarised as follows.  It is argued that in  finding  that  the
    appellant did not present a "serious threat" and there were no  serious
    grounds of public policy or public security to justify deportation, the
    FtJ had failed to take into  account  the  offences  committed  by  the
    appellant in Italy, those offences having been committed when he was  a
    serving police officer.  This represented a history on the part of  the
    appellant of  abusing  positions  of  trust.   Furthermore,  the  FtJ's
    assessment that the appellant was no longer a threat to the  victim  of
    his offences in the UK, failed to give adequate weight to the  offender
    manager's assessment as to the future risk the appellant represented.

 5. So far as Article 8 of the ECHR is concerned, it is argued that the FtJ
    had failed to take into account the considerations set out  in  section
    117A-D of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  ("the  2002
    Act").  Reference is made in the grounds to the decision in Badewa  (ss
    117A-D and EEA Regulations) [2015] UKUT 00329 (IAC).

 6. Furthermore, it is contended that the FtJ failed to provide any  reason
    as to why it was concluded that family life has been established in the
    UK,  in  particular  with  reference  to  his  relationship  with   his
    girlfriend.  His  relationship  with  his  sister  does  not  establish
    anything other than normal emotional ties.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The FtJ's findings included  the  following.   He  concluded  that  the
    appellant arrived in the UK on a date before 20 May 2005.  He  accepted
    that the appellant was in employment and exercising  Treaty  rights  in
    the UK as an EEA citizen from 21 December 2007.  He noted however, that
    his employment came to an immediate end when the appellant admitted his
    offending.

 8. At [40] the FtJ noted the respondent's concession  in  a  supplementary
    decision letter to the effect that it was accepted that  the  appellant
    had acquired a permanent right of residence in the UK, having exercised
    Treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.

 9. Dealing with the appellant's convictions in the UK from [42],  the  FtJ
    referred to the appellant having first come to the adverse attention of
    the UK authorities when he was arrested  in  connection  with  offences
    committed between 1 June 2011 and 5 October 2012.  This was a series of
    sexual activities with a  vulnerable  29  year  old  male  with  severe
    learning difficulties, that the appellant was trusted to care for.  The
    victim was suffering from cerebral palsy  and  dysphasia.   The  sexual
    activities engaged in by the appellant included masturbation, oral  and
    anal intercourse.  The FtJ noted that the appellant  told  his  manager
    about his sexual activities with the  victim  and  his  employment  was
    terminated.  The appellant also notified the  police  of  his  actions,
    which led to his arrest, interview, charge and conviction.

10. At [43] the FtJ quoted from the  pre-sentence  report,  in  summary  as
    follows.  The appellant had said that he did not see the  victim  every
    day as he only worked part-time and was not able  to  recall  how  many
    times the sexual activity took place.  He said that there were gaps  of
    between two to three months when no activity occurred.   Following  the
    offences  the  appellant  had  apparently  spoken  to  his  pastor  who
    suggested that the appellant attended an addiction day at a  church  in
    St. Albans, and he was put in touch  with  Sex  Addicts  Anonymous  who
    identified him as having a sex addiction.  The appellant is reported as
    having said that he was previously unaware of that addiction,  thinking
    that he simply had a high sex drive.  The appellant  is  said  to  have
    expressed remorse and regret for his offending behaviour.

11. The extract from the pre-sentence report continues to the  effect  that
    the author of it considered that the appellant had sought  to  minimise
    his actions by maintaining that the victim was able to give consent  to
    the sexual activity.  The  medical  report  however,  stated  that  the
    doctor found it hard to imagine  the  victim  having  the  capacity  to
    consent to sexual relations.  The author  of  the  pre-sentence  report
    said that in  his  assessment  the  appellant  was  in  a  professional
    relationship with the victim as his carer and had the balance of  power
    and control within the relationship.  He  had  regular  access  to  the
    victim's apartment, including sleeping in the victim's  room.   It  was
    his assessment that the appellant  took  advantage  and  exploited  the
    victim's vulnerability to satisfy his own sexual urges.  There may also
    have been an element of grooming.

12. The FtJ also quoted from the sentencing  remarks  which  refer  to  the
    appellant being in a position of trust as a carer and that  the  victim
    also regarded the appellant as a  friend.   The  appellant  would  have
    known from his professional position that  the  victim  was  not  in  a
    position to give informed and  full  consent  and  the  appellant  took
    advantage of that.  The matter was aggravated by the  number  of  times
    the activity took place.  The sentencing judge had said that as far  as
    can be ascertained there was no damage done to the victim and there was
    very substantial mitigation in that, but for the appellant's conscience
    and telling the authorities about his crimes, none of this  would  have
    come to light.

13.  The  appellant  received  a  sentence  of  two  and  a   half   years'
    imprisonment.

14. At [47] the FtJ  said  that  in  relation  to  the  proportionality  of
    deportation, he was aware that the  objectives  of  punishment  include
    that of general deterrence, and a deterrent to  further  offending  (in
    the individual case).  He said that  the  former  carried  considerable
    weight.

15. At [54] the FtJ referred to the pre-sentence report  stating  that  the
    appellant's risk of reoffending was medium.  At [55] the  FtJ  accepted
    that this was the case, although  noting  the  appellant's  actions  in
    attempting to rehabilitate himself  and  thereby  reduce  the  risk  of
    reoffending.

16. At [62] he stated that the appellant's personal conduct in relation  to
    his most recent criminal offending in the UK occurred over a period  of
    time when he was in a position of trust and responsibility  in  respect
    of a very vulnerable victim.  He said that it  was  apparent  that  the
    appellant came to realise that his actions were criminal  and  that  he
    needed assistance to stop.  To his credit he had  sought  guidance  and
    had admitted the crime.

17. At [64] the FtJ concluded that the appellant was willing  and  able  to
    accept professional and peer group assistance to assist  rehabilitation
    and to prevent any further offending.  He noted that the appellant  was
    obliged to register as a  sex  offender  "and  thereby  his  access  to
    situations in which there  might  be  a  prospect  of  reoffending  are
    restricted and potentially monitored".

18. In considering the threat that the appellant represented, the FtJ  said
    at [69] that the appellant is no longer a threat to the victim and  the
    prospects of the appellant being  in  a  position  of  trust  are  "now
    minimal".  He stated that the appellant's criminal acts in the UK  were
    directed  towards  only  one  victim.   Referring  also   to   criminal
    convictions in Italy, he concluded that it  had  not  been  established
    that the appellant now represents a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat "of further criminal action".  In terms of whether "that
    diminished  threat"  affected  one  of  the  fundamental  interests  of
    society, he stated that clearly any criminal offending  will  challenge
    the good order of society.  However, this appellant's criminal  actions
    were specific to one victim in the UK and there is no  indication  that
    any other persons were endangered by his conduct.  At [71] he concluded
    that the appellant at the date of  the  hearing  "was  not  a  present,
    serious threat".  He further concluded that it had not been established
    that there are serious grounds of public policy or security which  made
    deportation proportionate.

19. In completing his assessment of the appeal under the  EEA  Regulations,
    the FtJ concluded at [72] that  the  appellant  had  provided  credible
    evidence to establish that he has resided and exercised  Treaty  rights
    in the UK continuously for five years or more.  He then said  that  the
    appellant has provided evidence that he has acquired a permanent  right
    to reside by virtue of those five years' residence in  accordance  with
    the EEA Regulations.  He stated that

          "As such his removal from this country can only  be  justified  on
          imperative grounds (sic) of public security or public  policy.   I
          find that this application does not represent the  level  of  risk
          that is required to be posed in the case of a person with a  right
          of permanent residence."

20. In relation to Article 8  of  the  ECHR,  he  said  at  [77]  that  the
    appellant had established a private and family life for the purposes of
    Article 8.  He referred to the appellant having developed relationships
    and acquaintances, and that his sister and girlfriend  resided  in  the
    UK.  He found that having regard to the length of  time  the  appellant
    had lived in the UK, his removal would constitute an interference  with
    the right to respect for his private life.  In the  same  paragraph  he
    said  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would   be   a   significant
    interference with the exercise of his right to respect for his  private
    and family life.

21. He continued at [82] stating that it was apparent that the appellant is
    fluent in English and has resided here since 2005.  During that time he
    had developed social and cultural links and had significant social  and
    cultural integration.  He referred to the  appellant  having  developed
    friendships and acquaintances in the UK.

22. Having referred  to  the  decision  in  �ner  v  the  Netherlands  Case
    No.4610/99 he said that it had not been established that the nature and
    seriousness of the offences committed by the appellant in the UK are of
    a nature and degree so as to be so serious that his  deportation  would
    be justified "on imperative  grounds"  of  public  security  or  public
    policy.  He referred to the appellant having a long-term  relationship,
    as one of the factors to be taken into account.

23. As to his links to Italy, he said at [86] that  the  appellant's  links
    there are still in existence, including his mother who  resides  there.
    He said at [87] that he had assessed the totality  of  the  appellant's
    family and private life before balancing that against the interests  of
    the public in securing his removal.  He concluded that  the  effect  of
    deportation  was  disproportionate  when  considering  the   cumulative
    aspects of the appellant's private and family  life  established  since
    2005.  He found that the appellant is now  aware  of  the  prospect  of
    deportation, and that, amongst other things, combined to ensure that he
    could be expected not to engage in further criminal activities.

    Submissions

24. In submissions on behalf of the respondent Mr Avery contended that  the
    FtJ appeared to have dismissed the appellant's  previous  offending  in
    Italy as having nothing to do with his present offending.  The evidence
    indicated that he abused the power he had in a position of trust.   The
    FtJ had missed the pattern of offending.

25. Although it was true that the  appellant  may  no  longer  represent  a
    threat to the particular victim, it is difficult to say that  he  would
    not be in a position of trust in  the  future.   The  FtJ  had  wrongly
    focused on the threat to that particular victim.   Similarly,  the  FtJ
    had clearly not engaged with what was said by the offender  manager  in
    respect of the risk of reoffending.

26. So far as Article 8 is concerned, his findings in that respect  are  in
    any event undermined by the findings in relation to the decision  under
    the EEA Regulations.  His decision did not  in  this  context  properly
    reflect the public interest.

27. Furthermore, given that the appellant maintained links to Italy, it was
    difficult to see how his return there would amount to a breach  of  his
    Article 8 rights.

28. In response to my having raised the matter with the parties,  Mr  Avery
    also contended that  the  FtJ  had  erred  in  his  references  to  the
    appellant's removal being necessary on 'imperative grounds'.

29.  Mr  Aslam  submitted  that  the  FtJ's  decision  was   detailed   and
    comprehensive.  I was referred to various aspects of the FtJ's decision
    to  support  that  contention.   Although  the  FtJ  had  referred   to
    imperative  grounds,  he  had  also  correctly  referred  to  "serious"
    grounds.

30. The FtJ  had  looked  at  the  public  interest  and  the  question  of
    rehabilitation.  He had taken into account the offences in  Italy.   In
    any event, none of those offences attracted a  custodial  sentence  and
    they were all committed in  2001.   Furthermore,  a  person's  previous
    convictions under the EEA Regulations are not in themselves grounds for
    expulsion.  At [28] the FtJ had noted that the respondent had  provided
    very little evidence regarding the appellant's criminal convictions  in
    Italy.  At [29] he had said that the appellant's offending  pattern  in
    Italy was in "considerable contrast" with his criminal offending in the
    UK.

31. Furthermore, in quoting the sentencing remarks, it is  clear  that  the
    sentencing  judge  had  commented  on  the  appellant  having  previous
    convictions in Italy but he had decided to disregard them.

32. So far as the risk of reoffending is concerned, there were two reports,
    the pre-sentence report and the OASys Report.  They needed to be looked
    at in their entirety.  The FtJ had concluded that the prospects of  the
    appellant being in a position  of  trust  were  now  minimal.   He  had
    recognised his offending and had come forward  himself  to  report  his
    crimes.  He was registered as  a  sex  offender  and  so  he  would  be
    restricted and monitored, as the FtJ pointed out.

33. As regards Article 8, the FtJ  had  focused  more  on  the  appellant's
    private life, although it is true that he made a finding in relation to
    family life.  That  finding  would  have  related  to  the  appellant's
    girlfriend.   It  was  conceded  however,  that  there  was  no  proper
    reasoning as to the basis on which it was found that the appellant  had
    family life in the UK.  However, as already contended, the  main  focus
    was on private life.

34. In reply, Mr Avery submitted that the  respondent  could  only  provide
    what information was provided to her.  It was accepted  that  it  would
    have  assisted  the  FtJ  if  more  information  in  relation  to   the
    appellant's Italian convictions had been given.  However, the  FtJ  did
    not make an assessment on the basis of the conduct concerned.

    Error of Law

35. I announced to the parties that I was satisfied that the FtJ had  erred
    in law such as to require his decision to be set aside.  My reasons are
    as follows.

36. Reg.21 of the EEA Regulations, so far as material, provides as follows:

         "21.-(1) In this regulation a  "relevant  decision"  means  an  EEA
                 decision taken on the  grounds  of  public  policy,  public
                 security or public health.


             (2)   A relevant decision may not be taken  to  serve  economic
                 ends.


             (3)   A relevant decision may not be  taken  in  respect  of  a
                 person with a permanent right of residence under regulation
                 15 except on serious grounds of  public  policy  or  public
                 security.


             (4)   A relevant decision may not be taken except on imperative
                 grounds of public security in respect of  an  EEA  national
                 who -


                 (a)   has resided in the United Kingdom for a continuous
                     period of at least ten years prior to the relevant
                     decision; or


                 (b)   is under the age of 18, unless the relevant decision
                     is necessary in his best interests, as provided for in
                     the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by
                     the General Assembly of the United Nations on 20th
                     November 1989.


             (5)   Where a relevant decision is taken on grounds  of  public
                 policy  or  public  security  it  shall,  in  addition   to
                 complying with the preceding paragraphs of this regulation,
                 be taken in accordance with the following principles -


                 (a)   the  decision  must  comply  with  the  principle  of
                     proportionality;


                 (b)    the  decision  must  be  based  exclusively  on  the
                     personal conduct of the person concerned;


                 (c)   the personal conduct of  the  person  concerned  must
                     represent a genuine, present and sufficiently  serious
                     threat affecting one of the fundamental  interests  of
                     society;


                 (d)   matters isolated from the particulars of the case  or
                     which relate to considerations of  general  prevention
                     do not justify the decision;


                 (e)   a person's previous criminal convictions  do  not  in
                     themselves justify the decision.


             (6)   Before taking a  relevant  decision  on  the  grounds  of
                 public policy or public security in relation  to  a  person
                 who is resident in the United Kingdom  the  decision  maker
                 must take account of considerations such as the age,  state
                 of health, family and economic situation of the person, the
                 person's length of residence in  the  United  Kingdom,  the
                 person's social and cultural integration  into  the  United
                 Kingdom and the extent  of  the  person's  links  with  his
                 country of origin.



37. The EEA Regulations therefore provide that the personal conduct of  the
    person concerned must represent a  genuine,  present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat affecting one of the fundamental interests  of  society.
    It seems to me that it is mostly, but not exclusively, in this  respect
    that the FtJ has erred in law.

38. It is clear that the appellant has been convicted of criminal  offences
    in Italy.  These are set out at [26] of the FtJ's decision,  reflecting
    the document described as the UK Central Authority for the Exchange  of
    Criminal Records, in the respondent's bundle that was before  the  FtT.
    The appellant has been convicted on four occasions, between  16  August
    2001 and 2 July 2004.  The offence titles are given as, illicit sale of
    drugs, bodily harm, unlawful possession of weapons and ammunition,  and
    insubordination with injury (at the Appeal Military Court).   The  last
    is  described  as  an  offence  against  military  obligations.    Some
    explanation was given by the appellant in relation to those offences in
    evidence before the FtT.  It appears that at the time of the offence of
    the sale of drugs, the appellant was a police officer, and had  been  a
    police officer for nine years.  The drugs in question are said to  have
    been cannabis.

39. At [28] the FtJ stated that the respondent  had  very  little  evidence
    regarding the appellant's criminal convictions in Italy,  limited  only
    to the UK Central Authority  for  the  exchange  of  Criminal  Records'
    Information.  He said that  there  was  no  detailed  analysis  of  the
    appellant's offending or the reasons for his criminal  activities,  and
    no  prosecution  summary,  pre-sentence  reports,  judge's  remarks  or
    probation or prison reports as to rehabilitation.  At [29] he said that
    it was apparent from the outline description of the offences  that  the
    appellant's offending pattern in Italy "is  in  considerable  contrast"
    with his criminal offending in the UK.

40. In assessing the risk of reoffending directly, all that  the  FtJ  said
    about the offences committed  in  Italy  was  that  in  the  particular
    circumstances of his past criminal actions in both Italy and the UK, he
    found that it had not been established that he  represents  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat of further offending [69].   It
    is apparent that the FtJ has  not  undertaken  any  assessment  of  the
    extent to which the risk of reoffending is informed by the  appellant's
    criminal offences in Italy.  The only possible reflection on that issue
    is to be found at [29],  being  what  is  said  to  be  a  considerable
    contrast with the UK offences.  Even  putting  aside  the  respondent's
    contention that in Italy he also abused a  position  of  trust,  having
    been a police officer when he committed some of the offences at  least,
    the fact of those previous offences required some analysis  as  to  the
    extent to which they informed the present level of risk of reoffending.
     In failing to undertake such an assessment, I am  satisfied  that  the
    FtJ erred in law.

41. However, there are further errors of law in  the  FtJ's  assessment  of
    whether the appellant represented a genuine, present  and  sufficiently
    serious threat.  At [54],  quoting  from  the  pre-sentence  report,  a
    passage is quoted whereby the author of the pre-sentence report  stated
    that  "The  defendant's  antecedents  confirm  he   has   no   previous
    convictions for sexual offences. He also has  no  previous  convictions
    for violence."  It seems that the FtJ has accepted  that  as  being  an
    accurate reflection of the appellant's  previous  offending.   However,
    self evidently that is not an accurate assessment.  The  appellant  was
    convicted of an offence of bodily harm on 3 April 2003.   According  to
    the  "Offence  Category"  on  the  record,   this   is   described   as
    "Unintentionally  causing  grievous  bodily  injury,  disfigurement  or
    permanent disability."  Unintentional or not,  it  is  nevertheless  an
    offence of violence.  On 2 July 2004 he was convicted of an offence  of
    "insubordination with injury".  That  is  plainly  another  offence  of
    violence.  Without even taking into account the "unlawful possession of
    weapons and ammunition", and even if limited to ammunition as explained
    by the appellant to the FtJ,  he  has  undoubtedly  been  convicted  of
    offences of violence.  They are not sexual offences but  they  are,  at
    least potentially, relevant.

42. The assessment in the pre-sentence report, quoted at [54] by  the  FtJ,
    is to the effect that the  appellant  represents  a  'medium'  risk  of
    reoffending.  Aside from the observations I have made  about  the  pre-
    sentence report being inaccurate in terms of the  appellant  having  no
    convictions for violence, the FtJ said at [55]  that  he  accepted  the
    professional assessment in the pre-sentence report.  On that basis, the
    FtJ must have concluded that the appellant represented a medium risk of
    reoffending.  In those circumstances, it is difficult to  see  how  the
    FtJ could have concluded at [69] and [71] that the  appellant  did  not
    represent a  "genuine,  present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  of
    further criminal action" and "was not a  present  serious  threat".   A
    medium risk of reoffending  does  at  least  represent  a  genuine  and
    present threat.  If the FtJ meant to conclude that the threat  was  not
    sufficiently serious, that is not a conclusion  that  is  expressed  or
    explained.

43. In addition, at [69] the FtJ said that the appellant  is  no  longer  a
    threat to the victim of his offences in the UK and that  his  prospects
    of being in a position of trust are now minimal.  He  stated  that  the
    appellant's criminal acts in the UK  were  directed  towards  only  one
    victim.  At [70] he repeated that there was only one specific victim of
    his criminal offences and  there  was  no  indication  that  any  other
    persons were endangered by his conduct.  However, whilst it may be  the
    case that the appellant's prospects of being in a position of trust are
    "minimal" with respect to employment of the sort that he had  had  when
    he committed his offences, that by  no  means  indicates  that  in  his
    private life he is unlikely to be in a position of trust, or indeed  in
    employment were he to encounter a  vulnerable  individual.   The  gross
    abuse of trust that took place during the appellant's employment with a
    completely vulnerable victim cannot be so easily explained in terms  of
    risk for the future simply by virtue of the fact that  there  was  only
    one victim and the  appellant  is  unlikely  to  obtain  that  type  of
    employment again.

44. I raised with Mr Aslam the fact that the FtJ had referred on more  than
    one occasion in his decision to the need for  "imperative  grounds"  of
    public security or public policy being necessary so as to  justify  the
    appellant's removal.  The respondent accepted only that  the  appellant
    had a permanent right of residence, having resided in the UK exercising
    Treaty rights for  a  continuous  period  of  five  years.   That  only
    entitles him to protection against removal under the EEA Regulations on
    "serious grounds" of public policy or public  security.   The  FtJ  did
    refer to that concession on behalf of the respondent at [40] and  [58].
    At [59] he referred to the correct test of "serious grounds".  However,
    at  [72]  under  the  subheading   "Conclusion   regarding   the   2006
    Regulations"  after  referring  to  the  appellant  having  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence, he stated that:

         "As such his removal from this country can  only  be  justified  on
         imperative grounds of public security or  public  policy.   I  find
         that this appellant does not represent the level of  risk  that  is
         required to be posed in the case  of  a  person  with  a  right  of
         permanent residence."

45. Again, at [84], when considering Article 8 of the ECHR,  it  is  stated
    that the nature and degree of the appellant's offences committed in the
    UK have not been established to be  so  serious  that  his  deportation
    would be justified "on  imperative  grounds"  of  public  security  and
    public policy.

46. It is evident therefore, that the FtJ in places misdirected himself  as
    to the level of protection afforded to the appellant  against  removal.
    Albeit that the FtJ directed himself appropriately at other  places  in
    his decision, one cannot be confident that he did in fact apply the law
    correctly in this respect.

47. In the circumstances, I am  satisfied  that  the  FtJ's  decision  with
    respect to the EEA Regulations is vitiated by error of law such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.  I also take  the  same  view  in
    relation to the FtJ's decision under Article 8 of the ECHR.  It  is  in
    fact sufficient to conclude that given that the FtJ's conclusions under
    the EEA Regulations are flawed, his decision  under  Article  8  cannot
    stand.  However, there are other errors in  the  Article  8  assessment
    which it is only necessary to set out briefly.

48. At [75] the FtJ said that it appeared that the appellant's relationship
    with his girlfriend is not a relationship akin to marriage, noting that
    they do not live together.

49. At [77] he said that the appellant had established "private and  family
    life" for the purposes of Article 8.   He  said  that  his  sister  and
    girlfriend reside in the UK.  However, the basis  upon  which  the  FtJ
    concluded that the appellant has family life with his sister  (if  that
    is what he meant) or with his girlfriend, is not clear, and bearing  in
    mind that he had previously  stated  that  the  relationship  with  his
    girlfriend is not one akin to marriage.  At [77] the FtJ again referred
    variously to either private life or private and family life, as he  did
    at [78].  At [82]  he  repeated  that  the  appellant  had  established
    private and family life in the UK, again not explaining  the  basis  on
    which he concluded, if he did, that the appellant had  family  life  in
    the UK.  At [87] he concluded  that  the  appellant's  deportation  was
    disproportionate  "when  considering  the  cumulative  aspects  of  the
    appellant's private and family life established in the UK since  2005".
    Again, there is no explanation as to the basis upon which it was found,
    if it was, that the appellant had family life in the UK.

50. The FtJ's conclusions with respect to Article 8 of the ECHR involve  an
    error of law and his decision in this respect is also set aside.

    Re-making the Decision

51. Mr Aslam accepted that the decision  could  be  re-made  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis of the evidence presently  before  the  Tribunal.
    Mr Avery was of the same view.  I have given the  matter  very  careful
    consideration,  reflecting  on  whether  the  FtJ's  findings   are   a
    sufficient platform from which to allow me to re-make the decision, and
    whether there is otherwise sufficient evidence to allow the decision to
    be re-made.  I have come to the view that it is  necessary  for  a  re-
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal.  It is apparent that I have a number  of
    concerns about the FtJ's findings, in particular with reference to  the
    risk of re-offending and the relevance of the offences committed by the
    appellant in  Italy.   These  are  matters  which  are  not  yet  fully
    explored.   Furthermore,  the  FtJ's  conclusions  in  terms   of   the
    appellant's relationships in the UK, with his  sister  and  girlfriend,
    are unsustainable and require re-evaluation and proper assessment.

52. In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the appropriate  course  is
    for a further  hearing  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  following  which  the
    decision will be re-made. Issues that  require  further  consideration,
    with further evidence if the appellant and his representatives consider
    it appropriate, relate to:

      i) The appellant's offences in Italy.

     ii) The appellant's relationships with his sister and girlfriend in the
         UK.

    iii) Any further courses undertaken by the appellant.

53. It should not be thought however, that those are the only  issues  that
    may be canvassed with any witness who is to be called.

54. Furthermore, the parties must be in a position to make  submissions  at
    the next hearing as to what findings of fact made by  the  FtJ  can  be
    preserved.

55. The parties are to pay careful regard to the directions below.

                                 DIRECTIONS

      i) In respect of any witness whom it is proposed to call to give  oral
         evidence, insofar as the evidence is not contained in any  existing
         witness statement or in the FtJ's record of evidence given  at  the
         hearing before the FtT, there is to be a witness statement drawn in
         sufficient detail to stand as evidence-in-chief, such that there is
         no need for any further examination-in-chief.

     ii) Any further evidence relied on by either party is to be  filed  and
         served no later than 7 days before the next date of hearing.

    iii) The parties must be in a position  at  the  next  hearing  to  make
         submissions as to what findings of fact are to be preserved.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 2/06/16

