
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51820/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 April 2014                                |On 20 May 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                            Mr James Abiam Danso
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Awal
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 15 September  1969.
    He applied for a residence card as confirmation of a right of residence
    as the family member of an EEA national who is a qualified person.  The
    Secretary of State refused the application because the appellant failed
    to produce a valid marriage certificate as evidence that he is  related
    as claimed to the EEA national.  In the alternative the refusal  notice
    states that the appellant applied for a residence card as a person  who
    is in a durable relationship with an  EEA  national  and  although  the
    application had been considered in accordance with Regulation 8 of  the
    2006 Regulations the appellant failed to prove that he  is  in  such  a
    durable relationship.

The Appellant's Grounds of Appeal

 2. The appellant's grounds of appeal in essence are to the effect that  he
    entered into a proxy marriage in Ghana with the EEA national whose name
    is Rosemond Osei Gyamfi ("Ms Gyamfi") which marriage was in  accordance
    with the customary laws  of  Ghana  as  confirmed  by  the  Ghana  High
    Commission in London and the High Court of Justice  in  Ghana.   It  is
    said in the grounds that (a) the respondent failed  to  appreciate  the
    statutory  declaration  from  a  competent   court   in   Ghana   which
    unequivocally states that all the necessary  rites  pertaining  to  the
    validity of the customary marriage were performed in  the  presence  of
    elders from the two families, (b)  the  statutory  declaration  forming
    part of the evidence states that the customary marriage  contracted  on
    23 February 2013 was done in accordance with the Ghanaian customary law
    and usage, (c)  although  the  respondent  stated  that  the  appellant
    failed to provide the passport he entered the United Kingdom  with  the
    appellant is nevertheless entitled to a right of residence on the basis
    of the family relationship alone.  That  right  is  not  subject  to  a
    requirement of lawful residence - see Metock [2008] EUECJ C-127/08.  On
    the basis that the marriage was valid in the country in which  it  took
    place it should be recognised as valid everywhere else  in  the  world.
    As per the case of CB (Validity of  marriage:  proxy  marriage)  Brazil
    [2008] UKAIT 00080 a proxy marriage should be recognised in English law
    as long as it is recognised in the country in which it was contracted.

 3. The appeal was determined on the papers  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal was dismissed very shortly on the basis that in light of the
    case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law)  [2014]  UKUT  24  (IAC)  and
    because Ms Gyamfi is a Dutch national the judge  had  to  be  satisfied
    that the proxy marriage is valid under Dutch law.  There  was  no  such
    evidence before the judge and therefore he dismissed the  appeal.   The
    judge also recorded that the grounds of appeal did not raise Article  8
    and commented that it was significant that the appellant had chosen  to
    have the appeal determined on the papers.  If he had attended a hearing
    any evidence would  have  been  tested  by  cross-examination  and  the
    Tribunal would have wanted to know why, if the appellant and Ms  Gyamfi
    were in a genuine relationship, they had not chosen  to  marry  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. The appellant sought leave to appeal on the basis that the judge's fact-
    finding exercise was materially flawed.  The appellant had the right to
    either opt for a paper appeal or an oral hearing.  The judge failed  to
    take a structured approach to the requisite fact-finding exercise.   He
    should have found whether  the  appellant's  partner  was  a  qualified
    person within the meaning of Regulation 6 of the  EEA  Regulations  and
    then proceeded to make findings specific to the validity  or  otherwise
    of the appellant's proxy marriage.  If those findings were adverse then
    arguably he should have considered  whether  the  appellant  was  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national exercising treaty rights  and
    thereby entitled to a residence card.  Furthermore two letters provided
    by  the  Ghana  High  Commission  confirmed  the  authenticity  of  the
    documents provided and should have led to a finding as per the case  of
    CB namely that a proxy marriage should be recognised in English law  as
    long as it is recognised in the country in which it was contracted.

The Hearing before Me

 5. Permission to appeal was granted and the matter came before  me  on  an
    error of law hearing.  I heard  submissions  from  both  parties.   The
    appellant's  representative  produced  a  large  bundle  of   documents
    numbered 1-137 which included witness statements of the  appellant  and
    Ms Gyamfi and a skeleton argument. These were said to be  relevant  and
    should be taken into account with the other documentation produced if I
    found that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred materially in law in
    dismissing the appeal for the reasons given.

 6. In essence Mr Awal relied on the skeleton argument and  submitted  that
    because the marriage certificate was issued by  a  competent  authority
    according to the registration laws of the country  where  the  marriage
    took place this provided sufficient proof of the marital  relationship.
    The appellant is a person who is the spouse of an EEA national who is a
    qualified person in the United Kingdom and can therefore derive  rights
    of free movement and residence as per  the  Regulations.   It  was  not
    therefore necessary to go on to consider  Kareem  because  there  is  a
    valid marriage certificate and there is no doubt that  the  certificate
    has been issued by a competent authority.

 7. Mr Duffy submitted that at best the judge erred in failing to deal with
    the appeal in a structured manner but he had in any  event  arrived  at
    the correct result so that any  mistake  was  not  material.   Had  the
    appellant provided all the correct documentation the Secretary of State
    may have taken a different view as to both the marriage and whether the
    appellant and Ms Gyamfi are in a durable relationship.

My Deliberations

 8. It cannot be seriously in issue that it is for the appellant  to  prove
    that his marriage to Ms Gyamfi is valid.  Although  reference  is  made
    throughout the documentation before me that the appellant has submitted
    to the Secretary of State a Ghanaian customary marriage  certificate  I
    have not identified that document in the papers before me.  However, it
    is accepted by the respondent as set out in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter (at the bottom of page 2)  that  such  a  certificate  has  been
    submitted and this states that the appellant was married to  "your  EEA
    national spouse in Ghana" on 23 February 2013 by  proxy  and  that  the
    marriage was registered with the District Registrar on 10 May 2013.  As
    to that registration document I have  identified  that  in  the  papers
    before me.

 9. The respondent states in the Reasons for Refusal Letter that this  type
    of marriage (proxy) was governed by PNDC (Provisional National  Defence
    Council) Law 112, Customary Marriage  and  Divorce  (Registration)  Law
    1985 which was amended in 1991 to remove the mandatory  requirement  to
    register the customary marriage within a certain timeframe.  Further it
    is accepted by the respondent that as the appellant provided a Ghanaian
    customary marriage certificate he has demonstrated that he  voluntarily
    registered the marriage but goes on to say that the burden of proof  is
    on him to demonstrate that the registration was done in accordance with
    the Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration)  Law  1985.   Part  1
    registration of customary marriage states that:-

         "3.  (1) The application for registration of the marriage shall  be
                  accompanied  by  a  statutory  declaration   stating   the
                  following: -

                  (a)  the names of the parties to the marriage;

                  (b)  the places of residence of the parties at the time of
                      the marriage;

                  (c)  that the conditions essential to the validity of  the
                      marriage in accordance with the applicable  customary
                      law have been complied with.

             (2)  The statutory declaration shall be supported  by  parents
                  of the spouses or persons standing in loco parentis to the
                  spouses expect where there are no such persons  living  at
                  the time of application for registration."

10. It is therefore of importance to establish  as  per  3(1)(c)  that  the
    conditions essential to the validity of the marriage in accordance with
    the applicable customary law have been complied with.  The case  of  NA
    (Customary marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009 is
    in the bundle at pages 113 and following. Paragraph 11  refers  to  the
    expert opinion prepared by Mercy Akman. That opinion  appears  to  have
    been accepted by the Tribunal and states as follows:-

         "5.  The most common form of marriage in  Ghana  is  the  customary
             marriage.  It is a  type  of  marriage  contracted  under  the
             particular tradition and customary practices  of  a  group  of
             people.  Indeed until the introduction of civil  marriages  by
             the British in Ghana,  then  Gold  Coast,  the  only  form  of
             marriage was the customary marriage.   These  days,  civil  or
             ordinance marriages and customary marriages co-exist and  both
             are legally recognised.  It is up to  the  parties  to  choose
             which  form  of  marriage  they  desire.   A  valid  customary
             marriage can only be validly contracted between  two  Ghanaian
             citizens and both parties must have capacity to  marry.   This
             means that there should be no violation of any rule of  tribal
             relationship.  These rules differ from tribe to tribe.   Thus,
             whilst in some traditions, a  man  cannot  marry  his  cousin,
             other traditions accommodate cross-cousin marriages.

         6.    A  particular  characteristic  of  customary  marriage  which
             distinguishes it from the system of  marriage  in  Europe  and
             other places is that it is not just a union of 'this man'  and
             'this woman'.  It is the union of 'the family of  this  woman'
             and 'the family of  this  man'.   Marriage  in  the  customary
             context  therefore  unites  families  and   not   merely   the
             individuals.

         7.   It involves payment of  a  bride  price  by  the  bridegroom's
             family to the bride's family.  If the appropriate bride  price
             is not paid, there is no valid marriage, even if parties  live
             as man and woman for many years.  The acceptance of drink from
             the man's family is an indication of the consent of the wife's
             family to the marriage.  In the Akan system which is the  area
             from where the appellant hails, the bride price may  take  the
             form of drinks, cash, cloth and in the old  days,  gold  dust.
             It is potentially polygamous in nature; a man  may  decide  to
             marry  as  many  women  as  his  strength  and  resources  can
             accommodate.

         8.   [Describes four types of customary marriage.]

         9.   [What happens when the woman is pregnant and unmarried.]

         10.  There is not always a formal ceremony.  Even if there was, the
             couples do not have to be present at this ceremony for a valid
             marriage to take place, provided representatives  of  the  two
             families are present as witnesses to the meeting or event."

11. At this point I note that in an Upper Tribunal  decision  IA/23315/2012
    reference is made to a further expert report from Mercy Akman who  gave
    evidence in NA that having carried out  additional  research  and  upon
    reflection she wished to clarify and revise her  opinion  to  say  that
    customary marriages are available between non-Ghanaian  citizens.   The
    Upper Tribunal Judge in that case then stated  that  she  had  concerns
    about the expert opinion because it was not sourced or  evidence  based
    which cast doubt in her view over not only that expert report  but  the
    evidence before  the  Tribunal  in  NA.   Having  taken  note  of  that
    observation there was no further evidence on that aspect before  either
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge in this appeal or before me.

12. It may be seen therefore that  the  statutory  declaration  is  a  very
    important document, always assuming that the expert's report states the
    law accurately.  The statutory declaration provided to  the  respondent
    and which appears at 51  in  the  bundle  gives  certain  detail.   One
    declarant refers to being the father of the appellant and the other  an
    "uncle" of Ms Gyamfi.  At paragraph 5 it is said that all  the  "needed
    rites pertaining to the validity of (the marriage)  were  performed  in
    the presence of elders from the two families and after the approval  of
    it" without any further detail being given.

13. Payment of a bride price, according  to  the  expert,  is  a  necessary
    element in establishing a valid marriage and if not paid means that the
    marriage is not valid.  To state merely that all the  rites  have  been
    performed is not in my  finding  good  enough  to  establish  that  the
    requirements have been met, particularly as nothing has been said about
    the bride price.

14. There is also scant proof of the relationship between those making  the
    statutory declaration and the appellant and Ms Gyamfi. That proof could
    have been provided by production of, for instance,  birth  or  marriage
    certificates.

15. It is for these reasons I am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    proven on the balance of probabilities that he has entered into a valid
    marriage in accordance with the applicable customary laws.

16. However, matters do not end there because the appellant claims  in  the
    alternative that he is an  extended  family  member  of  Ms  Gyamfi  in
    accordance with Regulation 8(5) of the Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 which states:-

         "(5) A person satisfies the condition  in  this  paragraph  if  the
             person is the partner of an EEA national (other than  a  civil
             partner) and can prove to the decision maker that he is  in  a
             durable relationship with the EEA national."

17. It is not in issue that in such a situation the  EEA  national  has  to
    exercise treaty  rights  as  a  qualified  person  in  accordance  with
    Regulation 6.  In addition although there  does  not  appear  to  be  a
    definition of durable relationship the Secretary of State would  expect
    the appellant to demonstrate that he has been living together  with  Ms
    Gyamfi for at least two years.  Equally, it is said it is reasonable to
    expect that they both intend to live  together  permanently,  that  any
    previous relationship or marriage each of them may have had has  broken
    down and that the parties are  not  related  by  birth.   Although  the
    respondent  will  not  normally  accept  that  there   is   a   durable
    relationship where these criteria are not met each case  is  considered
    on its merits.

18. The respondent stated  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter  that  no
    documentation had been provided to suggest that the  appellant  and  Ms
    Gyamfi are in a durable relationship.  Even if the appellant were to be
    found to be in one he would only be entitled to a residence card as  an
    extended family member if it were considered appropriate to  issue  the
    card.  This would be as per Regulation 17(4):-

         "(4) The Secretary of State  may  issue  a  residence  card  to  an
             extended family member not falling within Regulation 7(3)  who
             is not an EEA national on application" -- (my emphasis)

         [There are then various conditions].

19. The extent of the evidence as to there  being  a  durable  relationship
    between the appellant and  Ms  Gyamfi  is  provided  by  their  witness
    statements dated 18 April 2014 which are in almost identical  form  and
    are extremely brief.  In addition there are a few documents such as two
    payslips from around the  date  of  application  (the  photocopies  are
    poor), a TV licensing letter to Ms Gyamfi  at  her  stated  address,  a
    letter referring to automatic enrolment  in  a  pension  scheme  and  a
    letter from Boots (the chemists) to the appellant at the  same  address
    given as for Ms Gyamfi. In the form that they are and in the absence of
    any further evidence, oral or otherwise, these documents fall  woefully
    short of allowing me to find on the balance of probabilities  that  the
    appellant and Ms Gyamfi are in any kind of  relationship, let  alone  a
    durable one.  The statements provided are of no help  and  it  was  not
    intended that the appellant or Ms Gyamfi would give evidence before me.
    Furthermore, with the lack of  evidence  provided  I  am  not  able  to
    conclude either that Ms Gyamfi is in fact a qualified  person  for  the
    purpose of the Regulations.  There is simply not good  enough  evidence
    for me to conclude that she is.

Conclusions

20. Within EU law it is essential that member states  facilitate  the  free
    movement and residence rights of  union  citizens  and  their  spouses.
    However, for the reasons set out above I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant has shown that  he  is  in  a  marital  relationship  with  a
    qualified person and therefore he cannot benefit from EU free  movement
    and residence rights on that basis.  Neither  have  I  found  that  the
    appellant is in a durable relationship with Ms  Gyamfi  such  that  the
    Secretary of State is required to exercise her discretion as to whether
    she should issue a residence card to the appellant  as  per  Regulation
    17(4).

Decision

21. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to make findings  as  to
    whether the marriage certificate was issued by a  competent  authority.
    On the basis that he did not so find he should have gone on to consider
    whether the appellant is in a durable relationship with Ms  Gyamfi  and
    whether she is exercising treaty rights  in  the  UK.  The  errors  are
    material and the decision is set aside for lack of reasoning.

22. For different reasons and as set out above the appellant has not  shown
    that he is entitled to that which he is  seeking,  namely  a  residence
    card as confirmation of a  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Therefore for different reasons the appeal is dismissed under  the  EEA
    Regulations.

23. An anonymity direction has not been made in this appeal thus far. I was
    not addressed on the matter but in all the circumstances I see no  need
    for a direction and do not make one.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton


