



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51679/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                                |Promulgated                |
|On 5th June 2015                                |On 24th June 2015          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mrs tayyaba ishtiaq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Dogra, of Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    Judge Davey to allow the appeal of Tayyaba Ishtiaq against the  refusal
    of her application for  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
    private/family life grounds. For the sake  of  clarity  I  shall  refer
    hereafter to the parties by reference to their status in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Background

 2. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan  born  5th  August  1951.  Her
    immigration history is as follows. She arrived in the UK on 27th  March
    2004 with leave to enter as a visitor until  25th  September  2004.  On
    12th August 2004 she applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  the
    parent of a settled person, a child. That application  was  refused  by
    the Respondent's decision of 11th November 2004. An appeal against  the
    Respondent's decision was dismissed by Judge Robb on  7th  March  2006.
    Permission to appeal that decision  was  refused  and  the  Appellant's
    appeal rights became exhausted on 4th April 2006.

 3. However further submissions were made dated 24th April 2006 and on 12th
    February 2009. On 5th January 2010 both  of  these  fresh  claims  were
    refused with a right of appeal and the Appellant  was  served  with  an
    IS.151A. The Appellant appealed on 11th January 2010 which  appeal  was
    dismissed on 21st April 2010 by Immigration Judge M  Keane.  Permission
    to appeal was refused on 8th  July  2010  and  the  Appellant's  appeal
    rights became exhausted the same day.

 4. The matter did not end there.  On  30th  November  2012  the  Appellant
    submitted a further application for leave to remain outside the  Rules.
    That application was refused by the Respondent on 22 November 2013  and
    removal directions were  given.  The  subsequent  appeal  against  that
    decision came before the FtT on 10th October 2014.

 5. When the appeal came before him  the  Judge  directed  himself  in  the
    following terms:

         "The question is whether or not the circumstances are  sufficiently
         compelling or exceptional to engage Article 8 ECHR outside  of  the
         rules. I apply the approach identified in MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA
         1192 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720. I find  the  Appellant's  personal,
         health and family circumstances raise issues about the care of  the
         elderly,  personal  dignity  and  family/cultural  obligations   to
         support elderly parents are not adequately covered by the rules".

 6. He then went on to allow the appeal under Article 8.

 7. Permission to appeal was initially refused  by  the  FtT  but  granted,
    following a review, by UTJ Macleman in the following terms:

         "Permission to appeal is granted.

         REASONS

         It is debatable whether the determination adequately  explains  why
         the circumstances justified going beyond the  Rules  (paragraph  19
         may be the focal point).

         The grounds rely heavily on Kugathas, but there is further relevant
         case law on family life with adult descendents, which  the  parties
         should be ready to cite at the hearing".

The Grounds

 8. There is only one ground seeking permission which  is  that  the  Judge
    made a material misdirection in law. There are however several  strands
    to that one ground, as follows.

      i) No compelling or exceptional circumstances have been identified.

     ii) The Appellant failed to establish family life for the  purposes  of
         Article 8.

    iii) There was a failure in assessing whether it was  proportionate  for
         the Respondent to be removed to Pakistan.

     iv)  A  failure  to  consider  Section  117(b)  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended by Section  19  of  the
         Immigration Act 2014)

The FtT Hearing

 9. The Judge in his decision records at [19] :

         "The question is whether or not the circumstances are  sufficiently
         compelling or exceptional to engage Article 8 ECHR outside  of  the
         rules. I apply the approach identified in MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA
         1192 and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720. I find  the  Appellant's  personal,
         health and family circumstances raise issues about the care of  the
         elderly,  personal  dignity  and  family/cultural  obligations   to
         support elderly parents are not adequately covered by the rules".

10. At  [20] the Judge he says the following:

         "I take full account  of  the  family  relationships  as  currently
         evidence by the statements of evidence before me. It is clear  that
         there is a regular and ongoing family relationship  in  the  United
         Kingdom that goes far beyond private life  considerations  although
         plainly the Appellant has but in a limited  sense  a  private  life
         within the United Kingdom".

11. Then  seemingly contradictorily in [21] the Judge says:

         "I take into account although it comes from  children  the  remarks
         made on behalf of two grandchildren in relation to this as well  as
         the evidence generally from the Appellant's children  as  to  their
         wish to  have  her  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  support  her
         themselves. It  appears  to  be  realistically  accepted  that  the
         Appellant could on return, have maids or a housekeeper although  it
         is said that those would be far less satisfactory than the care and
         help provided by the family themselves".

12. He follows this up at [22] and [23] when he says:

         "It seems inevitable in a country as large as  Pakistan  that  home
         help, carers, maids and the like are going to be  available,  Their
         availability may not be as satisfactory and  they  may  not  be  as
         reliable as family members in caring but of  itself  her  care  for
         whatever may be her physical conditions currently in  remission  or
         undergoing treatment or medication it does  not  seem  to  me  that
         those  are  matters  that  militate  significantly  in  favour   of
         remaining.

         The medical evidence out-of-date (sic) and has not been updated: it
         could well have been. I simply do not accept that it is  reasonable
         to conclude on the medical evidence of which the most recent is  in
         2012 that that indicates that the Appellant  could  not  return  to
         Pakistan".

 Has the Judge Erred?

13. I find that the decision of the FtT must  be  set  aside  for  material
    error.  I see no adequate reasoning allowing the  Judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion he did in [20].  Likewise in [25] where he says;

         "For the reasons given  before  it  seems  to  me  that  the  close
         relationship between the Appellant and her children in  the  United
         Kingdom and the lack now of any of her children being  in  Pakistan
         that the position has factually changed and moved  along.  In  this
         appeal there appeared to have been significantly more openness  and
         honesty by the Appellant, even if not a great deal of  insight,  in
         the representations made by the family on behalf of  the  Appellant
         and the evidence called".

14. The Judge then goes on to say in [26]

         "...it would be disproportionate for the Appellant  to  be  removed
         because of  the  adverse  impacts  upon  her  arising  from  family
         separation and the circumstances to which she would  return  to  in
         Pakistan as a woman on her own....I find the Appellant has a  clear
         dependency upon her children over and above  that  normally  to  be
         found between a parent and child".

    I find I am hard-pressed to find any reasons why the factors set out in
    paragraph [25] and [26] amount  to  dependency  "over  and  above  that
    normally to be found between a parent and child". The Judge rounds  his
    determination off by saying that given the age and circumstances of the
    Appellant, she fails under the Rules  because  she  has  not  lost  her
    language, cultural, historical and social ties to Pakistan.

15. These apparent contradictions in the findings  and  conclusions  render
    the factual matrix of this decision unsustainable.

16. For these reasons I set aside the determination of the FtT.  Since  the
    findings made are unsustainable I consider this an appropriate case  to
    be remitted to that Tribunal for a full rehearing and for full findings
    of fact to be made taking into account the jurisprudence under  Article
    8 ECHR.

Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  The  appeal  is
    remitted to that Tribunal for the decision to be remade before a  Judge
    other than Judge Davey. No findings of fact are preserved.


No anonymity direction is made as none was asked for.


Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

