
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/51599/2013
      IA/51603/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House           |Determination Promulgated       |
|On: 30th September 2014         |On: 27th November 2014          |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                ZOHAIB HASSAN
                                ROHIA HASSAN
                          (no anonymity direction)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   -


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are nationals of Pakistan who are a husband  and  wife.
    On the 23rd July 2014 their linked appeals against decisions to  refuse
    them further leave to remain as Tier 1 Migrants  were  allowed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Obhi).  The  Secretary  of  State  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision.

 2. The sole matter in  issue  was  that  the  Respondents  had  sought  to
    demonstrate their earnings with reference to  accounts  prepared  by  a
    firm who were not, as the First-tier Tribunal  puts  it  "on  the  Home
    Office list".  It was not in dispute that the accounts  that  had  been
    submitted with the application  were  defective  since  they  were  not
    prepared by a registered accountant. Judge Obhi noted however that  the
    Respondents had subsequently submitted another  set  of  accounts  that
    were acceptable and on the basis of these, found that  the  Respondents
    should have attracted the  requisite  points  under  the  Points  Based
    System and allowed the appeal. In doing so he makes  reference  to  the
    SSHD's "evidential flexibility" policy.

 3. The primary ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in
    allowing the appeal outright. There was no basis for doing so since the
    Respondents did not meet the requirement of the rule.  Section  85A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 precludes an applicant
    from  relying  on  appeal  on  a  document  that  was  submitted  post-
    application. The acceptable  set  of  accounts  were,  it  was  agreed,
    submitted after the applications were lodged.  This ground is made out.
    It was an error of law to allow this appeal, for the reasons set out in
    the grounds.

 4. The second ground relates to 'evidential flexibility'. It is  submitted
    that if the Tribunal wished to refer to a policy it should have done so
    in terms, identifying the specific policy which the  SSHD  is  said  to
    have failed to apply. There is also merit in this  ground.  Although  I
    think it unlikely that the SSHD is unable to understand the reasons for
    the decision - those are quite plain -  in  the  circumstances  it  was
    incumbent  upon  the  Respondents,  and  Tribunal,  to  identify  which
    'evidential flexibility policy' might have availed the Respondents.

 5. I therefore find the decision contains errors of  law  and  it  is  set
    aside.

 6. As to  remaking,   I  note  that  this  appeal  was  unopposed  by  the
    Respondents, who in a letter dated the 18th September 2014 informed the
    Tribunal that they no longer wished to pursue their appeals, since they
    were instead making fresh applications to the  Home  Office,  no  doubt
    supported by all of the correct documentation.   I  have  treated  that
    letter as a formal notice of withdrawal of  the  Respondents'  case,  a
    withdrawal to which I give consent pursuant  to  part  17  (2)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Decisions

 7. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    is set aside.  I re-make the decision  in  the  appeals  by  dismissing
    them.


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                         30th September 2014
