
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51923/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd October 2014                         |On 10th November 2014         |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                             ms Mary Tiya Kalawi
                          (anonymity not RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Poutney
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 17th May  1978  is  a  citizen  of  Malawi.   The
    Appellant  who  was  present  was  represented  by  Mr  Poutney.    The
    Respondent was represented by Miss Johnstone a Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made her original application for leave to remain  in
    the United Kingdom outside of the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  of
    the ECHR on 29th April 2010.  Further representations were made on  her
    behalf in that respect on 24th June 2011.  The Respondent  had  refused
    the Appellant's application on 17th November 2013 and the  matter  came
    on appeal before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Malik  sitting  at
    Manchester on 24th March 2014.  The judge had dismissed the Appellant's
    appeal.

 3. Application for permission to appeal was sought on 8th April  2014  and
    granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cox  on  12th  May  2014.   The
    Respondent had opposed such application by letter dated 9th June  2014.
    Directions were issued directing the matter  first  be  decided  as  to
    whether an error of law had been made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    the matter came before me in accordance with those directions  on  16th
    July 2014.

 4. I found an error of law had been made by the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    reasons provided in a determination promulgated on 22nd July  2014  and
    set aside that decision and issued directions for the remaking of  that
    decision.

 5. The matter comes back before me in the  Upper  Tribunal  in  accordance
    with those directions.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 6. The Respondent's bundle consists of:

       . immigration history;

       . those documents listed within  the  bundle  including  the  refusal
         letter of 12th November 2013 and removal directions in  respect  of
         the Appellant.  I was also  provided  with  removal  directions  in
         respect of the child dated 18th November 2013 which were not before
         the First-tier Tribunal Judge or before myself on the error of  law
         decision.

 7. The Appellant's documents consist of:

       . those documents listed at pages 2 to 219 on the index sheet to  the
         original bundle;

       . skeleton argument;

       . supplementary documents listed at pages 1 to 45 on the index to the
         supplementary bundle of 15th October 2014.

 8. Application had been made  under  Rule  15(2A)  for  the  supplementary
    bundle documents to be admitted.   I  allowed  the  admission  of  such
    documents.

 9. It was noted as a preliminary point that at the error of  law  decision
    it was believed that no removal directions had been issued  in  respect
    of the child although it appears that such removal directions had  been
    issued but not served either on the Appellant's representatives  or  on
    the Tribunal.

10. I further noted to the representatives the  existence  of  the  Section
    117B(6) of the 2002 Act brought into force by the Immigration Act  2014
    which apply to all fresh decisions made after 28th July 2014.   It  was
    accepted that the child in this case  was  a  qualifying  child  having
    lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven  years  or
    more (having been born in the UK and lived here  all  her  life  now  a
    period of some ten years).  Accordingly the question that would have to
    be asked in respect of Section 117B(6) is whether it was reasonable  to
    ask a qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom.  I  took  the  view
    which I expressed to the parties that I was of the view that  the  best
    approach to this case was to provide an answer one way or the other  to
    that question which I was obliged to consider  in  respect  of  current
    statutory provisions.

The Proceedings - Evidence

11. The Appellant was called to give evidence.  She  identified  her  name.
    She identified the two witness statements appearing at page  4  of  the
    original bundle and page 1 of the supplementary bundle  as  being  true
    and correct.  She confirmed that her daughter was at school.  She  said
    that she had spoken to her daughter  about  going  to  Malawi  and  her
    daughter had been shocked by the suggestion as she regarded the  UK  as
    her home.  The Appellant said that she had no-one in Malawi given  that
    both her grandmother and uncle who had previously  supported  her  were
    now dead.

12. In cross-examination she said that she had come to the UK as a  student
    with her grandmother as  a  Sponsor  before  she  died  in  2008.   Her
    grandmother  had  had  cattle  which  she  had  sold  to  support  her.
    Thereafter her uncle had provided for her between 2008  and  2011.   He
    was in employment and had no family.  He died in 2011.  In terms of any
    inheritance she said that when her grandmother died the elders  in  the
    village took over her belongings.  She said that  when  her  uncle  was
    alive an individual used to bring money to her from her uncle  but  she
    had not seen him or had contact from him since her uncle had died.  She
    had had no contact from her ex-partner since he  had  left  the  UK  in
    August 2010.  She said that she had in fact had no contact with him for
    a period of time prior to him leaving the UK and she had not  tried  to
    make contact with him nor did she have any other  means  of  contacting
    him in Malawi.  She said that his parents had died some  time  ago  and
    therefore her child did not have  living  paternal  grandparents.   She
    said that she had only known her child's father whilst in the UK as  he
    was a student in this country.

13. She said it would be difficult to find a job in Malawi and that she had
    nowhere to live.  She said that she was living alone with her  daughter
    in the UK.

14. In re-examination she said that  she  and  her  partner  had  split  up
    because he wanted to return to Malawi.

15. At the conclusion I heard submissions from both representatives  and  I
    reserved my decision to consider the documents and evidence  submitted.
    I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

16. In this case the burden of proof lies on the Appellant and the standard
    of proof required for both immigration and human  rights  issues  is  a
    balance of probabilities.  As the Appellant and her dependent child are
    within the UK I am entitled to look at all circumstances existing as at
    the date of hearing.

17. The Appellant's dependent child is 10 years of  age.   She  is  female.
    The only family member that  the  evidence  discloses  is  the  child's
    mother namely the Appellant.  The child's father has  on  the  evidence
    available returned to Malawi some four years ago but the Appellant  and
    her partner had separated whilst in the UK a short time  prior  to  his
    leaving the UK.  There has been no contact between her partner and  the
    Appellant or her child since that time.  The  evidence  available  does
    not disclose any efforts made by the father to make contact with either
    the Appellant or his child or indeed of the Appellant seeking  to  make
    any real efforts feasible or not to make contact with  her  ex-partner.
    There is in my view little likelihood of the Appellant making any  such
    efforts even if  those  were  feasible  and  on  balance  the  evidence
    indicates that it is highly unlikely that  even  on  return  to  Malawi
    there would be any contact between the  Appellant  and  her  ex-partner
    either generally or more specifically for the purposes of contact  with
    the dependent child.

18. I am examining this case  outside  of  the  Immigration  Rules  but  in
    accordance with statutory provisions which have recently  been  brought
    into force in order to clarify Parliament's views as  to  circumstances
    when, particularly in respect of a child, it  could  be  said  that  an
    exercise of proportionality would be deemed at face value  to  indicate
    whether removal would be proportionate or not.

19. Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act brought into force on  28th  July  2014
    regards the continuing presence of a qualifying  child  in  the  UK  as
    being  proportionate  unless  it  would  be  reasonable  in   all   the
    circumstances of a specific case to ask such qualifying child to  leave
    the UK.  The test of qualification is whether a child has been  in  the
    UK for a period of seven years or upwards.

20. In this case the dependent child was born in the UK and has  lived  all
    her life in the UK and at no stage, so far as the  evidence  discloses,
    has she returned to Malawi or indeed left the UK.  She is now 10  years
    of age and therefore is a qualifying child having lived in the  UK  for
    over seven years.  Given her young age she has lived in the  UK  for  a
    not insignificant period of time over and above the  qualifying  period
    of seven years.

21. In terms of whether or not it is reasonable to  ask  such  a  child  to
    leave  the  UK  it  is  necessary  to  examine  firstly  the   personal
    circumstances of the family and the circumstances that would be met  on
    return to Malawi and secondly to perhaps examine in general  terms  the
    country information regarding the circumstances that would  in  general
    terms impact on such a child.

22. On the evidence available as provided by the Appellant  (and  there  is
    nothing to gainsay that which she has said),  the  Appellant  would  be
    returning to Malawi with no living family members  or  family  support.
    She has no home that she could return to and no evidence that she would
    be  able  to  find  employment.    There   is   nothing   intrinsically
    inconsistent or lacking in credibility in those assertions based on the
    evidence before me.

23.  The  general  information  concerning  Malawi  contained  within   the
    documents before me do not suggest that the Appellant as a woman  would
    find it easy to either find employment  or  lodgings  on  her  own  and
    without any family or financial support or backing.  The plight  facing
    female children in Malawi is referred to within the Human Rights  Watch
    Report within the supplementary bundle as well as within documents that
    were provided within the original bundle.  That report notes  that  one
    out of two girls in Malawi will be married before their 18th  birthday,
    some being as young as 9 or 10 when they marry.  Such  early  marriages
    and the attendance problems and abuse that can flow from such  activity
    is often as the result of poverty and those are all factors that I have
    noted and in my view are not without significance in the  circumstances
    of this case.

24. It may well be, that there are  those  cases  where  it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to remove a qualifying child from the UK if  the  specific
    and country circumstances suggest little difficulty or problems in such
    removal.  However for the features that  I  have  summarised  above  it
    would in my view be unreasonable to ask a 10 year old Malawi  girl  who
    has lived all her life in the UK to return to Malawi  with  her  mother
    when set against the personal circumstances that would be faced by  the
    mother and the circumstances within the country generally.

25. This is not a case where there are other adults who are  able  to  look
    after the child in the UK nor are  there  circumstances  that  suggests
    separation of mother and dependent female child would be anything other
    than seriously disproportionate.

26.  I  find  therefore  the  answer  to  this  case  lies  in  the   clear
    unreasonableness of removing the dependent child from the UK under  the
    terms of Section 117B of the 2002 Act and the absence of any  facts  or
    circumstances that suggest that it would be proportionate to remove the
    Appellant alone and separate mother and daughter.

27. It is with those factors in mind therefore that I  find  the  dependent
    child qualifies to remain the UK within the terms of  Section  117B  of
    the  2002  Act  and  that  it  would   be   wholly   unreasonable   and
    disproportionate in those circumstances to require the removal  of  the
    mother namely the Appellant in this case.

28. The application in this case was made prior to the major changes to the
    Immigration Rules on 9th July 2012 although the decision was  not  made
    until after that date.  However as I noted in the error of law decision
    the transitional provisions in the case of Edgehill would indicate that
    given the application remained  outstanding  then  the  old  Rules  and
    presumably the old approach to Article 8 is applicable.  I am bound  to
    follow and observe the changes to primary legislation brought about  by
    the Immigration Act 2014 in this  fresh  decision  and  accordingly  my
    examination of Article  8  of  the  ECHR  is  a  combined  analysis  of
    proportionality under the Razgar  test  and  the  statutory  provisions
    referred to above.  If it was incumbent upon  me  to  find  exceptional
    circumstances prior to an examination of this  case  under  Article  8,
    following the guidance in Gulshan and other cases then in my  view  the
    length of time that the dependent child has remained in the UK  (namely
    ten years) indicating she is well above the qualification period, would
    be those exceptional circumstances.

29.  For  all  the  reasons  provided  above  I  find  that  it  would   be
    disproportionate to remove the Appellant and her dependent child.

Notice of Decision

I allow this appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever       10th November 2014


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

A fee has been paid in this case but given my decision  there  should  be  a
refund.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever       10th November 2014


