

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: IA/51315/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 1st December 2014                         |On: 7th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Karen Monique McDonald
                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pal , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adophy, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Jamaica date of birth 1st  March  1970.
    On the 9th September 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Majid) allowed
    her appeal against a decision to refuse to vary her leave to remain and
    to  remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to  s47  of  the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006. The Secretary of State now
    has permission to appeal against that decision[1].


 2. The grounds of appeal take issue with the determination's reference  to
    the Zambrano[2] principles, and with the Tribunal's approach to Article
    8 outside of the Rules. Permission is granted on those grounds.

 3. The determination does appear to touch  upon  the  Zambrano  principles
    (paragraph 26), and various cases relating to the  'best  interests  of
    the child' are set out at length (paragraphs 18-27).  This,  Mr  Adophy
    acknowledged, is somewhat peculiar since the case did not  feature  any
    children. He speculates  that  possibly  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
    confused two cases. Ms MacDonald's case before the First-tier  Tribunal
    was a) that she qualified for indefinite leave to remain having accrued
    ten years lawful residence in the UK; failing that b) she qualified for
    leave on the basis of her  private  life  under  paragraph  276ADE,  or
    finally c) her removal would be a  disproportionate  interference  with
    her Article 8(1) rights.  None of those  questions  are  satisfactorily
    answered in this determination. It must be set aside.

 4. The parties are in agreement that the matter should be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, since it would appear that there has  not  been  a
    safe and effective first-instance hearing.   I concur.



      Decisions

 5. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

 6. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  1st
                                December 2014

-----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 20th October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Cruthers
[2] Ruiz Zambrano (European Citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-34/09

