

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51774/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th April 2014                            |On 25th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

             NARANJANA SHAMINDRA KODAGODA WIJESEKERA ARACHCHIGE


                                  Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Anzani, counsel, instructed by Nag Law
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Permission to appeal a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
      dismissed an appeal against a decision by the  respondent  dated  19th
      November 2013 to refuse him leave to  remain  as  an  adult  dependant
      relative of his father and to remove him pursuant to  s47  Immigration
      Asylum and Nationality Act 2006 was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Ransley on the grounds that it was arguable:


   a.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  erred  in  focussing  too  much  on
      dependency resulting in further errors  in  assessing  proportionality
      after the judge had accepted that the appellant  enjoyed  family  life
      with his parents; that the judge had employed phrases such as "unusual
      dependency" and "striking and unusual dependency" indicating that  the
      judge applied a test which was unlawful;  the  wrong  legal  test  was
      applied in his finding that "the relationship  between  the  appellant
      and his parents does not have the striking  and  unusual  features  of
      dependency between parents and adult child";
   b. That the judge failed to correctly apply HK (Turkey) [2010]  EWCA  Civ
      583 and overlooked an important factor that family life did not end on
      the claimant reaching the age of 18.

      Background

     2. The appellant came to the UK 6th January 2009 as a student and  was
        granted extended periods of leave until 12 April 2013.  He  applied
        for leave to remain as an adult dependant  relative  on  5th  April
        2013, such application being refused, the refusal of which  is  the
        subject of this appeal.


     3. The appellant's father came to UK 31st  October  2004;  he  claimed
        asylum in March 2005 and was refused  although  he  was  eventually
        granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  2010  under  the  legacy
        programme.

     4. The First-tier Tribunal found:



         i. The appellant's father came to the UK in 2004 and  applied  for
            asylum, such application being refused but he was  subsequently
            granted indefinite leave to remain in 2010.
        ii. The appellant has lived with his father since his  own  arrival
            in the UK in January 2009 as a student.
       iii. The appellant's mother came to the UK in 2012  and  since  then
            they have lived as a family unit.
        iv. Although the appellant's mother has siblings in Sri Lanka  (and
            they have families), there is no contact with them. His  father
            has no siblings.
         v. The appellant's paternal grandmother lives in Sri  Lanka  in  a
            care home; she has visited the UK and in October 2013 came  and
            stayed for about 5 months.
        vi. The appellant studied until April 2013 and during that time  he
            worked as permitted (20 hours a week during term time and 30-40
            hours a week during the holidays). He wishes to undertake media
            studies and set up a business with his father.
       vii.  The  appellant  has  been  and  continues  to  be  financially
            supported by his parents.
      viii. The appellant has no health problems, no learning  difficulties
            or disabilities.
        ix. The appellant's father is unwilling to and fears return to  Sri
            Lanka and thus it would be unlikely that  the  appellant  would
            see his father in Sri Lanka for some considerable time.


     5. There is no challenge to those findings.








      Error of law


     6. The appellant accepts that he cannot meet the requirements  of  the
        Immigration Rules  but  asserts  that  because  of  his  particular
        circumstances his case falls outwith the Rules and should therefore
        be considered under Article  8  outside  the  Rules.  Although  not
        expressed in those terms the First-tier Tribunal  judge  in  effect
        undertook a separate Article 8 assessment.


     7. The judge records that  the  respondent  accepted  that  there  was
        family life such as engages Article 8 but he then goes on  to  make
        an assessment of dependency, considers caselaw relevant to such  an
        assessment and finds that the dependency is in  essence  financial.
        He also records submissions by the respondent to  the  effect  that
        the ties between the appellant and his family are no more than  the
        normal emotional ties between an adult child and  his  parents.  He
        refers to the lack of evidence as to any  psychological  effect  on
        either the appellant or  his  parents  resulting  from  the  family
        separation  and  refers  to  the  lack  of  any  evidence  of   any
        detrimental effect on any of them. It may  be  that  another  judge
        would not have reached the conclusion he did as  to  whether  there
        was family life such as to engage Article 8 although of  course  he
        would in any event have taken account of the nature and  extent  of
        the family relationship in assessing potential removal  in  private
        life terms. Be that as it may, that  is  a  finding  which  is  not
        opposed by the respondent and one which, given the  "robust  family
        life" and the family circumstances is reasonable and sustainable.


     8. Ms Anzani submits that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is
        confused because it first of all accepts that family life  is  such
        as to engage Article 8 and yet then considers caselaw that goes  to
        that issue such that the discussion in connection with that infects
        the assessment of proportionality. Although, as referred to  above,
        there appears to be unnecessary consideration of caselaw given  the
        finding that there is family life such as to engage Article 8,  the
        finding of family life is unchallenged. The matters  discussed  and
        referred to by the judge form part of his consideration overall.

     9. Ms Anzani accepts that the mere fact that family  life  exists  for
        the purposes of Article 8  does  not  result  in  the  decision  to
        refuse/remove being disproportionate. She refers to  paragraphs  11
        and 12 of MT (Zimbabwe) [2007] EWCA Civ 455 essentially  confirming
        that the issue of dependency is a matter for the decision maker and
        the relationship between a parent and child would  not  necessarily
        acquire the  protection  of  the  Convention  without  evidence  of
        further elements involving more than normal emotional ties.  It  is
        difficult to understand the complaint  made:  the  judge  finds  in
        favour of the appellant as to family life and there is  nothing  in
        his commentary upon the elements that make up that assessment  that
        cannot, on his findings, be sustained.

    10. The judge clearly identified that the significant  issue  at  large
        was the proportionality of the decision.

    11. The appellant takes issue with the use of phrases such as  "unusual
        dependency" (paragraph 22) and the lack of  "striking  and  unusual
        features of dependency between his  parents  and  an  adult  child"
        (paragraph  25)  and  submits  that  this  approach   tainted   the
        proportionality assessment.

    12. In oral submissions Ms Anzani referred  to  the  judge  incorrectly
        asserting that he was not aware of the nature  of  the  appellant's
        father's asylum claim. This  is  not  correct,  the  judge  clearly
        states that he did not have full particulars (he did not).  In  any
        event this has not been  held  against  the  appellant,  the  judge
        clearly finding that he accepts that  the  father  has  a  fear  of
        return (albeit making no finding  himself  whether  such  fear  was
        objectively sustainable) would impact on his willingness to  return
        (paragraph 24). She asserted that the impact on the father  of  the
        son's removal had not been properly accounted  for.  This  was  not
        further developed and I note in any event that permission to appeal
        on that ground was specifically refused. Ms Anzani  submitted  that
        merely referring to particular issues was  insufficient;  they  had
        not been properly accounted for although she accepts that  had  she
        been limiting her challenge  to  perversity  or  irrationality  she
        would have been unlikely to succeed.

    13. Ms Anzani expressed disquiet on the grounds, it seems, of  lack  of
        relevance, that the judge had referred to the lack of any  evidence
        that the appellant  or  his  parents  had  suffered  any  detriment
        (paragraph 21). The judge has assessed the evidence before him; his
        reference to the lack of evidence  of  detriment  is  valid  as  an
        element of his assessment, just  as  taking  account  of  any  such
        evidence if it had been produced would have been valid.

    14. In so far as HK  is  concerned  Ms  Anzani  stressed  the  need  to
        recognise that dependency doesn't cease at age 18. This is  clearly
        considered and taken on board by the judge  for  example,  see  his
        findings in paragraphs 16, 21 and 24. He specifically refers to  HK
        in reaching his findings.

    15. The grounds seeking permission to  appeal  attempt  to  incorporate
        into that assessment the observation by Lord  Bingham  EB  (Kosovo)
        [2008] UKHL 41 that it would "rarely be proportionate to uphold  an
        order for removal ...... if the effect of the order is to  sever  a
        genuine and subsisting relationship between parent and  child."  Ms
        Anzani submitted that this highlighting of family life had to be an
        essential part of the proportionality assessment  and  as  such  in
        this appeal that had not  been  undertaken.  Whilst  child  is  not
        defined as other than an  individual  under  the  age  of  18,  the
        submission was that,  given  that  dependency  doesn't  cease  upon
        reaching the age of majority (as per HK) so the  severance  of  the
        family bond was not usually permissible as per EB and that this had
        not been factored in to this determination. Attractive though  this
        may appear at first blush, the combination of HK  and  EB  does  no
        more, in the context of this appeal, than set out  the  requirement
        for the decision maker to assess and reach findings on the evidence
        as a whole as to  the  import  of  the  relationship  between  this
        appellant and his mother and father. It does  not  require  greater
        weight to be placed upon the  family  life  because  Article  8  is
        engaged but it does require an assessment of  all  of  the  factors
        relevant to the appellant which includes the degree and  nature  of
        the dependency and the degree, nature and  quality  of  the  family
        life that exists.


    16. In reaching his conclusions the judge  has  expressed  his  overall
        view of the evidence before him. His use of the words "unusual" and
        "striking" are no more than the description of the extent to  which
        he considers the evidence discloses factors which  would  or  could
        have resulted in a different conclusion. They are not  evidence  of
        an unacceptably high bar to cross or that factors have  been  given
        inadequate or perverse weight. He has clearly looked at the  family
        circumstances as a whole, the appellant's personal  situation,  the
        impact on his parents and on him of refusal and has considered  the
        evidence overall. He has not  restricted  his  conclusions  to  his
        findings on dependency but has  factored  such  findings  into  his
        overall conclusion. The judge has clearly had  great  sympathy  for
        this young man and his family situation but at the end of  the  day
        he concludes that there is nothing out of the ordinary  or  out  of
        the usual which is of sufficient import to result in a finding that
        the decision to refuse to vary  leave  to  remain  and  remove  the
        appellant was disproportionate.

    17. There is no error of law in the decision such as to result  in  the
        setting aside of the determination to be remade.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision


                                    Date 17th April 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
