

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
IA/51343/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |         Decision and Reasons       |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 5 February 2016                     |         On 22 February 2016        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES

                                   Between

                           CHERISH MARIE GONZALEZ
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Herself and her Sponsor Peter Hogan
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of  Cherish  Marie  Gonzalez,  a  citizen  of  the
       Philippines born 23  February  1988,  against  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State of 19  November  2013.  That  appeal  having  been
       dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal, she now appeals  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal with permission.


    2. The application giving rise to  these  proceedings  was  for  further
       leave to remain as the unmarried partner of a British citizen,  Peter
       Hogan. The application was refused on 19 November 2013 because absent
       evidence of two years of cohabitation  they  could  not  satisfy  the
       "partner" definition that was  the  gateway  to  consideration  under
       Appendix  FM  (though  it  was  accepted  there  was  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship), and she could be expected to integrate back
       in her country of origin and so her private  life  application  under
       Rule 276ADE also failed.


    3. There was  material  sent  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  the
       hearing, by way of an adjournment application  because  of  the  late
       stage of the Appellant's pregnancy,  and  via  copies  of  the  birth
       certificate and British passport (the originals having been  sent  to
       the Home Office) for A H born in 2014, sent on 12 March 2015.


    4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal,  from  which  the
       Appellant and Mr Hogan were absent, because it was not persuaded that
       there was adequate evidence of cohabitation and  as  to  whether  the
       relationship still subsisted (alighting on the evidence of  pregnancy
       but  without  addressing  the   material   confirming   the   birth),
       additionally finding that the  Appellant's  presence  in  the  United
       Kingdom had been precarious, and that as she spoke Tagalog and  could
       work in the Philippines given her experience as a nurse, there was no
       reason to think that she would face any difficulties in reintegrating
       there.


    5. Grounds of appeal alleged that relevant considerations had  not  been
       taken into account by the First-tier Tribunal,  particularly  as  the
       birth of the child strongly pointed towards the relationship being  a
       genuine and subsisting one; additionally the evidence that  Mr  Hogan
       was unwilling to relocate to the Philippines because  of  his  strong
       family and social ties in the United Kingdom, lack  of  knowledge  of
       the culture and language of the Philippines, and his  family  history
       of skin cancer that was indicative of risks to life in  the  Tropics,
       had been given inadequate attention.


    6. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Judge  Jordan  for  the  Upper
       Tribunal on 22 October 2015, taking what to his mind was a  Robinson-
       obvious point based on the Zambrano principle that,  whether  or  not
       Peter Hogan would leave the United Kingdom, on the facts there was  a
       real possibility that the Appellant would take  the  child  from  the
       United Kingdom so violating its rights as a Union citizen.


    7. Before me the  Appellant  represented  herself,  accompanied  by  her
       Sponsor. It quickly  became  clear  that  they  may  well  have  been
       seriously let down by their representative at the First-tier Tribunal
       level, who they told me to whom they had paid very  significant  sums
       of money to secure their interests and yet who had failed  to  inform
       them of the  date  of  hearing.  The  matter  was  being  pursued  by
       complaint to the relevant regulator.


    8. Ms Everett, whose pragmatic stance may well have been  influenced  by
       the concern expressed by the Upper Tribunal as to  that  development,
       accepted that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  indeed
       appear defective for overlooking the evidence of  the  child's  birth
       that was on the court file by the time of the hearing before it.





Findings and reasons

    9. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  flawed  by  a
       material error of law. Patently the existence of  a  British  citizen
       child is a material  consideration  and  the  correspondence  on  the
       Tribunal's file included a letter apparently sent several days before
       the appeal hearing  which  enclosed  a  copy  birth  certificate  and
       passport, demonstrating that the Appellant and her partner  were  now
       the parents of a British citizen child. Even were that  evidence  not
       before the First-tier Tribunal (contrary to the  ordinary  course  of
       the postal system), it may be admitted, as one of the  exceptions  to
       the general prohibition on considering fresh evidence at the error of
       law stage, as demonstrating a material error of fact  for  which  the
       Appellant was not responsible. The existence  of  such  a  child  was
       highly relevant to the disposition of the appeal as it  brought  into
       play the need for a "best  interests"  assessment.  Additionally  the
       First-tier Tribunal appears to have  overlooked  the  fact  that  the
       Respondent had in fact not put the genuineness of the relationship in
       issue.


   10. Unfortunately neither party engaged with the directions made by Judge
       Jordan. They will need to be given attention  on  any  re-hearing  of
       this appeal. I encouraged the Appellant and her Sponsor to seek legal
       representation,  notwithstanding  their  bad  experiences   so   far.
       Doubtless they will take account of that advice if it is within their
       means to do so.


          Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and the appeal is remitted for hearing to the First-tier Tribunal.





Signed:                                            Date: 5 February 2016


[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


