

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/51101/2014
                                                               IA/51103/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decisions & Promulgation    |
|On April 11, 2016                    |On  April 14, 2016          |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MISS SELINA ANIM ASARE
                                    [D A]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms McCarthy, Counsel, instructed by BWF Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The respondent in these proceedings was  the  appellant  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal. From hereon I have referred to the  parties  as
       they were in the First-tier Tribunal so that for  example  reference
       to the respondent is a reference to the Secretary of State  for  the
       Home Department.

    2. The Appellants are citizens of Ghana.  The  first  and  second-named
       appellants  are  mother  and  daughter.  The  first-named  appellant
       entered the United Kingdom as a visitor on September  10,  2006  and
       she became  an  overstayer  after  January  2008.  The  second-named
       appellant was born in the United Kingdom on [ ] 2007 and the  first-
       named appellant's evidence was that she was pregnant on  arrival  in
       the United Kingdom on September 10, 2006.

    3. On July 15, 2014 the first-named appellant applied for both  herself
       and son leave to remain on the basis of  family  and  private  life.
       This was refused with no right of appeal on September 17,  2014.  On
       October 22, 2014 a  pre-action  protocol  letter  was  sent  to  the
       respondent and on November 5, 2014 the respondent agreed to issue  a
       removal  direction  thereby  generating  a  right  of  appeal.   The
       respondent refused their applications on December 10, 2014 and  gave
       directions for their removal under section 10 of the Immigration and
       Asylum Act 1999.

    4. The appellants appealed those decisions under section 82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on December  24,  2014.
       No right of appeal was given to the second-named  appellant  but  on
       March 2, 2015 a right of appeal was extended as a preliminary issue.



    5. The appeals came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Shepherd
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on August 20, 2015 and  in  a
       decision promulgated on October 5, 2015 she allowed the  appellant's
       appeal under both the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.

    6.  The  respondent  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  October  8,  2015
       submitting the Judge had erred by failing to give  adequate  reasons
       and applying the test on "reasonableness" incorrectly.

    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Saffer on March 3, 2016 on the basis the grounds were arguable.

    8. The matter came before me on the above date and I heard  submissions
       from both representatives. I reserved my decision.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  I  see
       no reason to make one now and no submissions  were  made  suggesting
       that I should.

SUBMISSIONS

   10. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted the Judge had failed to  have  regard
       to the guidance in EV (Philippines) & Ors v Secretary of  state  for
       the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 and she  failed  to  explain
       why his ties to the  United  Kingdom  outweighed  reasonableness  of
       returning to Ghana. The fact the child had been  educated  here  was
       not a trump card as evidenced  by  the  Tribunal's  approach  in  AM
       (s.117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC). The first-named appellant had
       no status in the United Kingdom and following the guidance in EV and
       AM it was not unreasonable to require both appellants to relocate to
       Ghana. The fact the second-named appellant had been here  for  eight
       years did  not  mean  the  appellants  had  an  automatic  right  to
       settlement here. She submitted the Judge had erred and the  decision
       should be set aside and remade.

   11. Ms McCarthy submitted the decision was well reasoned and  the  judge
       had had regard to all of the evidence and reached findings  open  to
       her. The respondent's grounds were a mere disagreement and  did  not
       amount to an error in law. The Judge correctly identified the  Rules
       and law and based on her findings the first-named appellant  had  no
       family or support in Ghana, her conclusions were open  to  her.  The
       allowing of the appeals under the Rules was open to  the  Judge  and
       the respondent's appeal should be dismissed.

   12.  Having  heard  the  representatives'  submissions,  I  reserved  my
       decision.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   13. The first-named appellant came to the United Kingdom  as  a  visitor
       but following the expiry of her visa she became  an  overstayer  who
       did not come to the attention of the authorities until she lodged an
       application to remain. The Judge, in hearing the evidence,  accepted
       her claim that when she arrived she was already pregnant.  She  made
       that finding partly because the respondent had  not  challenged  her
       claim. The appellant's evidence, unchallenged by the respondent, was
       that her husband  had  rejected  her  when  he  discovered  she  was
       pregnant and she had no maternal family to turn  to  in  Ghana.  The
       only support she now had available to her was in the United Kingdom.
       These findings of fact were the cornerstone to the Judge's  ultimate
       consideration of the applications before her.

   14. The Judge accepted that she was financially  supported  by  her  own
       family who lived her legally because  she  had  no  other  means  of
       support. She also accepted that the second-named appellant had  been
       brought up by his UK family and in the absence of anything to  rebut
       the first-named appellant's claims about her  husband  (the  child's
       father) the Judge concluded he would not be interested in them after
       all this time. At paragraph [80] of her decision she concluded  that
       this was central to her assessment.

   15. The Judge was fully aware of the respondent's position  because  she
       set out both the relevant content of  the  refusal  letter  and  the
       respondent's submissions earlier in her decision. She  noted  errors
       in the respondent's refusal letter and examined all of the documents
       to ensure she had a full understanding of the pertinent points.

   16. The Judge considered the first-named appellant's claim under Section
       E-LTRPT of Appendix FM  and  ultimately  found  the  paragraph  EX.1
       applied. She considered the  second-named  appellant's  claim  under
       paragraph 276ADE HC 395 and allowed his appeal under that Rule.

   17. Both EX.1 and 276ADE(iv) have a "reasonableness" test to consider.

   18. Paragraph EX.1 required the appellant to show she had a genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and  that  it  would
       not be reasonable to expect the child to leave the  United  Kingdom.
       Paragraph 276ADE(iv) HC 395 requires the second-named  appellant  to
       show that at the date of the application he had lived  here  for  at
       least seven years and it would not be reasonable for  the  child  to
       leave the United Kingdom. The child was born on June 3, 2007 and the
       application was submitted on July 15, 2014 and  the  respondent  was
       required to consider his appeal under that section.

   19. The Judge's  decision  from  paragraph  [86]  onwards  is  confusing
       because she considered all matters at the same time.  The  case  law
       advanced by Ms Brocklesby-Weller is of course case law  in  relation
       to article 8. What has been overlooked by  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  is
       that the Judge allowed these appeals  under  the  Rules,  first  and
       foremost, and if an error in law is to be demonstrated  then  it  is
       necessary for Ms Brocklesby-Weller to persuade me that the Judge was
       wrong to allow the appeals under Section EX.1  of  Appendix  FM  and
       paragraph 276ADE HC 395 respectively.

   20. I accept in considering "reasonableness" it would not  be  wrong  to
       have regard to the factors set out in EV. Whilst the Judge  did  not
       quote this piece of case law I am satisfied that she did have regard
       to the content of it. In the case of the second-named appellant  she
       was aware of how long he had been here, his age, where and how  long
       he had been educated for, the fact he had been  born  here  and  had
       never been to Ghana and knew only family here as well as the lack of
       ties there  for  him  in  Ghana.  She  concluded  it  would  not  be
       reasonable for the appellant to be required to  go  to  Ghana.  This
       finding was open to her and consequently there is no error in law in
       respect of his claim.

   21. Having allowed his claim, the Judge also considered the claim first-
       named appellant's claim under EX.1 and having  accepted  she  had  a
       genuine and subsisting relationship  and  having  already  found  it
       would not be reasonable to require her son to go to Ghana she had to
       allow the appeal under Section EX.1. There can be no  error  in  her
       approach.

   22.  Section  117B  factors  are  not  matters  that   came   into   her
       consideration under the Rules. In paragraph [94]  she  allowed  both
       appeals under article 8 ECHR with her reasoning for those  decisions
       being set out in the paragraphs  that  preceded  it.  I  accept  the
       Judge's conclusion on the article 8 claims and there is therefore no
       error in this decision.

DECISION

   23. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
       involve the making of an error on a  point  of  law.  I  uphold  the
       original decisions and dismiss the appeal.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD

No fee award was made and I uphold that decision.


Signed:                                 Dated:

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
