
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/51699/2013
                                                               IA/51700/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 June 2015                      |On 16 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                 ZAINAB MORO
                            Mr mohammmed masahudu
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Rahman, Counsel, instructed by Zuriel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before the Upper Tribunal following  an  earlier
    hearing on 23 February 2015 which resulted in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal on the appellants' appeal being set aside  for  error  of
    law.

 2. We reproduce the error of law decision, described  as  a  Decision  and
    Directions, as follows.

         "1.  The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State.
             However, for convenience I refer to the parties as  they  were
             before the First-tier Tribunal.

         2.   Thus, the first appellant is a citizen of Ghana,  born  on  10
             October 1981.  The second appellant was born on 26  June  1966
             and claims to be a  national  of  Liberia,  although  this  is
             doubted by the respondent.

         3.   It seems that the first  appellant  made  an  application  for
             leave to remain on human rights grounds, on 25 September 2010,
             the second appellant being a dependant  on  that  application.
             After an initial refusal of the application,  the  matter  was
             reconsidered and a subsequent decision made on 31 October 2013
             maintained the original refusal.

         4.   On  11  November  2013  decisions  were  made  to  remove  the
             appellants under section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum  Act
             1999 and it is against those  decisions  that  the  appellants
             appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

         5.   The matter came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Boardman at a
             hearing on 4 August 2014.  He dismissed the appeals under  the
             Immigration Rules but allowed  the  appeals  on  human  rights
             grounds with reference to Article 8 of the  ECHR.   Permission
             to appeal  against  his  decision  having  been  granted,  the
             appeals came before me.

             The grounds and submissions

         6.   The grounds of appeal submitted by the respondent are detailed
             but can be summarised as follows.  The  grounds  rely  on  the
             decision in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192  and  refer  to
             Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT
             00640 (IAC), in terms of the extent to  which  the  First-tier
             Judge  was  entitled  to  consider  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.
             Similarly, the decision in Nagre v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) is relied on.   It  is
             argued that the First-tier Judge failed  to  provide  adequate
             reasons as to why the  appellants'  circumstances  are  either
             compelling or exceptional.

         7.   Various criticisms are made of Judge  Boardman's  findings  of
             fact in terms of the conclusion that the second  appellant  is
             from Liberia  despite  the  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
             between the first and second appellants,  and  other  evidence
             indicative of the second appellant in fact being from Ghana.

         8.   It is further contended in the grounds that although reference
             was made by Judge Boardman to Section 117B of the  Immigration
             Act 2014 ("the 2014 Act") in  terms  of  little  weight  being
             given to private life or a relationship formed when  a  person
             is in the UK unlawfully or has precarious status, this had not
             been factored into the judge's reasons.

         9.   So far as the best interests of the children are concerned, it
             is  argued  in  the  grounds  that  there  was  an  inadequate
             assessment of the extent to which their needs could be met  in
             Ghana or Liberia, or Spain, where  the  second  appellant  was
             apparently granted refugee status some years ago.  Reliance is
             placed on the decision in  EV  (Philippines)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

         10.  It is further argued in the grounds that there was  no  reason
             why the  appellants  could  not  continue  their  family  life
             together either in Ghana or Spain and any  reluctance  on  the
             part of the second appellant  to  go  to  either  country  was
             merely  a  question  of  choice  rather  than  necessity.   As
             Ghanaian citizens it would be in the children's best interests
             to relocate to Ghana where they could enjoy  the  benefits  of
             being Ghanaian citizens.

         11.  Even if the second appellant is not from Ghana,  it  would  be
             reasonable for him to relocate there as he and his  wife  were
             fully aware throughout their time in the UK  that  their  stay
             was precarious and their family life was established  in  that
             knowledge.  The evidence suggested that  the  first  appellant
             does have ties to Ghana including the fact that  they  entered
             into a proxy Ghanaian marriage in 2008.

         12.   The  second  appellant  had  not  provided  any  evidence  to
             establish  that  he  had  made  enquiries  with  the   Spanish
             authorities about his entitlement to return there and in terms
             of his and his family's ability to settle there.

         13.  In oral submissions Mr Avery relied on the grounds of  appeal,
             reiterating that the  evidence  strongly  suggested  that  the
             second appellant  was  in  fact  Ghanaian.   Although  in  the
             determination   the   First-tier    judge    had    identified
             discrepancies in the evidence which he described as "odd",  he
             did not consider the evidence in the round.

         14.  Furthermore, it was submitted that it was not clear why,  even
             if the second appellant did leave Liberia  as  a  refugee,  he
             could not return there now, given that it is 15 years since he
             made his refugee claim.

         15.  Mr Osadebe's submissions essentially relied on the  fact  that
             the First-tier Judge had heard evidence  from  the  first  and
             second appellant and had made his findings  in  the  light  of
             that evidence.  It was submitted that he was entitled to  make
             the  findings  that  he  did.   The  judge  had  balanced  the
             interests of both parties and was entitled  to  conclude  that
             the first appellant had lost ties to Ghana and  that  none  of
             them would be  able  to  go  to  Spain.   It  was  the  second
             appellant's evidence which indicated  that  he  would  not  be
             readmitted to Spain and the judge was entitled to have  regard
             to that evidence.

         16.  Judge Boardman had  made  an  assessment  of  where  the  best
             interests of the children lay and  that  formed  part  of  his
             assessment of proportionality.

             My conclusions

         17.  The appellants have three children, born on 19  May  2009,  24
             April 2010 and 9 January 2013.  All those children  were  born
             in the UK.  There was evidence  which  appears  to  have  been
             undisputed  that  the  eldest  child  suffers   from   autism.
             Evidence in relation to his  condition,  to  which  the  judge
             referred, came from a letter from his school,  dated  16  July
             2014.  The evidence was that he was on the  school's  register
             of special educational needs because of  his  difficulties  in
             social situations, with language and with  communication.   To
             summarise, his needs were such  that  he  required  specialist
             support.  At [39] the judge  recorded  that  the  child  found
             change difficult, such as the beginning and end of activities,
             school visits and moving to a  new  class.   Each  had  to  be
             approached  with  care,  with  additional  staff  and   visual
             resources to make sure he understood what was  happening.   At
             [40] it is recorded that he had a complex package  of  support
             at his school and  had  daily  speech  and  language  classes.
             Other aspects of his education and  the  support  he  receives
             were also referred to in the determination.

         18.  It was accepted on behalf of the appellants that they are  not
             able to meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
             terms of Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE.

         19.  As to the criticism of Judge Boardman for having undertaken  a
             'pure' Article 8 consideration, outside the Immigration Rules,
             it  is  important  to  note  what  is  said  at  [68]  of  the
             determination.  There it is evident that there  was  agreement
             between  the  parties  that  apart  from   not   meeting   the
             requirements of the Immigration Rules the appeal 'fell  to  be
             determined  under  Article  8  ECHR  outside  the  immigration
             Rules'.

         20.  Even  without  it  having  been  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
             respondent before the First-tier Tribunal that this was a case
             that called for consideration under Article 8 proper, I cannot
             see in any event that the judge erred in undertaking  such  an
             assessment, whether on the state of the  authorities  as  they
             were at the time or subsequently.  At the very  least,  having
             regard to the health condition of the appellants' eldest  son,
             Judge Boardman was entitled, if not  bound,  to  undertake  an
             Article 8 assessment outside the Rules.  It  is  evident  that
             the judge had regard to all the relevant authorities  as  they
             stood at the date of  the  decision  and  incidentally,  being
             unaffected by, for example, the decision in Singh and Khalid v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 74.
              It is as well to state also, that the  respondent's  reliance
             in the grounds on MF (Nigeria) is misconceived, insofar as the
             decision is relied on to suggest that  the  Immigration  Rules
             are a "complete code".  That applies to deportation cases  but
             not otherwise.

         21.  At [71] Judge Boardman indicated that subject to any  contrary
             submissions he was minded to find that, in summary, it was  in
             the best interests of the eldest child to remain in the UK  in
             order to continue with support  for  his  special  educational
             needs,  that  moving  to  Ghana  would  not  be  in  his  best
             interests, that it would also be in  his  best  interests  for
             both his parents to remain in the UK with him, because of  his
             special needs and his young age; and finally,  that  his  best
             interests and  those  of  his  two  siblings  were  a  primary
             consideration  but  not  a  paramount  consideration  in   the
             balancing exercise under Article 8.  At [72] it is stated that
             the Presenting Officer made no contrary submissions.  It seems
             to me that this was the basis for the judge's  conclusions  at
             [76] which reflected his preliminary views put to the  parties
             at [71].  In the circumstances, those conclusions were open to
             him.

         22.  There is a separate subheading  in  the  determination  headed
             'The question whether the Appellant's husband has ever been to
             Ghana'.  In the paragraphs that follow the judge expressed his
             conclusions on that issue.  It is expressly stated that he had
             taken into  account  all  the  challenges  on  behalf  of  the
             respondent in the decision letter and in the oral  submissions
             before him, the witness statements, birth certificates and the
             family questionnaire.  It was noted that on two of  the  birth
             certificates it is stated that the second appellant  was  from
             Ghana, a matter which the judge found "odd".  However, he went
             on to refer to the third birth certificate  stating  that  the
             second appellant was from Liberia and, taking into account the
             evidence of the appellants, concluded that the information  in
             the birth certificates did not undermine  the  credibility  of
             the second appellant's claim to be from Liberia.

         23.  In the same paragraph he referred to the family  questionnaire
             which states that the second appellant's fourth child was  now
             living  in  Ghana,  again  a  matter  which  he  found  "odd".
             However, he noted subsequent evidence about the child's mother
             being a Ghanaian and taking  into  account  the  rest  of  the
             evidence concluded that this was not a matter that  undermined
             the credibility of the second appellant's  claim  to  be  from
             Liberia.  Similarly, in  relation  to  the  statement  in  the
             family questionnaire that the second appellant "fled Ghana  on
             account of persecution in his country of origin"  was  also  a
             matter that was considered to be "odd"  but  the  judge  noted
             other evidence from the second appellant to the effect that he
             fled Liberia in 1982 and was granted refugee status  in  Spain
             as a result.

         24.  The question of whether the second appellant met the mother of
             his fourth child in Algeria or in Spain, he concluded did  not
             undermine what he considered to be other  consistent  evidence
             that he is from Liberia.

         25.  In the  light  of  all  those  considerations  the  conclusion
             reached was that the second appellant was from Liberia and had
             never been to Ghana.

         26.   Although  the   grounds   and   submissions   highlight   the
             inconsistencies in the evidence in terms of whether the second
             appellant has ever been to Ghana and whether  in  fact  he  is
             Liberian  as  he  claims,  these  it  seems  to  me  are  mere
             disagreements with the judge's assessment of the evidence.  It
             is true that  the  First-tier  Judge  did  not  refer  to  the
             evidence that  the  parties  entered  into  a  proxy  Ghanaian
             marriage in 2008 but in terms of whether the second  appellant
             had ever been to Ghana and whether he is in fact from Liberia,
             in  the  light  of  all  the  other  evidence  considered  and
             evaluated by Judge  Boardman,  that  is  not  an  omission  so
             significant as to undermine his findings.  Although  he  noted
             the Ghanaian proxy marriage as  a  matter  relied  on  by  the
             respondent in his summary of the refusal letter (at  [9]),  it
             does not appear that either appellant was asked  questions  in
             cross-examination about  the  proxy  marriage,  and  nor  were
             submissions made on the point on behalf of the respondent.

         27.  Judge Boardman heard the  evidence  of  the  appellants  which
             included  cross-examination.   He  had  the   opportunity   to
             evaluate their evidence at the hearing.  Whether or not  other
             conclusions were open to him on the evidence is not the point.
              In my judgement he was entitled to  conclude  as  he  did  in
             terms of the second appellant's country of origin and  whether
             or not he had ever been to Ghana.

         28.  As to whether the appellants, with their children, could  live
             in Liberia  or  Spain,  Judge  Boardman  accepted  the  second
             appellant's evidence that he fled persecution in  Liberia  and
             was granted refugee status in Spain as a  result.   Indeed,  I
             cannot see that this is disputed on behalf of the  respondent.
             The fact that it is suggested that the appellants  could  live
             in Spain together as a family  tends  to  support  the  second
             appellant's evidence in this respect.

         29.  I note that the notice of decision itself, in respect  of  the
             first appellant, is predicated on the  basis  that  the  first
             appellant would be removed to Ghana,  the  stated  country  of
             removal in the decision.  The notice of decision in respect of
             the second appellant is blank as to the  country  of  removal.
             However, in the refusal letter on page 5 it states as follows:
             'Even if we believed that  [the  second  appellant]  was  from
             Liberia, which we do not, we are not asking him to  return  to
             Liberia.'  There is then reference to their ability to live in
             Ghana.

         30.  All that aside, I  do  find  that  the  First-tier  Judge  was
             entitled to conclude that the family could not  live  together
             in Liberia, he having found that the first appellant  and  her
             children have no connection with Liberia, and that the  second
             appellant fled Liberia in 1982 and was granted refugee  status
             in Spain as a result.  It does not seem to me that  there  was
             information before the First-tier Judge which  indicated  that
             the situation in Liberia  was  such  as  to  make  possible  a
             finding that the appellant would no longer be at  risk  there,
             or that it would in any event otherwise be reasonable for  the
             family to relocate there in  circumstances  where  the  second
             appellant left that country when he was 16 years  of  age,  in
             1982.

         31.  In relation  to  Ghana,  Judge  Boardman  accepted  the  first
             appellant's evidence that the only family member in Ghana with
             whom she has any contact is her brother in Takoradi, and  that
             her other family  members  are  against  her  because  of  her
             mother's opposition to her marriage.  He also found  that  she
             had not lived in Ghana since  1999.   He  concluded  that  the
             first appellant's connection with Ghana  is  not  strong.   He
             went on to find that the second appellant had  never  been  to
             Ghana and that he no longer has any connection with the mother
             of his fourth  child.   Further,  he  found  that  the  second
             appellant has no direct connection with Ghana  except  through
             the first appellant.  The  children,  similarly  he  concluded
             have no direct connection with Ghana except through the  first
             appellant.

         32.  Those findings were all open to Judge Boardman on the evidence
             before him.  He noted at [91] that the  second  appellant  had
             indicated that he  would  not  go  to  Ghana  with  the  first
             appellant and their children if the  appeals  were  dismissed.
             In the same paragraph he went on to conclude as  follows:  "it
             would be unreasonable to expect him to do so, in light  of  my
             finding that he has never been to Ghana."

         33.  At [115b.] (the numbering is repeated) he  again  referred  to
             the second appellant as having no direct connection with Ghana
             except through the first appellant and stated that  'it  would
             be unreasonable to expect him to go there, for reasons already
             given'.  In relation to that conclusion however, I do consider
             that the First-tier Judge has not  given  legally  sustainable
             reasons for concluding that it would be unreasonable  for  the
             second appellant to live in Ghana.

         34.  The ostensible reason referred to at [91b.] is that  it  would
             be unreasonable to expect him to do so in  the  light  of  the
             finding that he had never been  to  Ghana.   However,  such  a
             conclusion it seems to me would mean that any partner would be
             entitled to resist removal simply on the basis that  they  had
             never been to the country to which their partner and  children
             were to be removed.  That in  my  judgement  is  an  untenable
             proposition which would have the  potential  substantially  to
             undermine the system of immigration control.  Furthermore,  it
             cannot be determinative of the question of whether it would be
             reasonable to expect a person to relocate to  the  country  of
             origin of their partner the mere fact that they have indicated
             that they  would  not  go  there.   In  these  respects  I  am
             satisfied that the First-tier Judge erred in law.

         35.   Similarly,  although  it  was  concluded   that   the   first
             appellant's connections with Ghana are not  strong,  she  does
             nevertheless, even on the judge's findings, have a  connection
             with Ghana, having been born there and spent the  majority  of
             her life there.  It does also seem to  me  to  be  significant
             that the appellants underwent a  proxy  Ghanaian  marriage  in
             2008 which is indicative of  a  more  recent  connection  than
             found by the First-tier Judge, and a  matter  not  taken  into
             account by  him  on  the  question  of  return.  There  is  no
             inconsistency in my conclusion here with regard to  the  proxy
             marriage, which in this respect relates to a  different  issue
             from that arising in relation to where the second appellant is
             from and whether he had ever been to Ghana.

         36.  I do not accept that there is any error of law in the  judge's
             assessment of the extent to which the eldest  child  would  be
             able to receive treatment for his condition in Ghana.  At [50]
             there is reference to the first appellant's evidence in  terms
             of the available treatment for her eldest son in  Ghana.   The
             first appellant accepted that  background  evidence  indicated
             that there was a medical centre in Kumasi which could  provide
             treatment for him but there would  be  no  education  for  him
             there she asserted.  She gave other evidence about the  extent
             to which he could be educated.  Furthermore, the  letter  from
             the  child's  school  dated  16  July  2014   also   contained
             information about the extent to which their son could  receive
             treatment for his autism in Ghana and the extent to  which  he
             would be accepted in the community  or  in  his  local  school
             because of the views of society towards children with autism.

         37.  Whilst, as is set out in the grounds, there was information in
             the refusal letter about the  availability  of  treatment,  in
             terms of speech therapy and special  needs  schools,  it  does
             seem to me that there was a basis for the judge's  conclusions
             in terms of the inability of the appellants' eldest  child  to
             be provided in Ghana with the intensive support and  treatment
             that he is receiving in the UK.  Criticisms  could  have  been
             made of the judge's reliance on the information in the  letter
             from the school dated 16 July 2014 in terms of  the  expertise
             of the writer as to conditions in Ghana, although such a point
             was not taken on behalf of the respondent before me or in  the
             grounds.

         38.  Furthermore, the judge's provisional indication of  where  the
             best interests of that  child  lay  was  not  contradicted  in
             submissions, as I have already observed.

         39.  Nevertheless, I am satisfied that Judge Boardman  did  err  in
             law  in  his  conclusion  to  the  effect  that  it  would  be
             unreasonable to expect the second appellant to move  to  Ghana
             with the first appellant if she  were  removed  there.   I  am
             similarly satisfied that the assessment of the strength of the
             first appellant's ties to Ghana was  inadequate,  taking  into
             account the proxy marriage in 2008.

         40.  Whilst Judge Boardman did refer  to  the  public  interest  as
             expressed in Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and
             Asylum Act 2002 as regards the limited weight to be  given  to
             private or their family life as  partners  established  whilst
             the appellants were in the UK unlawfully, I  cannot  see  that
             that statutory indication of where the  public  interest  lies
             has  been  given  appropriate  recognition  in  the  balancing
             exercise.

         41.  One of the  factors  in  the  balancing  exercise  taken  into
             account by Judge Boardman is that it would be unreasonable  to
             expect the second appellant to go to  Ghana  but,  as  I  have
             found, that conclusion is not a sustainable one on  the  basis
             of the reasons he gave.   Similarly,  the  assessment  of  the
             first appellant's connections with  Ghana  I  consider  to  be
             flawed for the reasons I have  given.   Although  account  was
             taken of the children's best interests, those  best  interests
             are but one factor to be taken  into  account  and  cannot  be
             determinative.

         42.  In terms of whether the family could live in Spain, it appears
             to be accepted on both sides that  the  second  appellant  had
             lawful residence there having  been  granted  refugee  status.
             The only evidence of his no longer being  able  to  enter  and
             live in Spain was the second appellant's own evidence.  Whilst
             the assessment of that evidence was a matter  for  the  First-
             tier Judge, in circumstances where there is no  evidence  that
             the second appellant had ever  made  any  enquiries  with  the
             Spanish authorities about his entitlement to  return  and  his
             family's ability to settle there, I do not consider  that  his
             conclusions in this respect are sustainable.  Where, as  here,
             it is asserted in the refusal letter that the family would  be
             able to reside in Spain, it is reasonable to expect the second
             appellant  to  have  provided  evidence  in  relation  to  his
             inability to reside  in  Spain  with  his  family.   In  these
             circumstances, Judge Boardman's conclusion that they would not
             be entitled to reside there is, on the  evidence  before  him,
             unsustainable.

         43.  There is no contradiction in that conclusion  when  considered
             with my conclusions as to the adequacy of the judge's findings
             concerning Liberia.  The  circumstances  of  his  having  left
             Liberia, in fear  of  persecution,  and  of  his  having  been
             granted refugee status in Spain, are plainly different.

         44.  Having concluded that in the respects to which I have referred
             the First-tier Judge erred in law, I am satisfied  that  those
             errors of law are such as to require the decision  to  be  set
             aside.  The decision will be re-made in the Upper Tribunal  at
             a further hearing.

         45.  The findings of fact to which I have referred  are  preserved,
             except insofar as they are infected by the errors of  law.   I
             will hear submissions from the parties at the further  hearing
             in terms of what other findings of fact should be preserved.

                                 DIRECTIONS

               a) Any further evidence relied on by either party  is  to  be
                  filed and served no later than 14  days  before  the  next
                  date of hearing.

               b) Any  further  oral  evidence  to  be  relied  on  must  be
                  contained within a comprehensive further witness statement
                  such that there is no need for any examination-in-chief of
                  the witness.

               c) All further evidence relied on by  either  party  must  be
                  contained in an indexed and paginated bundle.

               d) The appellants are to note what  is  said  at  [42]  above
                  about the present lack of evidence from the appellants  of
                  their inability to live in Spain."

 3. Thus, the appeal  comes  back  before  us  for  the  re-making  of  the
    decision.

 4. Further evidence was submitted on behalf of the appellant consisting of
    witness statements from the appellant and information  from  a  Spanish
    immigration lawyer in relation to the ability of the  second  appellant
    to obtain residence in Spain. We heard further oral evidence.

    The oral evidence

 5. The first appellant, Zainab Moro, explained in examination-in-chief the
    circumstances in which the Ghanaian proxy marriage in 2008 between  her
    and her husband took place.  In summary,  she  said  that  because  her
    husband is not Ghanaian and no one knows him  they  decided  that  they
    should undertake that marriage in the community where she  grew  up  so
    that the community would recognise her marriage to him for the sake  of
    her children. The rest of the ceremony was done in the UK with  friends
    and family.  Her mother was one of those present at  the  reception  in
    the UK.  During the Ghanaian ceremony the appellant was present on  the
    phone.  Her husband was not.  It was just her and her  mother.   During
    that ceremony  in  Ghana  members  of  her  family  were  there.   This
    consisted of her father's extended family and family  on  her  mother's
    side.  It was conducted by a Muslim 'priest'.

 6. Referring to her previous evidence before the First-tier Tribunal about
    the  difficulties  between  her  and  her  mother,  those  difficulties
    occurred after the marriage ceremony.

 7. In cross-examination she said that her  mother  visits  Ghana  now  and
    again with her mother's other children.  She has a place there.

 8. In re-examination she said that she is still estranged from her mother.
     Although her mother wants to  see  the  children,  she  finds  it  too
    difficult for her to see her son because of her son's  condition.   She
    is protecting her son from the rest of the family.

 9. In answer to our questions she explained the  last  answer  by  stating
    that he has special needs and they would  see  her  son  as  "something
    else".  Her mother already thinks that she is a failure because of  her
    choice of husband and seeing her son (in  her  mind)  would  prove  the
    point to her.  She is not comfortable for her to meet her son, although
    her husband wants her to meet him.  She knows how other members of  her
    family relate to their son.  Her mother  does  not  know  that  he  has
    special needs.  Some of the family who have seen him do know that there
    is something wrong with him and they call him all sorts of names.

10. In relation to the proxy marriage  certificate,  it  is  hers  and  her
    husband's signatures at the bottom of the page.   When  she  needed  to
    register her son's birth in the UK, she asked the imam to  provide  her
    with a certificate so that she could  register  her  son's  birth.  She
    obtained the certificate without her signatures on  in  2010  which  is
    when they then signed the document in the UK.

    Submissions

11. Ms Brocklesby-Weller  said  that  the  contents  of  the  documents  in
    relation to the second appellant obtaining residence in Spain were  not
    disputed.

12. So far as the Immigration Rules are concerned, it was  accepted  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on behalf of the appellants that they  are  not
    able to meet the requirements of those Rules.  The test now however, is
    whether there would be very significant obstacles  to  the  appellants'
    integration into Ghana.

13. It would not be unreasonable for the second appellant to join his  wife
    in Ghana. The evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the
    second appellant's  parents  were  from  Ghana.   The  first  appellant
    arrived in 1999.  She was educated in Ghana  and  her  formative  years
    were spent there.  She gave evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    recorded at [42] that she has a younger brother there.  English is  the
    national language.

14. In an interview on 30 October 2013 the second appellant  said  that  he
    speaks Hausa and English as well as a little  bit  of  Ashanti.   There
    would be no linguistic barrier to his continuing family life in  Ghana.
    The fact that he expressed a wish not to go to Ghana does not  make  it
    unreasonable to expect him to do so.

15. The First-tier Judge had concluded that it was in the best interests of
    the appellants' eldest child, Z, to remain in the UK.  However, that is
    not the end of the matter.  We were referred  to  the  decision  in  EV
    (Philippines) and others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  All three of the children could go back to  Ghana
    with the appellants.

16. The fact that the eldest child is receiving professional  treatment  in
    the UK does not mean it would be unreasonable for him  to  relocate  to
    Ghana.   There  was  limited  medical  evidence  in  relation  to   his
    condition.  Even though treatment in Ghana may not be the same  as  the
    UK, that is not determinative.  There is no Article  3  case  here.  We
    were also referred to the decision in GS (India) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  40  in  terms  of  the  inter-
    relationship between Article 3 and Article 8.  A  claim  that  did  not
    succeed under Article 3 would need something extra in order to be  able
    to succeed under Article 8.  There was no obligation to medically treat
    a person in the UK.  The expense to the public purse has  to  be  taken
    into account.

17. Section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the
    2002 Act") is relevant.  Its provisions apply in the  circumstances  of
    these appeals. We were referred in detail to those provisions.

18. There would  be  no  interference  with  family  life  so  far  as  the
    appellants  or  their  children  are  concerned.   There  would  be  an
    interference  with  private  life  but  that  interference   would   be
    proportionate.

19.  Mr  Rahman  referred  us  to  [50]  of  the    First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination in which the evidence of  the first appellant is recorded
    to the effect that the first appellant could not go to  live  with  her
    brother in Ghana and that she did not know  his  financial  status  but
    that he was "barely surviving" and living in one room.  The appellants'
    eldest child needs to be in Accra because of his condition.  The  first
    appellant's brother does not live in Accra.

20. We were referred to the  employment  history  of  the  appellants,  the
    second appellant having worked as an ambulance driver  for  ten  years,
    having arrived in the UK in 2000. The first appellant had worked in the
    health care industry.   If they are given leave  to  remain,  they  are
    healthy adults who could cater for themselves.  It is  true  that  they
    worked without permission  and  therefore  could  not  be  said  to  be
    financially  independent.  Similarly,  their  son  'Z'  is  to  receive
    treatment so in that respect s.117 of the 2002 Act is against them.

21. We were referred to the letter from Buxton School dated 16 July 2014 in
    relation to Z's autism.  The best interests of Z are to remain  in  the
    UK.

22. It  was  conceded  that  the  appellants  are  not  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

23. It was submitted that the second appellant would not be allowed legally
    to reside in Spain, although he previously had a residence permit.   He
    has sought an extension of his visa and sent his travel document to the
    Home Office but he did not receive it back until two  years  later,  by
    which time it had expired. He would not be in possession of any  travel
    document which would allow him to be removed to Ghana, and  he  has  no
    passport. The only way for him  to  get  a  travel  document  would  be
    through the Liberian Embassy but he is a refugee from Liberia. It would
    be impossible for him to be returned to Ghana.

24. As was recorded by the First-tier Tribunal, the school in Accra that  Z
    could go to is a private school and only goes up  to  the  age  of  11.
    This is set out at [50] of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.

25. It was also submitted that because the second appellant is a refugee he
    would not be able to receive any protection in Ghana,  there  being  no
    suggestion that Ghana could protect him.

26. Z's condition made him reliant on the very specialist and intense  care
    that he is receiving on a daily basis in the  UK,  and  weekly  from  a
    psychiatrist.

27. The middle child Z, has just started school.  None of the children have
    been to Ghana.  The decision in EB (Kosovo) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2008] UKHL 41 was relied on in terms of  the  best
    interests of the appellants' children, the submission being that  there
    needed to be  serious  countervailing  factors  to  outweigh  the  best
    interests of a child.  The only such fact in  this  case  is  that  the
    appellants have been here unlawfully. However, they have been here  for
    14 and 15 years, respectively.

28. The second appellant cannot be removed in any event  and  thus  if  the
    first appellant and the children were removed together, there would  be
    a separation of the family members.

    Conclusions

29. It was conceded in submissions on behalf of the  appellants  that  they
    are not able to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.    The
    appeal proceeded on the basis  of  Article  8  only.   It  is  as  well
    nevertheless, notwithstanding that concession, to  make  reference  and
    give consideration to what appears to us to  be  the  only  potentially
    relevant aspect of the  Rules.   This  is  paragraph  276ADE(1).   This
    provides as follows:

         "276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave
             to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at
             the date of application, the applicant:

             (i)  does not fall for refusal under any  of  the  grounds  in
                  Section S-LTR 1.2 to S-LTR 2.3. and S-LTR.3.1. in Appendix
                  FM; and

             (ii)     has made a valid application for leave to  remain  on
                  the grounds of private life in the UK; and

             (iii)    has lived continuously in the  UK  for  at  least  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (iv)      is  under  the  age  of  18  years  and  has   lived
                  continuously in the UK for at least 7  years  (discounting
                  any period of imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable
                  to expect the applicant to leave the UK; or

             (v)  is aged 18 years or above and  under  25  years  and  has
                  spent at least half of his life living continuously in the
                  UK (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

             (vi)     subject to sub-paragraph (2), is  aged  18  years  or
                  above, has lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20
                  years (discounting any period of imprisonment)  but  there
                  would be very significant  obstacles  to  the  applicant's
                  integration into the country to which he would have to  go
                  if required to leave the UK."

30. It seems to us that more specifically, the  only  potentially  relevant
    aspect of 276ADE which could apply is subparagraph (vi).  To summarise,
    the appellants have to establish that they  are  18  years  of  age  or
    above, have lived continuously in the UK for less  than  20  years  and
    there would be "very significant obstacles" to their  integration  into
    Ghana.  In that respect it is relevant to take into  account  that  the
    first appellant was born and brought up in Ghana and lived there  until
    the age of 18.  She has a brother there.   Neither  of  the  appellants
    would have any language difficulty in Ghana, where English  is  spoken.
    The second appellant's parents are from Ghana.   It  is  not  suggested
    however that he has family there now.

31. Furthermore, the appellants undertook a  proxy  marriage  in  Ghana  in
    2008, they being in the UK but the marriage  ceremony  in  Ghana  being
    attended by the first appellant's extended family on her father's  side
    and family on her mother's side.

32. Those facts are sufficient to lead to a conclusion that it could not be
    said that there are "very significant  obstacles"  to  the  appellants'
    integration into Ghana.

33. Although the appellants are not able to meet the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, and indeed on behalf of the appellants our attention
    was not drawn to any particular paragraph of the Immigration Rules,  we
    do consider that there are good  grounds  for  considering  the  appeal
    under Article 8 proper. It was not suggested otherwise on behalf of the
    respondent.  We adopt the structured approach set out in R. v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

34. It is as well also to set out ss.117A-B of the 2002 Act as follows:

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)      This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)      In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)      in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
         117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)      In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's right
             to respect for private and family life is justified under
             Article 8(2).

         117B Article8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases:

         (1)      The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in
             the public interest.

         (2)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak English, because persons who can speak
             English-

             (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)      It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
             interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and (b) are better able to
                  integrate into society.

         (4)      Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner, that is
                  established by a person at a time when the person is in
                  the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)      Little weight should be given to a private life
             established by a person at a time when the person's
             immigration status is precarious.

         (6)      In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,
             the public interest does not require the person's removal
             where-

             (a)      the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)      it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
                  leave the United Kingdom"

35. It is uncontroversial that the appellants have family life together and
    with their children.  There would be no interference with  that  family
    life if the appellants were removed together, and of course with  their
    children.   The  second  appellant's  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was that he would not go to Ghana with the  appellant  if  her
    appeal was dismissed [65].  However, his wishes in that regard are  not
    to the point since it is clear enough that the intention is  to  remove
    him to Ghana.  This is a matter that is dealt with at [29] in the error
    of law decision.  If the respondent's intention is  to  remove  him  to
    Ghana, which in our assessment it  plainly  is,  the  second  appellant
    expressing the view that he would not go there, is irrelevant.

36. It also must be said that we were somewhat perplexed by the  submission
    made on behalf  of  the  appellants  to  the  effect  that  the  second
    appellant would not be able to receive protection in Ghana, he being  a
    refugee from Liberia. There is nothing in Ghana against which he  needs
    protection.  There is no basis from which to conclude that he would  be
    refouled to Liberia, even working on the assumption that he would still
    be at risk of persecution in Liberia.

37. Similarly, we do not consider that there is any merit in the contention
    that the second appellant simply could not be removed to Ghana  because
    there is no evidence one way or the other  of  his  being  able  to  be
    admitted there and he does not  have  a  travel  document  or  passport
    allowing for his removal there.

38. In the first place, it is to  be  noted  that  the  second  appellant's
    evidence is that both  his parents are from Ghana.  It is reasonable to
    assume therefore  that  in  practical  terms  the  appellant  would  be
    admitted to Ghana.

39. On the question of his not having any  form  of  travel  document,  the
    submission on behalf of the appellant is contrary to the  decisions  in
    HH (Somalia) and others v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2010]  EWCA  Civ  426  at  [82]  to  [84]  and  also  MS  (Palestinian
    territories) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]  UKSC
    25.

40. So far as family  life  is  concerned  therefore,  there  would  be  no
    interference with their family life in any respect in  the  appellants'
    removal to Ghana. Ss.117A-B of the 2002 Act thus have no part  to  play
    in the Article 8 assessment of the proportionality of  the  removal  of
    the appellants with reference to their family life.

41. It is plain that the appellants will have established a family life  in
    the UK since their arrival in 1999 and  2000,  respectively.   Both  of
    them have been in employment,  the  first  appellant  apparently  as  a
    health care worker and the second appellant  as  an  ambulance  driver.
    There are letters in the respondent's bundle from  what  appear  to  be
    three friends of the appellants testifying to the relationship  between
    the  appellants.  Although  no  evidence  of  the  following  has  been
    provided, it is likely that in the time the appellants have been in the
    UK they will have established friendships, as  well  as  various  other
    social connections, aside from their association with their  children's
    schools and health professionals. The first appellant said in  evidence
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  recorded   at   [47]   of   the
    determination, that her mother's sisters in the UK had  been  providing
    support to her.  The second  appellant  is  recorded  at  [65]  of  the
    determination as having said that friends in the UK had been supporting
    him since he had been forced to stop work.

42. The private lives of the appellants' children are most  significant  in
    relation to the older child who has autism.   He was  born  on  19  May
    2009 and is therefore now 6 years of age.  The other two children  were
    born on 24 April 2010 and 9 January 2013, respectively.  Their  private
    lives because of their ages will plainly be limited.

43. We have given careful consideration to the evidence in relation to  Z's
    autism.  In the appellants'  bundle  that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  there  is  a  report  dated  25  September  2013  from  Dr  S
    Vidhyadharsan,  an  Associate  Specialist  in  Community   Paediatrics.
    Suffice to say, the  conclusion  of  that  report  is  that  there  are
    concerns about speech and language delay, social delay and play  skills
    delay.

44. The report from Buxton School is dated 16 July 2014.  We  summarise  it
    as follows.  It states that Z did not  attend  a  nursery  because  his
    challenging behaviour  made  him  difficult  to  place.   He  has  been
    diagnosed with autism  and  is  on  the  schools  register  of  Special
    Educational Needs due to his difficulties in social situations and with
    language and communication. He is described as a child with  obsessions
    about cleanliness, for example he will not take a bath  unless  he  has
    seen the bath has been washed out first.  He will not use a new  toilet
    unless he is very familiar with its location and its surroundings.

45. He was seen by an educational psychologist in October and December 2013
    because there were concerns about him screaming and taking his  clothes
    off at inappropriate times.   It  is  reported  that  he  finds  change
    difficult, including the ending and  beginning  of  activities,  school
    visits and moves to a new class.  Each of those has  to  be  approached
    with care, using additional staffing and visual resources to make  sure
    that he understands what is happening.

46. He is described as having  a  complex  package  of  support  at  Buxton
    School, including speech and language classes and attendance at  weekly
    sessions to improve his understanding of the purposes of communication.
     He also has special sessions to encourage  make-believe  play  and  is
    visited by the Borough's Specialist Team  for  teaching  children  with
    autism.  As a result of that team work and careful planning he is  said
    to be making progress in school.

47. The report continues  that  Z  is  a  child  with  significant  special
    educational needs who  needs  to  be  educated  within  a  system  that
    integrates health  and  educational  support  and  which  continues  to
    monitor him closely so that his learning programme can be tailored  and
    individualised.  The view is expressed that it is unlikely that such  a
    school system exists in Ghana and there is reference, albeit brief,  to
    information from the internet listing specialist schools only in  Accra
    and limited resources outside the capital city.  It is  suggested  that
    it is unlikely that he would be accepted by his  community  or  in  his
    local school.  It is further stated that in Ghana his  home  conditions
    would not permit expression of his fastidious obsessions about  toilets
    and bathing, and the move itself would cause considerable  distress  to
    him.

48. In the error of law decision it was concluded that there was  no  error
    of law in the judge's assessment of the extent to which Z would be able
    to receive treatment for his condition in  Ghana,  notwithstanding  the
    criticisms that could have been made of the First-tier Judge's reliance
    on information in the letter from the school in terms of the  expertise
    of the writer.  As is pointed out however, no issue was taken on behalf
    of the respondent on that point,  either  at  the  hearing  or  in  the
    grounds before the Upper Tribunal.

49. It is a preserved finding therefore, that as set out  at  [76]  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination, the move  itself  to  Ghana  would
    have an adverse impact on Z and it would be difficult for him to access
    support for his special educational needs there.

50. Having said that, it is not the case that there would be  no  treatment
    for Z in Ghana, as accepted by the first appellant and as reflected  at
    [50] of the First-tier Tribunal's determination.  In  the  respondent's
    bundle there is a Country  of  Origin  Information  response  dated  23
    October 2013, albeit apparently in relation to a  different  case  from
    that of these appellants.  It relates to  a  5  year  old  female  with
    Down's syndrome, experiencing 'minor hearing problems'  for  which  she
    was receiving speech and  language  therapy  and  attending  a  special
    school. In relation to treatments available in Ghana, the short  report
    states that treatment and follow-up by a speech therapist is available,
    as well as by an audiologist.  There is a special school  for  children
    with Down's  Syndrome.   As  to  medical  centres  that  would  provide
    treatments, the response was that these could be found in Accra at  the
    main teaching hospitals of Korle-Bu and Komfo Anokye in Kumasi.

51. Whilst that information is less than perfect in relation to autism,  it
    is a reasonable  conclusion  that  there  is  treatment  available  for
    children with autism,  at  least  in  Accra.   No  submissions  to  the
    contrary were made on  behalf  of  the  appellant  before  us,  and  as
    indicated already, such seems to have been accepted before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

52. We accept that change would be very difficult for Z to  understand  and
    that this will undoubtedly make his care and management very  difficult
    for his parents.  The report from Buxton School is written by a  person
    who is described as a Primary Special Educational  Needs  Co-ordinator.
    We do not know what her qualifications  are  but  we  are  nevertheless
    prepared to accept that  a  move  to  Ghana  would  cause  considerable
    distress to Z, as stated in her report.

53. However, he has the benefit of the  support  and  care  of  two  loving
    parents, which again it is reasonable to conclude would to some  extent
    help to mitigate his distress.

54. It is not suggested on behalf of the appellants that Z's  condition  is
    such as to reach the high Article 3 threshold.  The evidence  does  not
    reveal that Z's autism of itself, under Article 8,  provides  a  stand-
    alone basis for a conclusion that his, and therefore  the  appellants',
    removal would be disproportionate.   As was  explained  in  GS  (India)
    there would need to be something more in the Article 8 claim.

55. Furthermore, there is no "obligation to treat" in Article  8  cases  as
    explained in MM (Zimbabwe) [2012] EWCA Civ 279, repeated at [111] of GS
    (India).

56. In EV (Philippines) it was said at [60] that:

         "Just as we cannot provide medical treatment for the world,  so  we
         cannot educate the world."

57. That observation, it seems to us, is apposite  in  the  case  of  these
    appellants,  reflecting  on   the   proportionality   of   removal   in
    circumstances where it has been found by the First-tier  Tribunal  that
    the children's best interests  are  to  remain  in  the  UK.   This  is
    particularly so in terms of the eldest child, Z.  We  accept  that  the
    medical treatment and education he would be able to  receive  in  Ghana
    would not be of the same standard as in the  UK.  Even  if  absence  of
    treatment was a  determinative  factor,  which  it  is  not,  there  is
    nevertheless evidence that he could  obtain  treatment.   His  parents'
    have connections with Ghana, as already explained, the more so  in  the
    case of the first appellant.

58. The private lives of the appellants themselves attract  little  weight,
    as mandated by s.117B(4).   We do not consider that the force  of  that
    provision has so much bite in relation to the appellants' children.  In
    the first place, their private lives are limited because of their ages.
     In the second place, it is questionable as to whether  that  provision
    could be said to apply to very young children who  will  have  made  no
    conscious decision about establishing any private life.

59. Nevertheless, a further factor that tells  against  the  appellants  is
    their lack of financial independence, (see s.117B(3)) albeit that  that
    is because they are no longer allowed to work because of their unlawful
    status. Neither the appellants  nor  their  children  have  any  lawful
    status in the UK.

60. Considering all the circumstances, we are satisfied that the respondent
    has  established  that  the  removal  of  the  appellants  (with  their
    children)  is  a  proportionate  response  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
    maintaining an effective immigration control.  Accordingly, the appeals
    in each case are dismissed.

    Decision

61. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  The First-tier Tribunal's decision having been  set
    aside, we re-make the  decisions  by  dismissing  the  appeal  of  each
    appellant.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek      9/09/15
