
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51567/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice, Belfast  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 August 2016                           |On 13 September 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                VERONIQUE [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Gavin, instructed by Francis Hanna & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant before the Upper Tribunal is the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.  I shall refer herein to Ms [T] as the claimant.

 2. On 30 August 2013 the claimant applied for an EEA residence card as the
    partner of a Mr [W], an Irish national.  The couple live together  with
    Mr [W]'s child from a former  relationship.   The  Secretary  of  State
    refused the application by way of a decision dated 23 November 2013  on
    the basis that it had not been demonstrated that Mr [W] was a qualified
    person pursuant to Regulation 6 of the  Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.

 3. It is prudent to observe at this juncture that the Secretary  of  State
    has neither issued a removal decision nor provided a notice pursuant to
    Section 120 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. The claimant appealed the decision of 23 November 2013  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  This  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kempton on 10 February 2015 and was allowed  on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR) in a decision of 17 February 2015.   It  was  accepted
    during the course of that appeal that the claimant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the EEA Regulations 2006.

 5. The  Secretary  of  State  appeals  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  with  the
    permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Astle,  granted  on  17  April
    2015.  At a hearing on 19 October  2015  the  President  adjourned  the
    determination of the case pending the appeal to the Court of Appeal  of
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in Amirteymour  &  Others  (EEA  appeals:
    human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466.

 6. Whilst the decision of Amirteymour remains pending before the Court  of
    Appeal, the legal issue therein has now  been  determined  in  TY  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2015]  EWCS
    Civ1233.   In  TY  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the   claimant's
    application for an EEA residence card made as the dependant of a family
    member of an EEA national residing in the United Kingdom.  The claimant
    appealed that decision to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  two  grounds;
    first, that he  was  entitled  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  the  EEA
    Regulations and, second, that he had an entitlement to  asylum  because
    the situation in Sri Lanka had deteriorated and he would be  persecuted
    if he were to be returned there.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed the
    claimant's appeal on both grounds, the latter ground being rejected  on
    the basis that the Secretary of State had not  issued  a  notice  under
    Section 120 of the 2002 Act and, consequently, that the  applicant  was
    not entitled  to  pursue  asylum  grounds  in  an  appeal  against  the
    Secretary of State's refusal to  issue  an  EEA  residence  card.   The
    matter came before the Upper Tribunal who concurred entirely  with  the
    conclusions of the First-tier.

 7. On appeal to the Court of Appeal Jackson LJ, giving the judgment of the
    court, said as follows:

         "27. Since there is no Section 120 One-Stop Notice,  the  appellant
             is confined to the subject matter of  the  original  decision.
             That is a decision that the  appellant  does  not  fulfil  the
             requirements  of  the  EEA  Regulations.   That  decision   is
             unquestionably  correct.    However   strong   or   weak   the
             appellant's claims may be under the provisions of the  Refugee
             Convention and ECHR, those provisions could  not  entitle  the
             appellant  to  receive  a  residence  card   under   the   EEA
             Regulations.  ...

         33.   Ms  Jegarajah  relies  upon  paragraph  16-18  of  Laws  LJ's
             judgment. She submits that in the  present  case  if,  in  the
             future, the appellant is removed  that  removal  will  be  "in
             consequence of" the refusal to  give  him  a  residence  card.
             Therefore the decision to refuse a residence  card  will  have
             the effect  of  putting  the  UK  in  breach  of  the  Refugee
             Convention and ECHR.

         34.  I have carefully considered this argument and re-read JM  with
             Ms Jegarajah's  submissions  in  mind.  I  have  come  to  the
             conclusion, however, that those submissions  are  flawed.  The
             crucial feature of JM was that the Secretary of State served a
             section 120 one stop notice: see the last  sentence  of  [23].
             That had two consequences. First, if M's  appeal  to  the  AIT
             failed the Secretary of State would  be  able  to  proceed  to
             removal, without giving  M  any  opportunity  to  raise  human
             rights  arguments  or  to  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds.
             Secondly, M was fully entitled to advance  all  his  arguments
             under ECHR and the AIT was obliged to consider them.  The  AIT
             failed to do so, because it misconstrued section 84 (1) (g) of
             the 2002 Act. Accordingly the  Court  of  Appeal  allowed  M's
             appeal. The present case differs from JM in a crucial respect,
             namely that here there was no one stop  notice  under  section
             120.

         35.  It is impossible to say that the Secretary of State's decision
             to withhold a residence card  (a  decision  which  is  correct
             under the EEA Regulations) will or could cause the UK to be in
             breach of the Refugee Convention or the  ECHR.   The  UK  will
             only be in breach of those Conventions if in  the  future  the
             appellant makes an asylum or human  rights  claim,  which  the
             Secretary of State and/or the Tribunals incorrectly reject.

         36.  In the result therefore I reach  a  similar  decision  on  the
             issues before us to the decision reached by the Upper Tribunal
             in Amirteymour...

 8. At the outset of the hearing before me Ms Gavin sought  an  adjournment
    on the basis that it was  still  appropriate  to  await  the  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in Amirteymour; the decision in TY, it is said, being
    distinguishable because it dealt  with  the  question  of  whether  the
    Tribunal were entitled to  consider  a  Refugee  Convention  ground  as
    opposed to a Human Rights ground.  I refused the adjournment concluding
    that TY could not be materially distinguished from the  factual  matrix
    in Amirteymour on such basis.  In my conclusion the rationale  deployed
    by the court in TY applies equally,  whether  the  'additional'  ground
    being pursued before the Tribunal relates to the Refugee Convention  or
    whether it is a  human  rights  based  ground.   That  this  is  so  is
    emphasised by the court itself in TY, albeit in obiter.

 9. Ms Gavin, having been  unsuccessful  in  the  adjournment  application,
    subsequently submitted that  even  if  the  ratio  of  TY  is  directly
    applicable to the facts of the instant appeal, any  error  in  allowing
    the appeal on human rights  grounds  was  not  material  to  the  FtT's
    decision because it was, in any event, bound to have allowed the appeal
    on the basis that the SSHD's decision would lead to a breach of Article
    24 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.

10. I reject this contention for two discrete reasons.

11. First, it is not a point that has ever been put  to  the  Secretary  of
    State, nor was such a ground pursued before  the  First-tier  Tribunal;
    indeed, it has not been  raised  in  these  proceedings  prior  to  the
    instant hearing before the Upper Tribunal - despite the fact that there
    has been ample opportunity to do so at both levels of the Tribunal.  In
    circumstances where the point was not  previously  taken,  particularly
    before the First-tier Tribunal, it cannot be said in my view  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal was bound  to  have  allowed  the  appeal  on  that
    ground.

12. In any event, I conclude that if the FtT was entitled to consider  such
    ground, which of itself I find it was not for all the reasons given TY,
    the ground itself is without merit.

13. Article 24 of the Charter reads as follows:

         "(1) Children shall have the right to such protection and  care  as
             is necessary for their  well-being.  They  may  express  their
             views freely. Such views shall be taken into consideration  on
             matters which concern them in accordance with  their  age  and
             maturity.


         (2)  In all actions relating to children, whether taken  by  public
             authorities  or  private  institutions,   the   child's   best
             interests must be a primary consideration.


         (3)  Every child shall have the right  to  maintain  on  a  regular
             basis a personal relationship and direct contact with both his
             or her  parents,  unless  that  is  contrary  to  his  or  her
             interests."

14. It is impossible to say that  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  to
    refuse to issue an EEA residence card will lead to a breach Article  24
    of the Charter.  As indicated above  there  has  been  no  decision  to
    remove the claimant. If the claimant seeks to remain here  on  a  basis
    other than pursuant to the EEA Regulations, including in reliance on an
    ECHR claim or in pursuance of her rights under  the  Charter,  she  can
    make the relevant application to the Secretary of State.  It is only if
    such application is rejected by the Secretary of State incorrectly that
    it could be said that the UK would be in breach, on the facts  of  this
    case, of the ECHR and/or the Charter - including Article 24 thereof.

15. For the reasons given above I conclude  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law in allowing the claimant's appeal on human rights  grounds
    and I set its decision aside in that respect.

16. As to the re-making,  there  was  no  submission  before  me  that  the
    claimant now meets the requirements of the  EEA  Regulations  2006  and
    neither can, for reasons set out above, she  invoke  the  Human  Rights
    Convention or Article 24 of the Charter in support of  her  claim.   If
    she could invoke the aforementioned, such grounds fail  ostensibly  for
    the reasons identified in TY and set out above.





Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law capable  of
affecting the outcome of the appeal.  It is therefore set aside.

The  Upper  Tribunal  re-makes  the  decision  on  claimant's  the   appeal,
dismissing it on all grounds.


Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
2 August 2016
