
IAC-HW-AM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51313/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 November 2014                  |On 23 December 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                          COLINE CASSANDRA BANJAMIN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Goddard of Southwark CAB
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  born  on  22  April  1986.   She
    claims to have been in the United Kingdom since 6 July 2002.  She has a
    child born in 2007 who is a British citizen by  reason  of  his  father
    having been naturalised as a British citizen in  2005.   The  Appellant
    states she and her child's father have never set up home together.  She
    believes at the date of the birth of her child the child's  father  was
    married and states that now the father has no contact with his child.

 2. On 15 January 2013 the Appellant sought a residence card to evidence  a
    derivative right of residence as the primary carer of her  child  under
    Regulation 15C of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations  2006  as  amended
    (the EEA Regs.).  On  11  November  2013  the  Respondent  refused  her
    application on the basis that the Appellant had  not  shown  sufficient
    evidence that if she were removed her child would be unable  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom or within the European Union or European Economic
    Association because there would be none to take responsibility for  the
    child's care. The child's father was an exempt person for the  purposes
    of the EEA Regs.  The Appellant had failed to provide any  evidence  to
    show she was  the  primary  carer  and  that  no  one  else  could,  if
    necessary, care for her child.  The  Respondent  noted  the  burden  of
    proof was on the Appellant.

 3. The Respondent noted the Appellant could make a further application  on
    the  basis  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  make  an  application  for
    consideration of her claim by way of reference  to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention.  The Respondent considered  no  such  issues  were
    before her and having taken into account the state's duty under Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  to  safeguard
    the welfare of the Appellant's child found the Appellant did  not  have
    any basis to stay in the United Kingdom.  Details of  arrangements  for
    voluntary removal were given but no removal decision was made.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 4. By a determination promulgated on 18 July 2014 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Pears dismissed the appeal under  the  EEA  Regs.,  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the European  Convention.   He
    noted no anonymity direction had been requested  and  made  none.   The
    Appellant was unrepresented before him. He referred extensively to  the
    documentary evidence which the Appellant had put  before  the  Tribunal
    and that she and her child's father had never lived together  and  that
    at all material times the child's father had been  married  to  someone
    else. She claimed she did not know this fact when she became  pregnant.
    He referred at paragraph 11 of his determination to  the  very  limited
    contact between child and father.  He  considered  Regulation  15A  and
    separately the jurisprudence relating to claims under Article 8 of  the
    European Convention.  The Appellant had lived the majority of her  life
    in Jamaica.  Her last leave to enter or remain  had  expired  in  2004,
    some considerable time before the birth of her child.  She did not meet
    the requirements of any relevant Immigration Rule. She  had  not  shown
    the  Respondent's  decision  was  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate
    objective of proper immigration control.  He also noted the Appellant's
    child had now spent the entirety of its some seven years of life in the
    United Kingdom and was attending school.

 5. The Appellant then consulted the Southwark CAB who on 5 September  2014
    lodged an application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 8 October 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler extended time
    for the making of the application  and  granted  permission  to  appeal
    because it was arguable Judge Pears had made an error of law by failing
    to give any or adequate reasons for finding the Appellant did not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and in his assessment of  the
    proportionality of her claim outwith the Rules under Article 8  it  was
    arguable he had failed to make adequate findings  what  were  the  best
    interests of the Appellant's child and whether it would  be  reasonable
    for the child to leave the United Kingdom.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Appellant and her child attended  the  hearing  at  which  she  was
    represented by Mr Goddard of the Southwark CAB.

 7. He relied on his skeleton argument and  submitted  the  Judge  had  not
    given proper consideration to the nationality of the Appellant's child.
     The Appellant met the requirements of the Immigration Rules which  the
    Judge had not taken into account and the Judge's consideration  of  her
    claim  under  Article  8  of   the   European   Convention   had   been
    unsatisfactory.  Additionally, the fact  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules should have been a  factor  taken
    into  account  in  the  assessment  of  the  proportionality   of   the
    Respondent's decision in the Appellant's Article 8 claim.

 8. For the Respondent, Mr Melvin relied on the Respondent's response under
    Procedure Rule 24 and noted that the Appellant's skeleton argument  had
    been submitted at the hearing in Upper Tribunal and was not before  the
    Judge.  The burden was on the Appellant.  The  Appellant's  application
    was under the EEA Regs. and she had failed to show the Judge  had  made
    an error of law in his consideration of the derivative residence  right
    claim under the EEA Regs.  At paragraph 21  of  his  determination  the
    Judge referred to the Appellant's failure to make sufficient efforts to
    trace her child's father and to  give  greater  information  about  his
    current circumstances to the Tribunal.  Effectively, this  amounted  to
    an adverse finding that the Appellant could have done more and  so  had
    not been sufficiently frank with the Tribunal.  Additionally, there was
    no information before  the  Tribunal  why  there  was  no  one  in  her
    immediate or extended family able to assist with the care of her  child
    if the Appellant were to leave the United Kingdom without her child.

 9. In the light of his findings of  fact  the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
    Appellant's claim under Article 8  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  at
    paragraph  27  of  his  determination  was  adequate  and  sustainable.
    Additionally, the Judge had not made any finding that the Appellant was
    the primary carer of her child.  It was open to the Appellant  to  make
    another application for consideration for leave outside the Immigration
    Rules. That she was unrepresented at the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing
    was not reason to grant her a re-hearing of her appeal.

10. For the Appellant, Mr Goddard submitted the Judge was required to  make
    a full assessment of the Appellant's claim under Article  8.   She  had
    not approached her child's father because she was afraid of him and she
    was even too afraid to ask him for maintenance although he had  made  a
    claim for child benefit:  see paragraph 11 of the  determination.   The
    Appellant's claim under the EEA Regs. might  fail  but  she  was  still
    entitled to a consideration  of  her  claim  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention.  She may have been in  the  United  Kingdom  since
    about the age of 16  but  she  had  had  no  leave  since  early  2004.
    Nevertheless, when asked Mr Goddard confirmed that  the  Appellant  was
    not seeking to disturb the Judge's finding that her  appeal  under  the
    EEA Regs. had  to  fail.   Her  present  claim  was  that  the  Judge's
    treatment of her Article 8 claim contained a material error of law.

Findings and Consideration

11. The Judge referred to the  five  stage  process  described  in  R  (oao
    Razgar) v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  noted  the  observations  about
    decisions affecting children  in  Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (decisions
    affecting children: onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).   However,
    the Judge made no express reference to the State's duty  under  Section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  and  had  not
    specifically mentioned the need to consider the best interests  of  the
    child as a primary concern.  His assessment of the Article 8  claim  at
    paragraph 27 referred to a need for the Appellant  to  show  compelling
    circumstances why the Appellant's  child  could  not  go  with  her  to
    Jamaica.  The Judge said the Appellant had failed to  give  any  reason
    other than the age of her child and that the child has been  in  school
    since 2011 as a reason for allowing her claim under  Article  8.   This
    does not indicate the Judge has  given  proper  consideration  to  what
    might be in the best interests of the Appellant's child.

12. This is a material error of law.   I  considered  whether  any  resumed
    hearing should be in the Upper Tribunal and in  consultation  with  the
    parties concluded that a more  appropriate  course  would  be  for  the
    matter to be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh
    before a Judge other than Judge Pears.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error
    of law and is set aside.  The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh before a judge other than Judge Pears.

DIRECTIONS

    The Appellant is to consider what additional  evidence  she  wishes  to
    file about her child's father and her attempts to contact him  relating
    to the period since September 2011.

    The Appellant is to submit bank statements for all  her  bank  accounts
    for the period since September 2011 to support her claim  not  to  have
    received any child benefit for her child.

    The Appellant is to submit evidence from her child's school to show the
    degree and extent of the involvement  of  the  child's  father  in  her
    child's education.

    The Respondent is to file and serve details of  all  relevant  guidance
    and directions to case workers and policies about the removal of United
    Kingdom citizen children outside the EEA and on decisions  relating  to
    third parties which would have the likely or inevitable result of a  UK
    citizen child being taken for settlement outside the EEA.


    No anonymity direction is made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 02. xii. 2014

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

