
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51461/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th July 2014                               |On 18th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             MR MICHAEL DIONGOLI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Michael Diongoli in person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appeal of the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Pacey)  who,  in   a   determination
    promulgated on 10th April 2014, allowed the appeal  of  the  Respondent
    against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse   his
    application for further leave to remain on the grounds of  his  private
    life.

 2. Whilst this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for  convenience  I
    will refer to the parties in the determination as they appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The history can be summarised as follows.  The Appellant is a  national
    of Nigeria born on 10th October 1981.  He is from the Bayelsa State  in
    Nigeria and graduated with a BSc in Business Education Management  from
    Niger Delta University.  On 2nd September  2010  the  Appellant  first
    entered the United Kingdom with leave to enter as a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student valid until 3rd January 2011.  He was subsequently  granted  an
    extension of stay in the United Kingdom until 25th September as a  Tier
    4 (General) Student.  Whilst in the United Kingdom  he  studied  for  a
    Master's Degree in  International  Business  and  Management  from  the
    University of Bradford.  The Appellant finished his course in May 2012.



 4.  On 24th September 2012 the Appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain based on his private life under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 5.   In a notice of immigration decision dated  15th  November  2013  that
    application was refused by the Secretary of State.  It was  noted  that
    he had entered the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student on  2nd
    September 2010 and consideration was given to his claim  to  remain  on
    private life grounds under Article 8 which fell for consideration under
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.  The immigration decision  set  out  the
    relevant paragraphs, noting that he had entered the United  Kingdom  on
    2nd September 2010 and had not lived continuously  in  the  UK  for  at
    least twenty years, therefore he could not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(iii).  Similarly, at the time of  the  application  he
    was aged 31 and was not under the age of 18.  Furthermore, he  was  not
    aged between 18 years or above and under 25 and therefore he could  not
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) and (v).  In  respect  of
    the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(vi) it was considered that  having
    spent 29 years in his home country it was  not  accepted  that  in  the
    period of time that he had been in the UK he had lost ties to his  home
    country.  As to Article 8 outside of  the  Rules,  the  decision  also
    considered whether the application raised or contained any  exceptional
    circumstances, however, it was considered that the facts  of  the  case
    did not merit consideration outside of the Rules.  His application  was
    therefore refused under  paragraph  D-LTRP.1.3  with  reference  to  R-
    LTRP.1.1(c) and  (d),  paragraph  276CE  with  reference  to  paragraph
    276ADE(iii)-(vi) of HC 395 as amended.

 6. The Appellant exercised his right to appeal that decision  and  on  3rd
    December 2013 submitted Grounds of Appeal.

 7. The Appellant's appeal was heard  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before
    Judge Pacey on 1st April 2014.   The  Appellant  appeared  before  the
    Tribunal unrepresented although a bundle of documents had been prepared
    by his former legal representatives.  The judge recorded  the  evidence
    of  the  Appellant  at  paragraphs  [5]-[9].   At  the  time   of   the
    application, it had been stated that he was in a  relationship  with  a
    British citizen, however, as recorded  at  [5]  that  relationship  had
    ended.  The judge identified  that  the  issue  to  be  determined  was
    whether the Appellant could demonstrate that he had "no ties, including
    social, cultural or family, with the country to which he would have  to
    go if required to leave the United Kingdom"  (see  paragraph  [5]  with
    reference to paragraph 276ADE [6]).

 8.   The judge noted his evidence that he had entered the  United  Kingdom
    in September 2010 as a student.  Prior to this he had lived in Nigeria,
    having been brought up by his aunt (his mother's sister) who had  died.
    The judge made reference to a death certificate dated 29th March  2013.
    The judge also recorded that the Appellant had employment in the United
    Kingdom and also had many friends and was well established.  As to  his
    evidence concerning ties to Nigeria, it was recorded by the judge  that
    the Appellant said that he had no family in Nigeria and that the effect
    of his aunt's death was gauged by the fact  that  he  had  to  take  an
    additional year to complete his studies.  The Appellant, however,  said
    that he did have some relatives in Nigeria, namely cousins, but that he
    had never had anything to do with them.  He  said  that  his  aunt  had
    discouraged attempted contact with family members as a result of a form
    of witchcraft.  The Appellant further stated he had not  been  able  to
    establish contact with any other family members in  Nigeria  and  after
    his graduation had lived on his own without  his  aunt  for  about  six
    months.  The judge also recorded the  Presenting  Officer's  submission
    that this had indicated  that  the  Appellant  would  be  able  to  re-
    establish himself in Nigeria (see [8]).

 9.   The judge also recorded that in this context the  Appellant  referred
    to the bad employment situation in Nigeria, citing the recent  incident
    reported in the press of  applicants  who  attended  a  sports  stadium
    resulting in the death of some even though relatively few jobs were  on
    offer.  The  judge  recorded  that  "whether  the  Appellant  could  re
    establish himself in Nigeria, and his job prospects, are  factors  that
    are not directly relevant to the criteria of paragraph 276".  The judge
    also recorded at [9] that the Appellant had given evidence in "entirely
    sincere and heartfelt terms" and said that he would have no-one  to  go
    back to and that his  education  and  life  experience  in  the  United
    Kingdom has shaped his life to the extent that he would be  "destroyed"
    if he had to  return  to  Nigeria.   It  was  also  recorded  that  the
    Presenting Officer had submitted  that  there  was  evidence  that  the
    Appellant did have ties in Nigeria given that he  was  able  to  obtain
    documentary evidence  (the  death  certificate  of  his  aunt)  from  a
    neighbour but the judge found that that alone did not suggest "ties" of
    any substance.

10. The judge then referred to the decision of  Ogundimu  (Nigeria)  [2013]
    UKUT 60 (IAC) and at [11] the judge set out his conclusions.  The judge
    accepted that the Appellant had spent most of his life in  Nigeria  and
    would not be a stranger to that country or to the people or the way  of
    life.  He had had "considerable  exposure  to  the  cultural  norms  of
    Nigeria" and spoke the language.  But the judge went on to state  that:

         "Set against that, however he has no connection with any family  in
         that  country  (through  no  fault  of  his  own).   He  said  that
         occasionally - and only occasionally  -  he  spoke  to  friends  in
         Nigeria on Facebook but his links with those friends appear  to  be
         somewhat tenuous and of a very different nature from  the  strength
         of his friendships with people in the United Kingdom.  He has  very
         strong relationships with people in this country, where he had been
         for a significant period of time.  He has forged strong and durable
         links with the United Kingdom through  his  educational  background
         here, his work, his involvement with the local church and with many
         people.  There is, in my judgment, no real continued connection  to
         life in Nigeria.  The Appellant, in my view, has  only  remote  and
         abstract links to that country.  In the light of all this  then,  I
         conclude that the Appellant meets the criteria of paragraph 276."

11. Thus the judge allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

12.  The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  that  decision  to
    the Upper Tribunal and permission was granted by a Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal on 16th May 2014.

13.  Thus the appeal came before the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of
    State was represented by  Ms  Pettersen  and  Mr  Diongoli  represented
    himself as he did before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  explained  the
    procedure that would be adopted and  ensured  that  he  understood  the
    proceedings.  I also ensured that he had paper to make any  notes  that
    he wished to make  so  that  he  could  make  his  submissions  to  the
    Tribunal.

14.   Ms Pettersen expanded on the grounds.  She referred the Tribunal  to
    the relevant paragraphs of the decision of Ogundimu where the  Tribunal
    considered the issue of ties retained  in  a  home  country.   For  the
    purposes of this appeal, she submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to
    properly consider the decision of Ogundimu in the context of the  facts
    of this particular case.  Here, the Appellant had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom in 2010 when aged 29 years of age and therefore the age he  had
    left the country was of direct relevance to the issue of whether or not
    he had no ties.  Even when the judge had heard the case, she submitted,
    he had spent 90% of his time in Nigeria.  It could not be said that  he
    had no exposure to cultural norms, unlike Ogundimu who came as a  child
    aged 6.  There were also no language difficulties  for  the  Appellant.
    Thus the judge fell into material error  by  not  properly  considering
    those factors in the light of the conclusion reached at [11].

15.  Whilst the judge found he had no family members, that was not entirely
    right because the Appellant on his own evidence had submitted  that  he
    had cousins  and  also  he  had  occasional  contact  with  friends  on
    Facebook.  The judge fell into error at paragraph 11  by  reaching  the
    conclusion that his links with Nigeria were  "tenuous"  by  contrasting
    that with the relationships that he had with the people in  the  United
    Kingdom.  However, in respect of the letters in the  bundle  the  judge
    referred to, none of those friends had attended the hearing  to  attest
    to the strength of relationship.  Thus it was  difficult  to  see,  she
    submitted, how friends in the  United  Kingdom  could  be  assessed  as
    having been strong.

16.   Ms Pettersen also submitted that even  on  the  evidence  before  the
    judge it did not demonstrate that he had lost all ties and that  whilst
    he preferred to stay in the United Kingdom having finished his  studies
    that was not a proper consideration of  paragraph  276ADE,  bearing  in
    mind the age when he left Nigeria, and it could not be said that  there
    were remote and abstract  links  as  that  was  not  supported  by  the
    evidence.

17. Ms Pettersen also submitted that a point to take into account was  that
    the Appellant was able to contact  a  neighbour  to  obtain  the  death
    certificate very quickly (see page 16 of the bundle) and only a matter
    of weeks before the appeal hearing.  Whilst he may not  have  a  family
    member (other than cousins) he  did  have  some  point  of  contact  in
    Nigeria.  Thus if the  judge  had  applied  properly  the  decision  of
    Ogundimu to the facts of the case the judge would not have reached  the
    conclusion and thus the only outcome on the facts of the case could  be
    that the appeal should be dismissed as he had not demonstrated that  he
    had lost all ties to Nigeria.

18. I then heard from Mr Diongoli.  He asked  the  Tribunal  to  take  into
    account a number of matters.  Firstly that he  was  able  to  obtain  a
    death certificate but that did not mean that he had  ties  in  Nigeria.
    He said that he did have contact with friends on Facebook but that they
    were acquaintances.  Whilst he had conversations they did not know  him
    and he did not know them.  He stated that it was true that he had  come
    to the UK when he was 29 years of age but there had  been  "challenges"
    in Nigeria.  He said that his aunt wanted the best for him and that  he
    was given the best opportunity  to  come  to  the  United  Kingdom  for
    educational purposes.  He said he took his studies  seriously.   As  to
    his cousins, he said he had never been in contact with them or met them
    and whilst he would like to see people he was related  to  it  was  not
    fault that he had not.  Therefore the Secretary of State was  wrong  to
    say that he had any ties.  He said that he had friends with  people  in
    the church who had given him hope and that it had been  shaped  by  the
    four years he had been in the country.  He said he knew  nothing  about
    people in Nigeria and that he had been crying since the  death  of  his
    aunt and had been unable to visit her grave in Nigeria which had  upset
    him.  He submitted that his church and  his  neighbours  had  kept  him
    going and that he  could  not  envisage  any  return  to  Nigeria.   He
    submitted that he did not believe  the  judge  made  an  error  in  the
    decision and the decision should be upheld.

19. Ms Pettersen by way of reply submitted that the Appellant  had  entered
    the United Kingdom as an adult having studied at university and that it
    was not credible that  he  had  no  friends  whatsoever  when  he  left
    Nigeria.  The fact that he had lost his aunt did not cut off  all  ties
    to Nigeria.

20. At the conclusion of the submissions the Appellant stated that he would
    wish to say something  further.   As  the  Appellant  was  representing
    himself, I had no hesitation  in  allowing  him  to  make  any  further
    submissions that he wished to.  He said that he had gone to  university
    in Nigeria and he had had a close life with his aunt but he  had  never
    had any ties  with  anybody  at  university,  having  kept  himself  to
    himself.  He said his aunt had sacrificed his life for him.  He said he
    had nowhere to live or any finances in Nigeria as there  were  millions
    of Nigerians out of work and that whilst he had a  master's  degree  it
    did not give him anything to start a life in Nigeria.

21.  He confirmed that his circumstances  were  still  the  same  as  those
    before the First-tier Tribunal and that had nothing had  changed  since
    that time.



Conclusions

22. It is common ground  that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  any  other
    provisions of paragraph 276ADE given his short length of residence  and
    his age and also because he could not meet any of the  requirements  of
    Appendix FM as he had no partner and/or  child  living  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  As the judge recorded  at  [5]  whilst  his  case  originally
    before the Secretary of  State  and  set  out  in  the  application  in
    September 2012 was based on his relationship with  a  British  citizen,
    that had ended (see letter of 15th  March  2013).   Thus  the  relevant
    paragraph  to  the  Appellant's  application  was  that  of   paragraph
    276ADE(vi):

         "He is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for
         less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has
         no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country  to
         which he would have to go if required to leave the United Kingdom."

23. I have therefore given very careful consideration  to  the  submissions
    made by Ms Pettersen on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    submissions made by Mr Diongoli who gave them in heartfelt and  sincere
    terms, as he did before the First-tier Tribunal.  Having done  so,  and
    considering those submissions in the context of the  evidence  and  the
    decision of Ogundimu, I am satisfied that the judge fell into error  in
    his consideration of  paragraph  276ADE  and  the  application  of  the
    principles set out in the decision of Ogundimu (Nigeria) [2013] UKUT 60
    (IAC).  It  was  recognised  in  paragraph  124  that  the  test  under
    paragraph 276ADE(iv) is an exacting one,  and  that  there  must  be  a
    rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant  circumstances,   and   the
    assessment should not be  limited  to  "social,  cultural  and  family"
    circumstances, when considering whether a person has "no ties".

24. The relevant paragraphs in the decision can be found at paragraphs 123-
    125 of that decision as follows:

         "123.    The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
             imports, we think, a concept  involving  something  more  than
             merely remote and abstract links to the  country  of  proposed
             deportation or removal.  It involves there being  a  continued
             connection to life in that  country;  something  that  ties  a
             claimant to his or her country of origin.  If  this  were  not
             the case then it would appear that a person's  nationality  of
             the country of proposed deportation could of itself lead to  a
             failure to meet the requirements  of  the  rule.   This  would
             render the application of the rule, given the  context  within
             which it operates, entirely meaningless.

         124. We recognise that the text under the rules is an exacting one.
              Consideration of whether a  person  has  'no  ties'  to  such
             country must involve a rounded assessment of all the  relevant
             circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural
             and family' circumstances.   Nevertheless,  we  are  satisfied
             that the Appellant has no ties with Nigeria.  He is a stranger
             to the country, the people, and the way of life.   His  father
             may have ties but they are not ties of the  Appellant  or  any
             ties that could result in support  to  the  Appellant  in  the
             event of his return there.  Unsurprisingly, given  the  length
             of the Appellant's residence here, all of his  ties  are  with
             the United Kingdom.  Consequently the Appellant has so  little
             connection with Nigeria so as to mean  that  the  consequences
             for him in establishing private life there at the age  of  28,
             after 22 years residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,  would  be
             'unjustifiably harsh'.

         125. Whilst  each  case  turns  on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
             relevant to the assessment of whether a person has ties to the
             country to which they would have to go if they  were  required
             to leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not  limited
             to: the length of time a person has spent in  the  country  to
             which he would have to go if he were  required  to  leave  the
             United Kingdom, the age that the person left that country, the
             exposure that person has had to the  cultural  norms  of  that
             country, whether  that  person  speaks  the  language  of  the
             country, the extent of the family and friends that person  has
             in the country to which he is being deported  or  removed  and
             the quality of the relationships that person  has  with  those
             friends and family members."

25. Whilst the judge made a self-direction to the decision of  Ogundimu  at
    paragraph [10], I accept the submission made by Ms Pettersen  that  the
    assessment of the evidence  did  not  demonstrate  that  the  case  was
    considered properly in that context or in light of  the  decision  when
    considered as a whole.  The judge recorded that the Appellant had spent
    most of his life in Nigeria in a country where  he  would  be  familiar
    with the culture, tradition, history and had "considerable exposure  to
    the cultural norms of Nigeria" and also that he spoke the language  but
    nonetheless found that he had "no real continued connection to life  in
    Nigeria" (see paragraph  [11]).   This  appears  to  be  based  on  the
    evidence of the Appellant that he had no family in  Nigeria  (his  aunt
    having died).  Whilst the judge found that he had  cousins  in  Nigeria
    from his own evidence and that he had friends in Nigeria (whom  he  was
    in contact with on  Facebook),  the  judge  contrasted  that  with  the
    friendships that he had made in the  United  Kingdom  where  the  judge
    found he had been for a "significant period  of  time".   However,  the
    Appellant had not been in the United Kingdom for a "significant period"
    he had been in the UK on the temporary basis as a  student  since  2010
    for a period of four years at the time of  the  hearing.   Furthermore,
    whilst there were a number of letters in the bundle  from  friends  and
    from his contacts in the church which he had begun attending  in  2011,
    none of them had attended court  to  attest  to  the  strength  of  the
    relationship and to that end the evidence was wholly untested as to the
    strength of those relationships.

26.   In reaching the conclusions that he had "no real continued connection
    to life in Nigeria" and that "he had only remote and abstract links  to
    the country" wholly failed to take into account or place weight upon  a
    number of  relevant  factors  established  from  the  evidence.   Those
    factors are as follows; the Appellant had entered the United Kingdom on
    2nd September 2010 when aged 29, thus he had spent 29 years of his life
    in his country of nationality prior to coming to the United Kingdom and
    thus as Ms Pettersen submitted he had spent over 90%  of  his  life  in
    Nigeria.  Having spent such a long and significant period  of  time  in
    his country of nationality, it could not properly be said that  he  had
    no connection or no ties to life in Nigeria.  The facts of the case are
    not like those in the decision of Ogundimu where the Appellant came  to
    the United Kingdom at the age of 6 with his father  and  had  spent  22
    years living in the United Kingdom.   Here,  the  evidence  established
    that the Appellant had spent the greater part of his life  in  Nigeria;
    he was born there, he had spent  his  formative  years  there  and  was
    educated there.  He attended university in Nigeria and obtained  a  BSc
    in Business Education Management at the Niger Delta  University.   Thus
    the Appellant left his country of nationality as an adult.   There  are
    no language difficulties for the Appellant as the judge recorded and it
    cannot be said that after living in the United Kingdom for a period  of
    only four years that he had lost all links to the culture, history  and
    traditions  of  Nigeria  which  would  have  been  formed  during   his
    upbringing and  his  adulthood  and  life  in  Nigeria.   Applying  the
    decision of Ogundimu, the exposure that he had to the cultural norms of
    Nigeria must be significant given the length of residence of  28  years
    in Nigeria and four years in the United Kingdom.

27. It is accepted that the Appellant has spent four years  in  the  United
    Kingdom and during this time has established ties to the United Kingdom
    through his membership of the church which he entered in 2011  and  the
    friendships that he has established.  I take into account the  contents
    of the letters, as did the judge, attesting to the friendships that  he
    has made whilst a student, during his worship at his church and  during
    his time in employment, but that does not mean that  he  has  lost  his
    connections to Nigeria, his country of nationality.  The Appellant  has
    stated that he has no family in Nigeria although  his  evidence  before
    the judge was that he had cousins living  in  Nigeria  but  he  had  no
    contact with them.  But that of itself is not  a  determinative  factor
    when set against the other factors that have been set  out  above.   As
    the decision in Ogundimu makes it plain, that whilst each case turns on
    its own facts, the test is an exacting one and there must be a  rounded
    assessment of the relevant circumstances when considering a person  has
    "no ties" to their country of nationality.  Thus I find the  judge  did
    fall into  error  for  the  reasons  given  above.  The  Appellant  has
    confirmed that his circumstances have not changed since the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal in April and no further evidence has been filed
    in accordance with the directions sent with the grant of permission  by
    either party. I have taken into account the Appellant's  submission  to
    the Tribunal that his life is now in the UK and  that  has  no  friends
    whatsoever. However, the judge had found that he did  have  friends  in
    Nigeria that he had spoken to on Facebook.  Whilst  the  Appellant  has
    said that they are not friends but acquaintances and that "they do  not
    know me" even if it could be said that those friendships may be tenuous
    by reason that the Appellant has lived in the United Kingdom  for  four
    years that does not mean that he cannot re-establish  friendships  with
    those that he is in contact with or seek to do so.

28.   Furthermore, it cannot be said that he has "remote and abstract links
    to Nigeria" and, as the  Presenting  Officer  noted,  he  was  able  to
    contact a former neighbour concerning his aunt very quickly and  within
    a short period of time before the hearing (see the re-establishment  of
    email contact at page 16 of the bundle).

29.   Thus having taken into account all those factors identified above  at
    paragraphs 26-28, it cannot be said that the Appellant had "no ties" to
    Nigeria within the meaning of paragraph 276ADE(vi) and thus  he  cannot
    succeed under the Immigration Rules.

30.    As  set  out  earlier,  the  Appellant  could  not  meet  the  other
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE given his short  length  of  residence
    nor could be meet the requirements of Appendix FM as he had no  partner
    and/or child living in the United Kingdom.  Applying  the  decision  in
    Nagre  and  Gulshan,  there  are  no  good  arguable  grounds  for  the
    Appellant's circumstances to  be  considered  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant's private life claim  and  the  consideration  of
    those issues relevant to paragraph 276ADE(vi) take into account all the
    issues relevant to Article 8.  In terms of the principles in Nagre  and
    Gulshan there are no arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain
    outside of the Rules and in those circumstances it is not necessary  to
    go on to consider Article 8 in a wider context.

Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved an  error  on
a point of law.  The appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  allowed;  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The appeal is re-made  as
follows: appeal is dismissed.



Signed                          Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

