

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Numbers: IA/51944/2013
                                                               IA/51949/2013
                                                               IA/51952/2013
                                                               IA/51956/2013
                                                               IA/52091/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                               |Determination           |
|                                                   |Promulgated             |
|On 23rd July 2014                                  |On 4th August 2014      |
|                                                   |                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                  Between:

                                 ZAHID IQBAL
                                 FARHAT NAZ
                            MUHAMMAD ZAYAN IQBAL
                            MUHAMMAD SARIM IQBAL
                               SPOGAMI KHATTAK
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr M Blundell, instructed by Maliks and Khan
           Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellants are citizen of Pakistan. They  are  husband,  wife  and
      three children aged 8, 5 and 11 respectively.  They appeal against the
      determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dated  14th   May   2014
      dismissing their appeals against the  Respondent's  decision  of  22nd
      November 2013 refusing leave to remain and the decision to remove them
      to  Pakistan  under  section  47  of  the  Immigration,   Asylum   and
      Nationality Act 2006.


2.    On 1st March 2005, the Second Appellant  [the  Appellant]  arrived  in
      the UK with leave to enter as a  student.  The  First  Appellant,  her
      husband, and the Fifth Appellant, Spogami, were  her  dependants.  The
      Third Appellant, Zayan, was born on 29th March 2006.  The  Appellant's
      leave was extended on various occasions until 10th November 2013.  The
      Fourth Appellant, Sarim, was born on 20th March  2009.  The  Appellant
      applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  on  4th  October  2013.  The
      Respondent refused the application under Appendix FM, paragraph 276ADE
      and Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.

3.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Edwards found that  the  Appellant  and  her
      husband were unimpressive witnesses; they had changed  their  accounts
      which were contradictory and they were evasive. The Judge  found  that
      their evidence could not be relied upon. He found that  the  Appellant
      and her husband had relatives in Pakistan  and  had  visited  Pakistan
      twice. They spoke the language and were educated  there.  The  husband
      and children were dependants on the Appellant's  application  and  the
      application could not succeed under Appendix FM. The Judge found  that
      it would not be unreasonable for the Appellant and her family to  move
      to Pakistan. The children's education was  not  at  such  an  advanced
      stage that leaving now would put it in jeopardy. There were  perfectly
      good educational facilities in the Appellant's home country.

4.    The Judge concluded that there were no  compelling  circumstances  not
      covered by the Immigration Rules to allow an  inquiry  as  to  whether
      leave should be granted outside the Rules. In any event, the  decision
      was a proportionate one. The Respondent had considered section  55  of
      the Borders Act 2009. The family would be removed as a unit and it was
      in the best interests of the children to remain with their parents.

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brunnen
      on 5th June 2014 on the grounds that it was arguable the  Judge  erred
      in law in failing to consider the  best  interests  of  the  children,
      Zayan and Spogami, who had both been in the UK for over  7  years,  in
      concluding that it would be reasonable to expect them to leave the UK.



6.    Mr Blundell relied  on  the  three  grounds  in  the  application  for
      permission to appeal, but only made submissions in relation to  ground
      1: the best interests of the children. He submitted that  the  Judge's
      reference to section 55 was inadequate and his finding that  it  would
      not be unreasonable for the children to move to Pakistan because their
      education was not at such an advanced stage that leaving now would put
      it in jeopardy was lacking analysis within the terms  of  Azimi-Moayed
      (decisions affecting  children;  onward  appeals)  [2013]  UKUT  00197
      (IAC). The two older children had put down roots and had  reached  the
      seven-year benchmark. Spogami was not a young child  who  focussed  on
      her parents; she was at  an  advanced  stage  of  her  primary  school
      education and about to move to senior school. She had only  known  the
      UK system of education.


7.    Mr Blundell relied on EV (Philippines) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ  874  at
      paragraphs 31 to 47. The best interests of  the  children  required  a
      multifaceted approach. All but one  of  the  factors  referred  to  at
      paragraph 35 of the judgment pointed in  the  children's  favour.  The
      Judge had  failed  to  carry  out  a  detailed  assessment  (MK  (Best
      interests of the child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC)) and had he done
      so he would have allowed the appeal.

8.    Mr Duffy submitted that although the Judge's findings were  brief,  he
      had relied on the reasons for refusal letter which was  sufficient  to
      show that he had  considered  the  best  interests  of  the  children.
      Paragraph 276ADE was a two limb test; seven years  residence  was  not
      sufficient in itself. It was reasonable to expect a  child  to  follow
      parents who had no right to remain in the UK to the country of  origin
      (paragraph 58 of EV). Neither parent in this case had any reason to be
      in the UK and they were seeking  to  remain  on  the  basis  of  their
      children (paragraph 60 of EV). If  there  was  an  error  it  was  not
      material because it was in the children's best interests to  accompany
      their parents to Pakistan and re-adjust to life there.

9.    Mr Blundell submitted  that,  in  adopting  the  reasons  for  refusal
      letter, the Judge's analysis of the best interests of the children was
      insufficient. The Judge proceeded on the wrong assumption that it  was
      in the children's best interests to be with their  parents.  According
      to EV (Philippines), the  assessment  had  to  be  more  refined.  The
      starting point in  this  case  was  that  the  children,  particularly
      Spogami, had put down their own roots and they were not parcels to  be
      transported with their parents. The  Judge's  inquiry  was  brief  and
      inadequate as a matter of law. The Appellant was  not  an  overstayer,
      nor had she acted deceitfully. The factors in favour of  the  children
      militated in favour of a  positive  outcome.  There  were  no  adverse
      features in this case. The Judge had failed to consider the factors at
      paragraph 35 of EV (Philippines).

Discussion and conclusions

10.   I find that there is no merit in grounds 2 and 3  of  the  application
      for permission to appeal. The Judge found that the Appellants had ties
      to Pakistan, over and above nationality, and that  the  Appellant  and
      her husband were not credible. These findings were open to  the  Judge
      on the evidence  before  him  and  he  gave  cogent  reasons  for  his
      conclusions.

11.   The Judge's consideration of the best interests  of  the  children  is
      brief. However, his  finding  that  it  was  in  the  children's  best
      interests to remain  with  their  parents  was  open  to  him  on  the
      evidence. Mr Blundell submitted that the Judge had  ignored  the  fact
      that Spogami was at the end of her primary school  education  and  had
      made friendships and set  down  roots  outside  the  family  unit.  He
      submitted that the Judge failed to take into account the fact that the
      children had only been educated in the UK and had become  westernised.
      On the contrary, the Judge was well aware that the children were  only
      educated in  the  UK  and  took  into  account  their  school  reports
      (paragraph 13). The Judge also  took  into  account  the  letter  from
      Spogami at paragraph 22 of the determination.


12.   The  Judge  properly  directed  himself  following  Azimi-Moayed.  His
      starting point that the best interests of the children were to  remain
      with their parents was open to  him  on  this  evidence.  Mr  Blundell
      submitted that Spogami had developed ties  outside  the  family  unit.
      That may well be the case, but she was still only  11  years  old  and
      there was insufficient evidence before the Judge to show that  Spogami
      had developed ties outside the family unit such that it would  not  be
      in her best interests to remain with her parents.  Spogami  and  Zayan
      had lived in the UK for over seven years, but this in itself was not a
      compelling circumstance.

13.   The Judge took into account the evidence  in  the  witness  statements
      and the skeleton arguments at paragraph 6 of  the  determination.  The
      evidence before the Judge was that the Appellant and  her  family  had
      lived in the UK lawfully for nine years. The children were settled  in
      school and were doing well. They were fully  integrated  into  the  UK
      educational system and the UK  way  of  life.  Spogami  had  lived  in
      Pakistan as a baby, but had spent her formative years in the  UK.  She
      was about to finish primary school and move to secondary school. Zayan
      had some medical issues which were being monitored in  the  UK.  There
      was no  evidence  that  this  could  not  continue  in  Pakistan.  The
      Appellant and her family had developed close  friendships  and  strong
      ties to the UK. The Judge's finding that the Appellants'  removal  was
      proportionate in all  the  circumstances  was  open  to  him  on  this
      evidence.

14.   Taking the Appellants' case at its highest they  had  failed  to  show
      that there were compelling  circumstances  not  recognised  under  the
      Immigration Rules or that their removal would be  disproportionate  in
      all the circumstances.

15.   The Judge made no error on any point of law which  might  require  the
      determination to be set aside. The appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
      dismissed.  The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  dated  14th
      May 2014 shall stand.






Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
31st July 2014
