
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/51025/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 14 July 2014                               |on 15 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 ARTAN OOSJA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:       Mr D Byrne, Advocate, instructed by McGill & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mrs S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant appeals against  a  determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Morrison, promulgated on 11 February 2014.

2) The appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  proceeded  only  on  grounds  of
   Article 8 of the ECHR, outwith the Immigration Rules (see  paragraphs  2,
   5(vii) and 10 of the determination).

3) The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  firstly  quarrel  with  the
   judge's conclusion that the effect of requiring the appellant's  wife  to
   move to Italy would be serious but not unduly harsh.  Secondly, the judge
   is said to have erred also by looking at  the  possible  outcome  of  the
   appellant's asylum claim in Italy, rather than taking as a starting point
   an ex facie valid  asylum  claim.   Thirdly,  the  grounds  contend  that
   although the matter was not argued before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
   subsequent judgment of the Supreme Court in EM (Eritrea)  v  SSHD  [2014]
   UKSC12 "presents a compelling reason for the decision to be revisited  on
   the basis of an alteration in  applicable  jurisprudence  such  that  the
   appellant may now succeed on grounds that were  previously  unattainable.
   It is ... in the interests of justice  to  allow  such  a  proximate  and
   germane decision to be considered."

4) On 3 March  2014  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  permission  to
   appeal, because the judge "failed to consider EM."

5) In a response under Rule 24 the SSHD submits  that  the  judgment  in  EM
   does not add anything to the appellant's appeal so as to reveal any  flaw
   in the determination, and that it is unreasonable to criticise the  judge
   for failure to address a judgment not available to him.

6) Mr Byrne submitted on the EM ground that the Upper Tribunal should  remit
   to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  evidence  to  be  led  on  whether  the
   appellant's removal to Italy would involve a breach of Article 3  of  the
   ECHR, there being insufficient evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
   enable it to decide the matter.  He turned next to the Article 8 grounds,
   which had not been excluded from the grant of permission, and  argued  as
   follows.  The judge erred by not considering  "insurmountable  obstacles"
   prior to the logically second test of "unjustifiably harsh consequences".
    The determination at paragraphs 27 and 28 leapt over the correct test in
   the Rules.  That error was material because it was capable  of  affecting
   the outcome, there being different tests to apply at different stages.

7) Mr Byrne sought also to rely on a new point, set out at  paragraph  6  of
   the skeleton argument, of error in assuming that the appellant might  re-
   enter the UK if he  secured  refugee  status  in  Italy.   There  are  no
   Immigration Rules allowing for such transfer, or any provision within the
   Refugee Convention. The Secretary of State's  discretion  was  previously
   set out  in  an  asylum  policy  instruction  (API)  but  that  has  been
   withdrawn.  Mr Byrne produced a copy of  the  respondent's  "transfer  of
   refugee status - interim notice" dated 5 February 2013.

8) The skeleton argument also develops a "Chikwamba" point at  paragraphs  7
   and 8, which I find rather obscure and not particularly relevant.  I  did
   not understand Mr Byrne to rely significantly upon it.

9) Mrs Saddiq submitted that the judge  did  not  fall  into  the  error  of
   deciding the validity of the appellant's  asylum  claim,  but  considered
   rather the procedural options open to  the  appellant  and  his  position
   while awaiting an outcome in  Italy.   The  judge  specifically  reminded
   himself at paragraph 31 that it was not  for  him  to  speculate  on  the
   claim, and said that any view he expressed on it did not form part of his
   decision.  Even if the judge failed to consider the case along the  lines
   of EM, there was not shown to  be  anything  specific  in  that  case  to
   benefit the appellant.  As to Article 8, it was plain that there were  no
   insurmountable obstacles to family life between  the  appellant  and  his
   partner continuing outside the  UK.   It  was  questionable  whether  the
   system of the reception of asylum seekers would apply to  the  appellant,
   given that he is married to an EEA national with rights of free  movement
   as a Union citizen for herself and her family members.

10) I reserved my determination.

11) EM post dates the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  There can be  no
   error of  failing  to  consider  EM  directly.   Nor  can  there  be  any
   constructive  error  of  failing  to  apply  and  consider  the  law   as
   subsequently explained therein, when the appellant's case  was  expressly
   put to the First-tier Tribunal on Article 8 ECHR in respect of family and
   private life consequences, and not on any Article 3 arguments  along  the
   lines of the appellants in EM.

12) I was not referred to any principle derived from EM or any passage  from
   the judgement to show error of law by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  see
   nothing to suggest any error such as to entitle the appellant  to  a  new
   opportunity to develop in these proceedings a case  based  on  Article  3
   ECHR risk on from return to Italy, which  he  did  not  choose  to  argue
   previously.  He has made no application to  adduce,  even  at  this  late
   stage, any evidence to support any such case.

13) The judge had to make a proportionality  judgment.   The  case  did  not
   turn on any nicety of whether insurmountable obstacles and  unjustifiably
   harsh consequences are  significantly  different  tests,  or  which  test
   applies first.  The appellant's wife is an EU citizen with free  movement
   rights to live in Italy or the UK as  she  chooses.   There  are  various
   options available to the couple.  It was not  speculative  but  realistic
   for the judge to explore  these  options.   There  is  no  refinement  of
   respect for the appellant's asylum claim which required him  to  overlook
   that the appellant has willingly travelled to  and  from  Albania.    The
   Article 8 grounds amount only  to  disagreement  with  a  proportionality
   assessment properly reached.  (While  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  any
   further for present purposes, it might have been surprising if any  judge
   had concluded otherwise in the circumstances of this case.)

14) The judge observed at paragraph 30 that  if  successful  in  his  asylum
   application in Italy the appellant would be entitled  to  enter  the  UK.
   The appellant  did  not  maintain  to  the  contrary  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, or until providing his skeleton argument on 10 July 2014 to the
   Upper  Tribunal.   This  was  only  one  of  the  possible  eventualities
   considered by the judge, and not the critical reason for  dismissing  the
   appeal.

15) The interim notice which Mr  Byrne  produced  says  that  UK  policy  on
   transfer of refugee status has been withdrawn for  review,  but  it  also
   appears that applications for transfer will be considered if the  country
   which recognises an applicant as a  refugee  has  ratified  the  European
   Agreement on the Transfer of Responsibility for Refugees,  a  Council  of
   Europe Agreement of 16 October 1980.  Italy has ratified that  agreement.
   I do not think that withdrawal of an API indicates that the UK has ceased
   to honour its obligations as a signatory to a  European  Agreement.    As
   his wife's family member, the appellant would have other avenues of entry
   to the UK in any event. At its best the point, taken very late, goes to a
   matter well short of being determinative.

16)  The  determination  of  the   First-tier   Tribunal,   dismissing   the
   appellant's appeal, shall stand.


                               [pic]
                                15 July 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
