

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51983/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd March 2015                            |On 26th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                        MISS RANEE APPALONIA WILLIAMS
                      (Anonymity Direction Not Made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr G Brown (instructed by Fisher Meredith)
For the Respondent:  Mr G Harrison (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge N  M
    K Lawrence promulgated on 29th September 2014 by which he dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to  refuse
    her leave to remain in the UK as the primary carer of her daughter.
2.   Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    on the basis that despite Article 8 being raised in the grounds and  in
    the skeleton argument no mention was made by the Judge of Article 8. It
    was  also  alleged  that  the  Appellant  had  not  had  sight  of  the
    Respondent's; bundle prior to the hearing and was misled  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer on the day as to its contents, being told  it
    contained only the Letter of Refusal when it contained  other  relevant
    material referred to in the determination.

3.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal are quite  unnecessarily  long
    as the issue in this case is straightforward.

4.   The background to  this  appeal  is  that  the  Appellant,  a  Jamaican
    national who came to  the  UK  as  a  visitor  and  overstayed,  had  a
    relationship with another Jamaican national who has Indefinite Leave to
    Remain in the UK.  She had a child by him and as a result that child is
    British.

5.    The  Judge  found,  for  good  reason  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    untruthful.  However, the Judge appears to have allowed his low opinion
    of the Appellant and the child's father to lead him  to  fail  to  take
    into account relevant evidence and the law involved.

6.   The father of the Appellant's child has fathered  some  9  children  by
    different mothers.  It is clear from the  evidence  that  he  takes  no
    ongoing responsibility or interest in any of them.  There is  a  wealth
    of evidence from the Appellant that  at  the  maternity  unit  she  was
    treated as a single mother.  She has been housed by a  local  authority
    as a single parent.  Social services that support her treat  her  as  a
    single parent and the school that the child attends know nothing of the
    father. It is clear from the evidence that the Appellant is the primary
    carer of her child.  The  Judge  failed  to  take  that  evidence  into
    account and that was an error of law material to  the  outcome  and  as
    such I set aside the determination.

7.   I am able to redecide the appeal on the evidence that  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

8.   It may be that the Appellant has lied.  It may be  that  the  Appellant
    deliberately had a child by this man to protect her status in  the  UK.
    The father may have colluded in this.  However that  does  not  prevent
    her from having the benefit of Regulation 15A of the  EEA  Regulations.
    They are designed to protect the child, not the parent. Regulation  15A
    (4A) provides simply:-

         P (the Appellant) satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

              (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen (the  relevant
    British citizen");
              (b) the relevant British citizen is  resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom; and
              (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in
             the UK or in another EEA state if P were required to leave.

9.   On the evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  Appellant  has
    primary care of her daughter  in  accordance  with  Regulation  15A(7),
    comes within Regulation 15A (4A) and thus under Regulation 15A  (1)  is
    entitled to a derivative right to reside in the United  Kingdom  for  a
    long as her child resides here.

10.  Mr Harrison made no submissions to the contrary.

11.  Having set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  I  redecide
    the appeal and allow it under the EEA Regulations.





    Signed                 Dated 25th March 2015


       Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
