

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/51950/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision Promulgated            |
|On October 28, 2014             |On October 30, 2014             |
|                                |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR JOSEPH ACKAH
                          (No anonymity order made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Poynor Counsel, instructed by Elder
      Rahimi Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, born November 30, 1986 is a citizen of Ghana. On January
    10, 2013 the appellant entered the United Kingdom as a  family  visitor
    with leave valid until May 19, 2013. On April 25, 2013 he applied for a
    variation of his leave.  The  respondent  refused  his  application  on
    November 22, 2013 and at the same  time  a  decision  to  remove  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum  and  Nationality  Act  2006  (as
    amended) was taken.

 3. On December 6, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  arguing  the  application
    should have been allowed under article 8 ECHR.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Hanbury
    (hereinafter referred to  as  "the  FtTJ")  on  June  24,  2014.  In  a
    determination promulgated on July 4, 2014 he allowed the  appeal  under
    article 8 ECHR.

 5. The respondent appealed that decision on July 14, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Colyer  on
    September 8, 2014. He found the FtTJ may have erred for the reasons set
    out in the respondent's grounds.

 6. The appellant was in attendance at the hearing.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 7. Mr Tarlow adopted the grounds of appeal  and  submitted  the  FtTJ  had
    placed undue and exceptional weight on the Family  Court  order.   This
    decision was not binding on the Tribunal and  the  FtTJ  had  erred  in
    placing too much weight on it. The FtTJ failed to attach weight to  the
    fact the appellant had only been here a short period of  time  and  the
    fact there were other relatives to whom a residence order could be made
    and of course Social Services would be able to assist if there  was  no
    one else. There was nothing exceptional within the Rules  that  brought
    article 8 into play.

 8. Ms Poynor relied on a rule 24 response and submitted the respondent had
    not considered the determination as a whole. The FtTJ had  the  benefit
    of a detailed skeleton argument in which counsel had set out the weight
    and  approach  to  be  taken  with  family  court  decisions  in   this
    jurisdiction. The FtTJ had regard to Nimako-Boateng (residence  orders-
    Anton considered) [2012] UKUT 00126 (IAC)  and  followed  the  approach
    suggested. He took the Order as his starting point and then  considered
    the facts. He did not find the order determinative but merely  evidence
    that should be given substantial weight in light of the fact that court
    had reports from a Guardian ad litem and an independent social  worker.
    The FtTJ had both reports and other evidence  from  that  court  before
    him. There was no error in law. As regards the second ground of  appeal
    there was also no error. The grandmother did not speak good English and
    the evidence suggested that this appellant had a good understanding  of
    English. The FtTJ found there were cultural and language issues and  it
    was not contested the child could not speak Tui. The fact the appellant
    spoke Tui did  not  go  assist  any  assessment  of  what  was  in  the
    children's best interests.

 9. Mr Tarlow in response emphasised that the ftTj had treated  the  Family
    Court decision as determinative and that amounted to an error.

    ASSESSMENT OF ERROR IN LAW.

10. This is an appeal against the FtTJ's  decision  to  allow  this  appeal
    under article 8 ECHR.

11. The FtTJ allowed the appeal  based  on  the  evidence  and  submissions
    presented to him. The FtTJ was placed in an invidious position  because
    it seems Southwark Social Service encouraged the appellant to  come  to
    the United Kingdom for a visit in order to assess his suitability as  a
    potential carer for two children. The FtTJ was not  provided  with  any
    visa application form but it is clear that once he was here  he  became
    involved in his nephews' lives and on March 28, 2013 a residence  order
    was made in his favour.

12. The Family  Court  heard  representations  from  the  Local  Authority,
    Counsel for the children, mother and grandmother  and  expert  evidence
    from the court appointed guardian ad litem and  an  independent  social
    worker. The conclusion drawn was that the two children (twins now  aged
    10) should reside with their grandmother and the appellant.

13. The FtTJ noted the appellant  could  not  satisfy  the  Rules  but  was
    satisfied he could deal with this  outside  of  the  Rules.  I  do  not
    disagree with his approach as the rules do not provide for  a  scenario
    such as this. He then applied the approach set  out  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 00027 in paragraphs [13] to [15] of his  determination.  The  FtTJ
    was clearly aware of the family matrix and circumstances.

14. He reminded himself that one of the factors he had to consider was  the
    "best interests of the child" and he also had regard  to  the  guidance
    set out in Nimako-Boateng (residence  orders-Anton  considered)  [2012]
    UKUT 00126 (IAC) and this was expanded on in some  detail  in  original
    counsel's skeleton argument. He placed great  weight  on  the  detailed
    evidence before the Family Court. Sometimes in Family court proceedings
    the only evidence is that of the parties but in  this  case  there  was
    evidence from a guardian,  social  worker  and  an  independent  social
    worker. There conclusions were that the child's best interest was  with
    the appellant and they examined his and relevant party's suitability to
    care for these children.

15. The FtTJ was entitled to place weight on the court's conclusions and he
    did so in paragraph [16] of his determination and  he  also  noted  the
    respondent did not  oppose  that  approach.  He  concluded  that  their
    welfare would be adversely affected if the  appellant  were  forced  to
    leave. He had regard to the fact a court had properly assessed what was
    in the childrens' best interests.

16. Whilst best interests of the child are not the only  consideration  the
    FtTJ was entitled to give them more weight than normal. He was aware of
    the consequences of refusing the appellant's application and  concluded
    it would be disproportionate to remove him.

17. Mr Tarlow raised a point in paragraph [8] of his  grounds  about  there
    being no contact order in place for family members. I do  not  see  how
    this helps the respondent's position albeit this was a case  where  the
    court made no contact order because one was not needed. Ironically,  if
    no other person could look after the children then this,  if  anything,
    strengthened the appellant's hand.

18. There was no error in law.

    DECISION


19. There is no material error of law and I uphold the original decision.

20. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.



Signed:                           Dated: October 28, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not alter the decision to make no fee award.

Signed:                           Dated: October 28, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
