
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51070/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 29 October 2014                           |On 9 January 2015             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                               OLIVIA KWABIAH
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Adama-Adams
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born in 1971.  She appealed against
    a decision of the Secretary of State made on 2 December 2013 to  refuse
    to issue a residence card as confirmation of a right  to  reside  as  a
    family member of Joseph Ewusi Kusi a citizen of the Netherlands.

 2. The application was considered under  Regulation  7  and  8(5)  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 3. In refusing the application the Respondent was not satisfied  that  the
    customary marriage  by  proxy  on  8  August  2010  was  registered  in
    accordance  with  the   Ghanaian   Customary   Marriage   and   Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985.  In addition the Respondent was not  satisfied
    that the Appellant was in a durable relationship.

 4. She appealed.

 5. In a determination promulgated on 8 July 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Abebrese dismissed the appeal under the Regulations.

 6. The judge's main findings are at paragraphs [14  ff].   He  stated  (at
    [14]) 'In respect of the requirement for a  statutory  declaration  ...
    this is a mandatory requirement in the proving of  the  validity  of  a
    Ghanaian customary marriage'.

 7. He went on: 'The statutory declaration that accompanies the marriage it
    was concluded by the Respondents (sic) did not state that a  dowry  had
    been paid and it did not state the current condition or marital  status
    of the parties at the time of the marriage.  As such the declaration is
    not  valid  in  accordance  with   Customary   Marriage   and   Divorce
    (Registration) Law 1985 and therefore the marriage certificate  is  not
    valid without a valid statutory declaration' [15].

 8. The judge went on to note submissions on the  Appellant's  behalf  that
    the requirement for a statutory declaration  may  be  replaced  by  the
    obtaining of a certificate which had occurred in this case.

 9. Also, the comments of Professor Woodman who  had  lodged  a  report  in
    support of  that proposition.  However the judge  considered  that  'in
    this instance the wording of the 1985 law  is  clear  in  that  one  is
    required to provide a statutory declaration.  This is mandatory  in  as
    far as the words which are inserted to make this  absolutely  clear  is
    (sic) "shall" as opposed to "may".' [15].

10. The judge concluded on  this  matter:  'The  statutory  declaration  is
    defective in relation to the matters which ought to have been stated in
    that declaration but which were not.  The statutory declaration  states
    that the Appellant was represented at the customary wedding by a family
    member.  The relationship to the Appellant is stated as her father, but
    the  Appellant  has  not  provided  evidence  in  the  form  of   birth
    certificates/marriage certificates, etc., to show that she  is  related
    to this person as claimed.  The Tribunal therefore concludes  that  the
    findings of the Respondent is (sic) in accordance with the 1985 law and
    that it is not acceptable not to have had these requirements dealt with
    in the statutory declaration.  The Tribunal also makes the finding that
    the fact an updated statutory declaration  was  provided  in  order  to
    cover any defects is an indication that the  original  one  did  indeed
    have defects and that the later document was  created  for  immigration
    purposes and that this does cast  doubts  on  the  credibility  of  the
    documentation.' [16].

11. Having concluded that the marriage and the relationship  had  not  been
    proved  in  accordance  with  the  requirements  for  registration  and
    statutory declaration, the judge went on to consider  the  relationship
    under Regulation 8(5) in respect of whether or not there is  a  durable
    relationship.

12. The judge on the evidence before him found  that  there  was  not.   He
    stated: 'The parties to the marriage were not credible in  relation  to
    evidence that they both gave in respect of the relationship.  They gave
    inconsistent answers in relation to occasions when they may  have  gone
    to a restaurant, whether or not they have arguments as a couple and  it
    was significant that there had been no celebration  recorded  of  their
    marriage in Ghana by the parties.   The  Tribunal  do  not  attach  any
    significance to the fact that the Appellant was not wearing  a  wedding
    ring, this in itself in customary marriages is not  untypical.   Weight
    however is being  attached  to  the  above  mentioned  inconsistencies,
    particularly bearing in mind that it has been the Appellant's case that
    they have been living together for a significant amount of  years,  one
    would have expected there to be some sort of celebration to mark  their
    marriage which had taken place in their absence in Ghana.' [17].

13. He also dismissed the appeal under Regulation 8(5).

14. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by a  judge
    on 15 September 2014.

15. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Adama-Adams sought essentially
    to rely on the brief grounds.  In summary, the judge had failed to have
    regard to the cases of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT
    00024 (IAC) and TA and Others  (Kareem  explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
    00310 (IAC).  This was material because letters had been produced  from
    Dutch sources which supported  the  claim  that  Dutch  law  recognised
    customary marriage by proxy.  Also,  the  judge  failed  adequately  to
    explain why he preferred the Secretary of State's position on customary
    marriage to that of the expert, Professor Woodman.

16. Mr Adama-Adams also sought to raise  a  challenge  to  the  First  tier
    judge's decision to dismiss the appeal under Regulation 8(5). Mr  Duffy
    objected. Nothing had been raised in the grounds seeking permission  in
    that regard. I agreed and upheld  the  objection.  The  decision  under
    Regulation 8(5) stands.

17. Mr Duffy accepted that the judge had  erred  in  failing  to  refer  to
    Kareem but questioned whether it was material as the evidence  produced
    from the Dutch sources did not, in his view, show that the marriage was
    recognised by the EEA State of which her partner is a member.

18. In considering this matter I concluded that in failing to  have  regard
    to the relevant law and evidence that was before  him  the  First  tier
    judge materially  erred.  I  set  aside  the  decision  in  respect  of
    Regulation 7 and proceed to remake it  in  light  of  the  guidance  in
    Kareem and having regard to the Dutch evidence. Nothing further was put
    before me.

19. In paragraph 11 of its determination the Tribunal in Kareem  recognised
    that the question of whether a person is married is a  matter  governed
    by the national laws of the individual Member States.

20. Moving forward to paragraph 16, the Tribunal once again observed that:-

         '... where there are issues of EU law that involve the  nationality
         laws of Member States, then the law that applies will be the law of
         the Member State of the nationality and not the host Member State.'

21. The reasoning continues in paragraph 18:

         'Within EU law, it is essential that Member States  facilitate  the
         free movement and residence rights  of  Union  citizens  and  their
         spouses.  This would not be achieved if it  were  left  to  a  host
         Member State to decide whether a Union  citizen  has  contracted  a
         marriage.  Different Member States would be able to reach different
         conclusions about that Union citizen's marital status.  This  would
         leave Union citizens unclear as to whether their spouses could move
         freely with them; and might mean that the Union citizen could  move
         with greater freedom to one Member State (where the marriage  would
         be recognised) than to another  (where  it  might  not  be).   Such
         difficulties  would  be  contrary  to  the   fundamental   EU   law
         principles.   Therefore,  we  perceive  EU  law  as  requiring  the
         identification of the legal system of which a marriage is  said  to
         have been contracted in such a way as  to  ensure  that  the  Union
         citizen's marital status  is  not  at  risk  of  being  differently
         determined by different Member States.  Given  the  intrinsic  link
         between nationality of a Member State and free movement rights,  we
         conclude that the legal system of  the  nationality  of  the  Union
         citizen must itself govern whether a marriage has been contracted.'

22. That such was the position was made clear in TA and Others.   The  head
    note reads: 'Following the decision in Kareem ... the determination  of
    whether there is  a  marital  relationship  for  the  purposes  of  the
    Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations  2006  must  always  be   examined   in
    accordance with the laws of the  Member  State  from  which  the  Union
    citizen obtains nationality.

23. The Dutch sources do not advance the Appellant's case.   A  letter  (13
    March 2014) from the Embassy of the Kingdom of the  Netherlands  states
    merely that  the  'recognition  of  marriages  contracted  outside  the
    Netherlands is governed by articles 10:31 to 10:34 of the  Dutch  Civil
    Code'.  It adds that an English summary of the relevant parts is  given
    in paragraphs 27 and 28 of Kareem.  The letter  concludes:  'The  Dutch
    embassy will only draw conclusions on the recognition of a marriage  in
    the context of an application such as a Dutch passport application.  It
    is thus not possible to comment on the documentary evidence required'.

24. The second item is a letter (28 February 2014) apparently from a  Dutch
    'advocaat', Mr Van Yperen-Groenleer.  He  states  in  response  to  the
    question whether or not a proxy Ghanaian marriage will be recognised in
    the Netherlands: 'According to article 10:31 from the Dutch Civil  Code
    an outer (sic) the Netherlands closed marriage that is  legally  follow
    (sic) the law of the State  where  the  marriage  took  place  will  be
    recognized as such.  There is one  exception.   Article  10:32  of  the
    Dutch Civil Code  stipulates  that  approval  to  an  enclosed  outdoor
    wedding is dismissed when the marriage is incompatible with the  public
    policy.  A valid foreign proxy marriage is (probably) not  against  our
    public order, so the proxy part will not be  a  stay  in  the  way  for
    recognition.  Almost all valid foreign marriages are recognised in  the
    Netherlands as long as they are not bigamies'.

25. The writer continues: 'However, I expect that the municipality will not
    consider for granted  proved  (sic)  the  existence  of  the  marriage.
    Therefore I assume that recognition in  the  Netherlands  should  start
    with proving the marriage.  If this marriage can be proven and if it is
    a formal marriage as you informed me, I don't expect problems with  the
    recognition of this marriage in the Netherlands.   Of  course  I  can't
    give you guarantees.  If you want  to  be  sure,  you  should  ask  the
    municipality where the registration of the marriage should take place'.

26. The writer provides no personal  details  or  a  curriculum  vitae.  He
    describes himself as 'specialised in international family law'.   As  a
    family lawyer he represents 'a lot of expats with  their  divorces  and
    other family law related matters'.  He is 'a  publisher  in  specialist
    journals' though no details are given.  He is a 'teacher  international
    private law at the University in Leiden next to my job  as  a  lawyer'.
    He adds that to answer  the  question  he  'also  had  contact  with  a
    specialist (no details) working at the municipality in Amsterdam  (who,
    he says, is an expert) in international lineage law and we once gave  a
    course together about problems in  the  area  of  international  family
    law'.

27. The Tribunal in Kareem considered Dutch  law  (from  [25]).   It  noted
    Articles 10:31 and 10:32 of the Dutch Civil Code  and  stated  at  [29]
    'The passages we cite are  silent  on  whether  a  proxy  or  customary
    marriage would be recognised in  the  Netherlands  or  whether  such  a
    marriage  would  be  incompatible  with  Dutch  public  order.   We  do
    recognise,   however,   that   article   1:66   permits   marriage   by
    representation in  certain  circumstances,  which  would  suggest  that
    marriage in the absence of one of the parties would not be contrary  to
    Dutch public order.  However, ... we  have  not  received  evidence  on
    these complex issues and have been given no help in how Dutch law might
    apply'.

28. The Tribunal went on at [30]  to  take  note  of  article  10:27  which
    explains that section 10.3  of  the  Civil  Code  which  addresses  the
    contracting and recognition of the  validity  of  marriages,  of  which
    articles 10:31 and 10:32 are part is to implement the Convention on the
    Celebration and Recognition of the validity of marriages  concluded  at
    the Hague on 14 March 1978.  The Tribunal added that 'even  insofar  as
    it  applies  to  the  Netherlands,  we  note  that  article  8  of  the
    Convention,  which  addresses  the  recognition  of  the  validity   of
    marriages,  specifically,  excludes  proxy   marriages   and   informal
    marriages from its scope'.

29.  As the Tribunal in TA noted at ([22]): 'It is relevant to observe that
    the Tribunal in Kareem itself gave consideration to the relevant  legal
    provisions of the Dutch Civil Code and concluded on the evidence before
    it, that it was not satisfied that  the  Netherlands  was  one  of  the
    countries that recognised the validity of proxy marriages.'

30. I do not doubt that the Dutch 'advocaat' has sought to give to the best
    of his knowledge an accurate response to the  question  asked  of  him.
    However, I do not consider that he has established that he is an expert
    in this field. I also do not consider that some sixteen lines in half a
    page in a letter remotely equate to an expert report providing reliable
    evidence about the recognition of the marriage under the  laws  of  the
    EEA country. His brief comments do not show how the law  is  understood
    or applied. Mere assertion as to the effect of such laws can  carry  no
    weight. He is uncertain: 'A valid foreign proxy marriage is  (probably)
    not against our public order...' The burden of proving the fact that it
    is a valid marriage is on the Appellant. There is  simply  insufficient
    evidence before me on, as the Tribunal in Kareem put it, 'these complex
    issues' [29]. As indicated the letter from the embassy does not advance
    the case.

31. Professor  Woodman's  report  which  does  not  address  the  issue  of
    recognition of the marital relationship under Dutch law does  not  take
    the Appellant's case forward.

32. For the reasons stated I find that the Appellant and Mr Kusi are not to
    be treated as married for the purposes of  the  2006  Regulations  and,
    therefore, that the Appellant cannot establish that  she  is  a  family
    member for the purposes of Regulation 7 of those Regulations.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error  on  a  point  of
law and it is set aside. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeal  under
the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway




