
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51206/2013
                                                               Oral judgment

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 July 2014                               |On 31 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Mr Nana Aninakwa Bonsu Asante

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Adams, Counsel, instructed by Makanda Bart & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The respondent Mr Nana Aninakwa Bonsu Asante, whom I shall refer to  as
    the appellant as he was before the First-tier Tribunal, is a citizen of
    Ghana and his date of birth is 29 June 1967.

2.   The appellant made an application on 10 September 2013 for a  residence
    card pursuant to the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 on the basis of his marriage to an  EEA  national,  a  citizen  of
    Belgium, Agnes Osie Bonsu.  In support of his application the appellant
    provided a  marriage  certificate  dated  12  June  2012  in  order  to
    establish that a marriage by proxy took place in Ghana on 30 June 2011.

3.    The  application  was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  because
    according to the decision-maker the appellant had not provided evidence
    that the marriage was conducted in accordance with  law  in  Ghana  and
    that  the  appellant  had  not  established  the  durability   of   the
    relationship.

4.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    and his appeal was allowed by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Sweet
    following a hearing on 7 April 2014.  The  determination  is  dated  17
    April 2014.

5.   The appellant and the EEA sponsor attended the hearing  and  gave  oral
    evidence.  The First-tier Tribunal made findings at paragraphs  20  and
    21 of the determination.

         "20. The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the civil standard
             of the balance of probabilities applies.  The Appellant  first
             arrived in the UK as a visitor in 2005 with a  two-year  visa,
             under which he could spend six months at a time in the UK.  He
             returned to Ghana and came again to the UK in  2007.   He  met
             his wife, Agnes, in late 2009.  She is a Belgian  citizen  and
             therefore an EEA national.  It appears that  the  relationship
             started some three months after their meeting and some time in
             February 2011 the Appellant proposed  to  her.   They  entered
             into a proxy marriage in Ghana on 30th June  2011  and  it  is
             that marriage which the Respondent does not  accept  as  being
             recognised, because following CB (validity of marriage:  proxy
             marriage) Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080 three  requirements  exist
             for a proxy marriage to be accepted as valid  in  the  UK  for
             immigration purposes: the type of marriage must be  recognised
             in the country in which it took place; and the  marriage  must
             have been properly executed as to satisfy the requirements  of
             the law of the country in which it took place; and there  must
             be nothing in the law of either party's  country  of  domicile
             that restricts the freedom to enter into  the  marriage.   The
             Respondent considered that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided
             evidence that the EEA sponsor was of Ghanaian descent or  that
             either of them have direct familiar links to Ghana.


         21.  I have reached a contrary view, because the Respondent did not
             give consideration to the IDI dated July  2012  and  published
             4th December 2013, and conclude that the marriage  was  indeed
             recognised in Ghana and was  properly  executed  in  order  to
             satisfy  the  law  of  that  country  and  neither  party  was
             restricted from entering  into  that  marriage.   Furthermore,
             pursuant to Amoako there is no requirement to show  that  both
             parties are of Ghanaian origin, but in any event it  is  clear
             that the Appellant and his spouse are both of Ghanaian origin.
              It follows therefore that in  my  view  the  Appellant  is  a
             family member being the spouse of the EEA national.  It is not
             necessary therefore for me to  consider  whether  there  is  a
             durable  relationship  under  Regulation  8(5),  because   the
             Appellant meets the family member requirement under Regulation
             7.  It follows therefore that the Appellant should  be  issued
             with a residence card."

6.   The Judge found that the marriage by proxy was valid and recognised  in
    Ghana and that there was no need for him  to  go  on  to  consider  the
    durability of the relationship.  The Secretary  of  State  was  granted
    permission to appeal by Judge Hollingworth on 6 May 2014.  The  grounds
    seeking permission argue that the Judge failed to consider  whether  or
    not the marriage was valid in Belgium and the Judge misdirected himself
    in relation to Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24
    (IAC).  The Judge failed to engage with the  submissions  made  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing.

7.   I heard oral submissions from both representatives.  Mr  Melvin  relied
    on the case of TA and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316
    (IAC).  Mr Adams was unsuccessful in trying to persuade me that TA  and
    Others was wrong.  In my view the Judge made a material error  of  law.
    It is clear from recent jurisprudence that whether there is  a  marital
    relationship for the purposes of the 2006 Regulations  must  always  be
    examined in accordance with the laws of the member state from which the
    Union citizen obtains nationality.  The Judge did not consider  whether
    the marriage was recognised in Belgium and this amounts to  a  material
    error of law.

8.   I set aside the decision  and  pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(a)  of  the
    Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 there was no evidence before
    the First-tier Tribunal that the marriage is recognised in Belgium, and
    I remake the decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(ii) of the 2007  Act
    and  dismiss  the  appeal  pursuant  to  Regulation  7  of   the   2006
    Regulations.

9.   The Judge did not consider the durability of the relationship and  this
    issue must be determined. There has been a previous hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal on 10 June 2013 before Lord Justice Matthews  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge King.  The matter had on that occasion been  listed  for
    an error of law hearing.  Mr Melvin informed me that on  that  occasion
    the appellant attended alone and unrepresented and he was warned by the
    panel that its provisional view was that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    made a material error in relation to Regulation 7 and if that  was  the
    decision the matter should be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    make findings of fact relating to the durability of  the  relationship.
    The appellant and the EEA sponsor both attended before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The appellant attended the hearing before me alone.  He  had
    informed his representative that his wife was  unwell.   There  was  no
    further evidence submitted by either party.



10.  I  remit  the  matter  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal should consider the durability  of  the  relationship  in  the
    context of Regulation 8 (with regard to Regulation 17(4) and (5) of the
    2006 Regulations).






Signed            Joanna McWilliam                    Date 20 July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


