
[pic]
IAC-FH-ck-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51109/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2016                   |On 5 February 2016                   |
|Given extempore                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr Bastos Howard Jones
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R. Subramanian, Counsel instructed by Lambeth
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent (hereinafter "the claimant") is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria
    born on 25 December 1964.  He came to the UK in July 2008 as the spouse
    of an EEA national to whom he  has  been  married  since  2001.   On  5
    October 2014 he applied for a permanent residence card as  confirmation
    of the right to reside in the UK.  The Secretary of State  refused  the
    application on the basis  that  the  claimant's  spouse  has  not  been
    exercising treaty rights for a continuous period of five years.

 2. The claimant then appealed and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Cockrill.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
    claimant's spouse was not exercising treaty rights and consequently the
    claimant  was  not  entitled  to  a  permanent  residence  card  as   a
    consequence of his relationship with her.

 3. However, the First-tier Tribunal then considered whether  the  claimant
    was entitled to a permanent residence card because of his  relationship
    with his wife's eldest son, a German national born in October 1994  who
    has been living with the claimant in the UK since 2008 as part  of  the
    family unit and has been exercising treaty rights as  a  worker  and  a
    student.  The First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the  claimant  was
    entitled to a permanent residence card because he was a  family  member
    of his wife's son such that  Regulation  15(1)(b)  of  the  Immigration
    (EEA) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations") was satisfied.

 4. The grounds of appeal submit that the First-tier  Tribunal  misdirected
    itself as to the proper  application  of  Regulation  15(1)(b)  as  the
    claimant cannot bring himself within the description of a family member
    under Regulation 7 in relation to his stepson.

    Consideration

 5. Having heard submissions from Ms Fijiwala and  Mr  Subramanian,  it  is
    clear that this appeal turns on the interpretation of Regulations 7 and
    15 of the 2006 Regulations.

 6. Regulation 15(1)(b) stipulates the  circumstances  in  which  a  family
    member of an EEA national will acquire a right to residence in  the  UK
    permanently.  The question, therefore, is whether  the  claimant  is  a
    family member of his stepson, who is the relevant EEA national.

 7. It is important to keep in mind that Regulation 15(1)(b) requires  that
    the claimant must be a family member of  his  stepson  and  it  is  not
    sufficient to satisfy the Regulation to show  that  the  stepson  is  a
    family member of the claimant.  The significance  of  this  distinction
    becomes clear  when  we  consider  how  family  member  is  defined  in
    Regulation 7.

 8. I turn now to Regulation 7. Regulation 7(1)(a) provides that a person's
    spouse is his family member.  The claimant clearly is not his stepson's
    spouse.  Regulation 7(1)(b) provides that (in certain circumstances)  a
    person's direct descendants or that of his or  her  spouse  are  family
    members.  The claimant is not his stepson's direct descendant  (or  the
    direct descendent of his step-son's  spouse).   It  is  true  that  the
    claimant's stepson is the direct descendant of the  claimant's  spouse,
    but that relationship does not satisfy Regulation 15(1)(b), which, as I
    have explained, requires that the claimant must be the family member of
    an EEA national, not the other way around. Regulation 7(1)(c)  provides
    that a person's dependent direct relatives in his  ascending  line  are
    family members but the claimant is not a dependant of his  stepson  and
    therefore the claimant cannot avail himself of subsection (1)(c).

 9. It is therefore my conclusion  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  a
    material error of law in finding that the claimant satisfied Regulation
    15(1)(b) by way of a relationship with his step son  as  he  is  not  a
    family member as defined in the 2006 Regulations.  As the  claimant  is
    unable to satisfy the  requirements  of  Regulation  15  I  remake  the
    decision and dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

 a. The appeal is allowed.

 b. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.

 c. I remake the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  dismissing  the
    appeal.

 d. No anonymity direction is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 2 February 2016               |

