
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/51350/2013
                                                               IA/51360/2013
                                                               IA/51371/2013
                                                               IA/51378/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 20 November 2015                  |on 25 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                         MR CLAUDIO MERCEADO NAVARRO
                         MRS ELEANOR HEMADY NAVARRO
                   MS CLAUDEAN MARIE ALEXIS HEMADY NAVARRO
                     MR CLAUDE ALEJANDRE NVARRO NAVARRO
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms R Sharma of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr K Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are citizens of the  Philippines  born  on  26  February
    1966, 25 August 1965 6 April 1993 and 5  February  1995,  respectively.
    They are husband and wife  and  their  adult  son  and  daughter.  They
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 27 August 2013 to refuse to grant them leave to remain
    under paragraph 276 ADE of the Immigration Rules.

 2.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A.  Martins  dismissed  that  appellant's
    appeals. Permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge J. M. Holmes stating  that  it  was  arguable
    that the Judge did not consider ordeal with Article 8 even if it  means
    they may be ultimately unsuccessful.

 3. There is no  dispute  between  the  parties  that  the  Judge  did  not
    specifically consider Article 8 in her determination. Mr Kandola argued
    that it is not a material error of law and the Judge having found  that
    there are no significant obstacles for the appellants to return to  the
    Philippines,  there  was  no  need  for  the  Judge  to  consider   the
    appellant's private life in this country. He argued that there  are  no
    compelling circumstances where the Judge  should  have  considered  the
    appellant's appeal outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. Mr Sharma argued that there are many factors in the  appeal  which  are
    not catered for under paragraph 276 ADE and therefore there should be a
    freestanding evaluation under Article 8.

 5. Mr Kandola submitted that the whole family are overstayers since August
    2012. Any private life established has been without any  legal  status.
    They are all adults and I  must  consider  paragraph  117B  (5).  Their
    private life therefore must carry little weight. The Judges found  that
    there are explanations for why they cannot return to the Philippines is
    not credible. They are  all  adults  that  they  can  go  back  to  the
    Philippines. They are a financial  burden  on  the  state  because  the
    children are  studying  in  this  country.  There  are  no  exceptional
    circumstances in this appeal when they should be allowed under  Article
    8.

    Decision as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

 6. The only ground of appeal for me to consider in this appeal is  whether
    the Judge materially erred in law by  not  considering  the  appellants
    private life rights pursuant to Article 8 in the United Kingdom.

 7. There is no dispute that the appellants do not meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules  which  are  Article  8  compliant.  Is  it  then
    incumbent on the Judge to consider the appellant's  Article  8  appeal,
    notwithstanding the Judges findings that the appellants who  have  been
    in this country only since 2009 and without leave since  2007,  have  a
    private life worthy of protection  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.

 8. The evidence before  the  Judge  was  that  the  appellants  have  been
    overstayers in the United Kingdom  since  August  2012.  Therefore  any
    private life that they may have established has been without any  legal
    status. The Judge made many adverse credibility  findings  against  the
    first and second  appellant,  who  are  husband  and  wife.  The  first
    appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student and the other  family
    members followed him as his dependents. The Judge noted  that  all  the
    family members came to this country  based  on  the  first  appellant's
    student visa and they all stated that they understood that it was their
    intention to return to the Philippines at the end of their studies.

 9. The judge noted that the only reason given for why  the  family  cannot
    return to the Philippines is because of the debts  owed  by  the  first
    appellant. The Judge found that  the  appellant's  evidence  that  they
    cannot return to the Philippines because the first appellant has unpaid
    debts in that country was not credible and the Judge  did  not  believe
    it. The judge properly found that the first appellant's  wife  remained
    in the Philippines for a  year  before  joining  her  husband  in  this
    country and there was no evidence that the appellant's wife experienced
    any difficulties on account of not paying back the debt. The Judge  was
    also not satisfied that the appellant's do not have family  members  in
    the Philippines as he found the evidence is consistent. The Judge found
    that the appellants have spent the  majority  of  their  lives  in  the
    Philippines and can return as a family.

10. The appellants' complaint now is that the Judge did not consider  their
    Article 8 rights. The case of Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014]  UKUT
    00025 (IAC) focused on the issue of private life within Article 8.  The
    headnote states:

         "The judgments of the Supreme Court in Patel and Others v Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2013] UKSC 72 serve  to  re-focus
         attention on the nature and purpose of Article 8 of the  ECHR  and,
         in particular, to  recognise  that  Article's  limited  utility  in
         private life cases that are far removed from the protection  of  an
         individual's moral and physical integrity".

11. Where an area of the Rules does not have such an express mechanism, the
    approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31] in particular) and Gulshan  (Article
    8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC)  should  be
    followed: i.e. after applying the requirements of the  rules,  only  if
    there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside
    them is it necessary for Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under them."

12. Therefore it is not always necessary to engage the five step process in
    Razgar when it is obvious that the appellants do  not  have  a  private
    life in the United Kingdom which requires  protection.  There  were  no
    arguably  good  grounds  for  granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

13. The appellants  are  overstayers  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  first
    appellant came to this country as a student. The family could not  have
    had an expectation that they could continue to  live  in  this  country
    when they could not satisfy the Immigration Rules for further leave  to
    remain. They have not identified any  exceptional  circumstances  which
    have not been catered for within the Immigration Rules.

14. At the hearing, the appellants'  representative  said  that  there  are
    circumstances in the appellant's appeal which have not been catered for
    under the Immigration Rules but was not able  to  tell  me  what  these
    exceptional circumstances  are  other  than  to  say  the  daughter  is
    partially blind and the second appellant does community  service.  This
    does not constitute exceptional  circumstances  such  as  their  appeal
    should be considered pursuant to Article 8.

15. I find that there is no material error of law in the determination  and
    the determination stands. There was no requirement  for  the  Judge  to
    have considered the appellants appeals pursuant to  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights given his findings pursuant to  the
    Immigration Rules.

16. Even if I was  to  remake  the  decision,  considering  the  appellants
    circumstances, I would find that they do not have a private life in the
    United Kingdom which  requires  protection.  The  appellants  have  not
    demonstrated that there are any arguably good grounds for granting them
    leave to remain outside the Immigration Rules and to  consider  whether
    there are compelling circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under
    them. The first appellant has been in this country since 2009  and  his
    family members joined him a year later.

17. I would also find that it  is  entirely  proportionate  to  immigration
    control that the appellants are  required  to  leave  the  country  and
    replicate whatever private life they have in their home country.

18. The Judge has not made a material error  of  law  in  not  specifically
    considering the appellants  Article  8  rights,  in  respect  of  their
    private lives pursuant to the European Convention on human rights.  The
    Immigration Rules are Article  8  compliant  and  the  Judge  carefully
    considered  all  the  evidence  in  this  appeal  and  found  that  the
    appellants, who are unlawfully in the United  Kingdom  do  not  have  a
    private life which requires protection.

    Decision

    Appeals dismissed for all four appellants


      Dated this 23rd day of November 2015
Signed by

Mrs S Chana
.............................................

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Chana
