
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA 51613 2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2014                               |On 25th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                 hee ji jung
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Norman of Counsel instructed by Westkin
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a person who is a citizen both of South Korea  and
    the United States of America  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing her appeal against a decision of the respondent not
    to give her leave to remain on the basis of ten years' residence.

 2. Certain things in this case are clear.  The  appellant's  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom has been lawful throughout and started with her entering
    the United Kingdom for  the  purpose  of  studying.   She  has  been  a
    successful student.  There is a supporting letter from Professor W M  C
    Foulkes at Imperial College London speaking well of her, both  for  her
    academic and her personal qualities including her ability to settle  in
    the United Kingdom.  Professor Foulkes expressed himself very carefully
    and does not presume to comment on the Immigration Rules or how the law
    should be applied, but he tells us something about  the  person  before
    the tribunal.

 3. Although the appellant has been energetically represented by Counsel, I
    am not persuaded there is any material error in Judge Pedro's decision,
    and I must dismiss her appeal.  I will explain this decision.

 4. It is accepted that the appellant has not been in  the  United  Kingdom
    for the ten years necessary to satisfy the requirements of  the  Rules.
    She has had various periods of absence, most of  them  short,  for  the
    purpose of visiting her home, but two of them are rather long.  One  of
    them is the result of her studying somewhere in continental  Europe  as
    part of her first degree, and the  other  is  a  result  of  her  being
    treated for cancer in her home country  of  South  Korea.   I  am  very
    pleased to note the evidence that the treatment has been successful and
    the appellant enjoys good health.

 5. Counsel says, and it may well be right, that none of these absences are
    indicative of a lack of desire to continue to associate with the United
    Kingdom.

 6. The appellant would hardly have chosen to  need  cancer  treatment  and
    taking treatment in the country of which she  is  a  national  was  the
    obvious thing to do.

 7. Similarly, her course of study in continental Europe was  part  of  the
    degree offered by Imperial College which is  one  of  the  reasons  the
    appellant chose that course. Throughout her time there she was in touch
    with the college as she needed to be because such contact was  part  of
    her studies.

 8. These points are well made.

 9. It says in the various documents before me that the Secretary of  State
    has a policy which enables her to have discretion outside the Rules and
    that this can be applied in certain cases.   However  no  copy  of  the
    policy was ever relied on or, as far as I can see, even produced to the
    Tribunal and it is plain from the refusal letter  that  the  respondent
    did consider the case outside the rules (second paragraph,  page  3  of
    the refusal letter).

10. Counsel says that the policy should have been applied in cases such  as
    this where the long periods of delay (the ones that "cause the trouble"
    if I can put  it  like  that)  were  not  indicative  of  a  desire  to
    disassociate herself from  the  United  Kingdom  but  were  for  clear,
    understandable and in many ways laudable reasons.

11. The application was to remain under a Rule that applies to  people  who
    have ten years' lawful residence in the United Kingdom.  The  appellant
    does not have ten years' lawful residence in the United  Kingdom.   She
    does not meet the requirements of the Rule.

12. Although the existence of a policy is  interesting,  nothing  was  said
    before me to show how any discretion could have been exercised  in  the
    appellant's favour.  This is not a case where the  Secretary  of  State
    has clearly got anything wrong. In fact, as Mr Jack  pointed  out,  the
    case before the First-tier Tribunal expressly did not rely  on  failure
    to follow policy. Although the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are fairly described as generic  they  identified  appropriate
    statutory grounds and did raise the contention that  the  decision  was
    "not in accordance with the law". That is the way  to  raise  arguments
    based on failure to follow policy. However, it is plain from the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision, that those grounds were  not  only  not
    followed, but were expressly abandoned before the First-tier  Tribunal.
    At paragraph 10 of his determination the judge says that  Counsel  (not
    Miss Norman):

         "confirmed that the appellant would be seeking to rely on only  one
         ground of appeal before me", and that is the  ground  raising  that
         the decision was in breach  of  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
         under the European Convention on Human Rights.

13. I am entirely satisfied that Judge Pedro did not  err  in  any  way  in
    failing to consider whether the Secretary of  State's  polices  obliged
    her to do something that she did not do in this case.  Cases  involving
    sensitive issues of the kind frequently seen by this Tribunal  are  not
    usually determined justly by an overly  zealous  regard  to  procedural
    points but a  judge  is  really  not  to  be  criticised  when  counsel
    expressly abandons a point for which no evidential foundation had  been
    laid.

14. The First-tier Tribunal did misdirect itself when deciding if  removing
    the appellant would be a disproportionate interference with her private
    and family life.  At paragraphs 13 and  16  of  the  determination  the
    judge showed concern that the  appellant  was  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom in circumstances where the judge thought that  she  should  not
    have been working and that apparent misconduct made it  more  important
    to remove her. The judge said at paragraph 13 "I consider these factors
    to give added weight to the public interest in this particular appeal".
    However, the appellant's leave permitted her to work. It  follows  that
    the judge took a bad point here but it is not material.  It  is  common
    ground that the appellant would not pass the tests in  Appendix  FM  or
    other attempts in the Rules to codify the operation of Article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  It is not suggested for a  moment
    that  they  would  assist  her,  so  the  case  has  to  be  considered
    jurisprudentially, and whilst there might be ways  of  criticising  the
    approach taken by the judge on this occasion, for my part I cannot  see
    how a judge could responsibly have come to any other conclusion.   This
    is not a case where there are any  of  the  compelling  or  exceptional
    factors of the kind required by decision in Gulshan v SSHD [2013]  UKUT
    000640. Rather this is a quite straightforward case  of  a  person  who
    would like to remain in the United Kingdom but has not lived there long
    enough to qualify. The fact that there might be policies which might in
    some circumstances cause the Secretary of  State  to  make  a  decision
    outside the Rules is not at all the same as saying that  the  appellant
    is anywhere near to establishing a right to remain.   It  follows  that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge made no material error.

15. There is nothing in any way satisfying about telling a  highly  capable
    and well-motivated woman whose behaviour in the United Kingdom, as  far
    as I know, has been entirely in accordance with the Rules, that she  is
    not allowed to remain but she does not have a right to remain under the
    rules, removing her is not contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations
    under the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err materially.

16. I therefore dismiss this appeal.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 June 2014                   |

