
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: IA/51748/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 17 June 2014                        |On 30 June 2014           |
|Prepared 23 June 2014                  |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    R. M.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohammed, Solicitor, Kingstons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq, born on 28 August 1970,  who
           claims to have entered the UK illegally  on  23  July  2007.  He
           claimed asylum on 24 July 2007, which was refused.
        2. On 9 May 2012 the Appellant applied  for  a  Residence  Card  as
           evidence of his acquisition of  a  right  of  residence  as  the
           unmarried partner  of  an  EEA  citizen.  That  application  was
           refused on 20 June 2012. Although the Appellant initially sought
           to appeal against that decision, he withdrew his  appeal  on  21
           August 2012 intending instead to  make  an  application  in  his
           status as the spouse of the EEA citizen; relying upon a marriage
           to his sponsor on 19 July 2012.
        3. On 21 August 2012 that application was duly made. It was refused
           on 10 September 2012 for lack  of  supporting  evidence.  On  17
           September 2012 the Appellant made a further application  on  the
           same basis. The Respondent initially refused that application 10
           April 2012, but then withdrew the decision on 31 July 2012, only
           to remake it so as to refuse the application on 30 October 2013.
        4. The Appellant's appeal against the decision of 30  October  2013
           was heard on 18 February 2014, and it was allowed under the  EEA
           Regulations 2006 in a Determination promulgated on 4 March  2014
           by First Tier Tribunal Judge Caskie.
        5. By a decision of First Tier Tribunal Judge Keane dated 15  April
           2014 the First Tier Tribunal granted the  Respondent  permission
           to appeal on the basis that it was arguable the Judge had  erred
           in  reaching  contradictory  findings  of  fact,  and  that  his
           decision was accordingly irrational.
        6. The Appellant filed a Rule 24 Notice on 28 May 2014.  He  argued
           that the grant of permission  was  misconceived,  and  that  the
           Respondent had not asserted in  the  grounds  that  the  Judge's
           decision was irrational. It was argued  there  was  no  material
           error in  the  approach  taken  to  the  issue  of  whether  the
           Appellant was lawfully married to the sponsor.
        7. Thus the matter comes before me.


      The validity of the marriage
        8. The Respondent's starting point was that the  Determination  did
           not disclose any finding of fact upon the issue  of  whether  or
           not the Appellant had entered into a  valid  marriage  with  the
           sponsor. This issue was said to arise because the Appellant  had
           disclosed upon making his asylum claim in July 2007 that he  was
           then married to an Iraqi citizen, who was living in Iraq. It was
           argued that the Appellant had failed to establish  that  he  was
           free  to  lawfully  marry  the  sponsor,  because  having  never
           returned to Iraq he had failed to establish that  this  marriage
           had ever been terminated.
        9. The Appellant produced his original marriage certificate  before
           me. It would appear that this  document  was  also  in  evidence
           before the Judge. The marriage certificate records in the Deputy
           Registrar's hand the Appellant's  marital  status  as  "previous
           marriage dissolved". In consequence  Mr  Dewison  accepted  that
           this certificate established that the Appellant had disclosed to
           the Deputy Registrar in question that  he  had  previously  been
           married, and that in order for the Deputy Registrar to go on and
           marry him to the sponsor, she must have been  satisfied  on  the
           evidence that he had produced to her that this previous marriage
           had been terminated by divorce. He was  in  my  judgement  quite
           right to do so.
       10. Whilst it is not entirely clear from doubt which  documents  the
           Appellant did produce to the Deputy Registrar, because there  is
           in evidence no  contemporary  record  of  what  they  were,  the
           available evidence does show that the Appellant did not hide his
           marital status from the Deputy Registrar (and  the  Respondent's
           fears that he did are without foundation), and that  the  Deputy
           Registrar did accept the evidence that he produced to  establish
           that he had been validly divorced. There is no  suggestion  that
           any document in evidence before the Judge  was  a  forgery;  the
           Respondent's case was simply that they were unreliable,  because
           the Appellant was himself  an  unreliable  witness.  Absent  any
           evidence to establish the contrary, Mr Dewison therefore accepts
           that there is in these circumstances no  basis  upon  which  the
           Respondent can properly question the validity  of  the  marriage
           entered into with the sponsor on 19 July  2012.  To  the  extent
           that the Judge did err in failing to deal with the issue of  the
           validity of the marriage in terms, it is accepted that  this  is
           not an error that requires his decision  to  be  set  aside  and
           remade.


      Marriage of convenience
       11. The Respondent's alternative argument is that on the findings of
           primary fact that the Judge did make, he ought to have  gone  on
           to find that  the  marriage  relied  upon  was  a  "marriage  of
           convenience", or to give adequate reasons as to why he  accepted
           that it was not. This is in essence a perversity  challenge,  as
           indeed the Judge  granting  permission  identified,  and  as  Mr
           Dewison candidly accepts.  The  Respondent  therefore  seeks  to
           overcome a very high threshold; Miftari  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  481.
           "Perversity" is a demanding concept, which could be made out  if
           a challenge established  that  a  finding  of  fact  was  wholly
           unsupported by the evidence, but not if the  challenge  amounted
           merely to a disagreement with the finding of fact in question; R
           (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982.
       12. In my judgement, whilst it is clear that the  Appellant  had  in
           many respects demonstrated himself to be an  unreliable  witness
           (as the Judge had noted), it did not automatically  follow  that
           the Judge was bound to find that everything that he had  to  say
           was untrue, or, to find that any marriage entered  into  by  him
           within the UK was bound to be a marriage of convenience. To  the
           extent that this was the Respondent's challenge I  am  satisfied
           that it was misconceived.
       13. I note the Appellant's case did not rely  solely  upon  his  own
           evidence. His claim that this  was  a  genuine  relationship  of
           marriage following a lengthy  genuine  relationship,  which  had
           therefore endured for some time, was supported not only  by  his
           spouse, but also by an asylum support officer. It was apparently
           never put to the Appellant's spouse  in  cross-examination  that
           she was lying about why the marriage had been entered  into.  In
           an email of 13 February 2014 the asylum support officer had said
           that he recalled meeting the Appellant and his  then  girlfriend
           (now his spouse) a few times in the course of his work, and that
           they had discussed the  adverse  reaction  of  his  girlfriend's
           father to  the  Appellant  following  his  introduction  to  her
           parents. The presenting  officer  at  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
           hearing  chose  not  to  challenge  the   Appellant's   evidence
           concerning this email. It was not suggested for example that  it
           was a forgery, or that its content was anything other  than  the
           genuine recollection of the author.
       14. Whilst the Determination lacks reference to the guidance  to  be
           found in Papajorgi (EEA spouse - marriage of convenience) Greece
           [2012] UKUT 38, the Judge was referred to, and  did  quote  from
           the guidance to be found in IS (marriages of convenience) Serbia
           [2008] UKAIT 31. Accordingly Mr Dewison did not suggest that the
           Judge did not have the relevant principles in mind.
       15. In consequence I am satisfied that there is  no  merit  in  this
           second  challenge.  The  Respondent  does  not  come  close   to
           discharging the burden that she faces of establishing perversity
           in the Judge's decision. On the contrary the Judge made findings
           of fact that were open to him to make, and the reasons  that  he
           gave for them were adequate.


      Conclusion
       16. The Determination does not disclose any material error of law in
           the Judge's approach to the evidence  placed  before  him.  That
           being so I dismiss the Respondent's appeal.





   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      4 March 2014 did not involve the  making  of  an  error  of  law  that
      requires that decision to be set aside and  remade.  The  decision  to
      allow the appeal is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly identify him, or the  sponsor.  This  direction  applies
        both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with
        this direction could lead to proceedings being brought for contempt
        of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 23 June 2014
