
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/51052/2013
                                                               ia/51097/2013
                                                               ia/51113/2013
                                                               ia/51119/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2015                         |On 15 June 2015                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ARCHER


                                  Between:

|                     |sajmir matoshi                 |First Appellant       |
|                     |BLERINA MATOSHI                |Second Appellant      |
|                     |ALESIA MATOSHI                 |Third Appellant       |
|                     |EVEREST MATOSHI                |Fourth Appellant      |
|                     |(Anonymity Direction Not Made) |                      |


                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr P Nathan, Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although the appeal touches on the welfare of children  it  does  so  in
    only the most general terms and we see no reason to, and do not make, an
    order restricting publication of the details of this case.

 2. This is an appeal by members of a family against a decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to dismiss their  appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing them leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on human rights grounds.  In simple terms they are citizens of  Albania.
    The first two appellants are married to each other and have been in  the
    United Kingdom for some time. They have exercised  degrees  of  pretence
    and discreditable behaviour in the means used to establish themselves in
    the United Kingdom although, as far as can be seen on the papers  before
    us, they have lived industriously once they had arrived.   It  might  be
    thought that there is a strong public interest in their removal.

 3. The children however are in an entirely different  position.   They  are
    obviously innocent to any shenanigans on  the  part  of  their  parents.
    They were born respectively in September 2006 and December 2008  and  so
    have been in the United Kingdom for long enough to  start  to  establish
    significant private and family life outside the home.  There is evidence
    in the case of the older child, the third appellant, that she  is  doing
    very well at school and generally behaving in a way that  is  wholly  to
    her credit and about which her parents ought to have proper pride.   The
    point is that this is a case where the rights of the children suggest  a
    very different outcome from the rights  of  the  parents  and  therefore
    particular attention to their needs is merited.

 4. There is a difficulty in the case which did not really emerge until  the
    start of the hearing before us although it is there on  the  papers  for
    anyone who troubles to see it. The respondent appears  to  have  ignored
    completely her obligations under section 55 of the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009 to consider the interests of the children  when
    she made the decision that is  subject  to  appeal.   Considering  their
    interests is a statutory obligation.  The respondent is required to make
    their rights a primary consideration.  This is not a case where there is
    simple failure to mention the statute. There is nothing in the papers to
    suggest that that obligation has been given any thought whatsoever.

 5. When this was pointed out Ms Vidyadharan took  an  opportunity  to  take
    instructions. She  then  accepted  that  the  respondent's  decision  is
    unlawful because of the respondent's total failure to show that she  had
    regard to her section 55 obligations. It followed that the  best  course
    is for the Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and substitute a decision ruling that the respondent's decision
    is not in accordance with the law. The respondent must now make a proper
    decision in accordance with her statutory obligations.

 6. We hesitated a little before making  this  decision  because  there  are
    findings about the children which are helpful and  they  should  not  be
    lost lightly.

 7. It is quite plain that the First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed himself  to
    be confused about the operation of paragraph 276ADE of  the  Immigration
    Rules because he appears to have overlooked the fact that  the  time  of
    the application (which is the critical time in  the  Rules),  the  Third
    Appellant had not been in the United Kingdom for long enough to  qualify
    for their protection.  The findings that are been favourable are not the
    result of generosity on the part of the Tribunal but a positive response
    to independent evidence about the  child's  performance  at  school  and
    although the whole case  can  be  looked  at  again,  we  will  be  very
    surprised indeed if any less favourable view about  Third  Appellant  is
    taken when the case is looked at again but,  we  emphasise,  that  is  a
    matter for the Secretary of State.

 8. We therefore find that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  law.   We  set
    aside that decision and, as indicated, replace it with a  decision  that
    the Secretary of State's decision is not in accordance with the law.  It
    is now for the Secretary of State to make a lawful decision which can be
    subject to processes of appeal if that is what the appellants decide  to
    do.

    Notice of Decision

    The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside. We substitute a decision allowing the appeal because the decision
    is not in accordance with the law.




|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 June 2015                   |

