
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/51010/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st November 2016                |On 22nd November 2016                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                              MR ZILE HUSANAIN
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ali, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  against  the  decision  of
   Judge Chambers in which he allowed  the  appeal  (for  the  second  time)
   against refusal of Mr Zile Husanain's application for  limited  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom as a spouse.

2. In a letter dated the 1st December 2014, the Secretary of  State  refused
   the application on the ground that the appellant had  purported  to  rely
   upon his own earnings as evidence of his ability to  meet  the  financial
   requirements under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. The  application
   could not therefore succeed under the Rules because these permitted  only
   the  earnings  of  his  British  wife  to  be  taken  into  account.   It
   subsequently transpired,  however,  that  the  appellant  had  mistakenly
   referred to his wife's earning as his own.

3. In any event, as both Mr Ali  and  Mr  McVeety  agreed,  the  appellant's
   application was doomed to fail under the Immigration  Rules  because  the
   sponsor had not at that time been employed for the minimum  period  of  6
   months for which the appellant was required  to  provide  evidence  under
   Appendix FM-SE. The application was thus premature.

4. Judge Chambers first heard this appeal on the  3rd  June  2015.  On  that
   occasion, the Presenting Officer made the point  that  is  noted  in  the
   previous paragraph. However, Judge Chambers held that  the  Secretary  of
   State's decision was incompatible with the right of the appellant and his
   wife to respect for private and family life under Article 8 of  the  1950
   European Convention for the Protection of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
   Freedoms. In particular, he  concluded  that  any  application  that  the
   appellant may choose to make for entry clearance from Pakistan was likely
   to succeed, and that there was thus "little  purpose  in  insisting  upon
   that course" [paragraph 15].

5. In a decision promulgated on the 5th February 2016, Upper Tribunal  Judge
   Hanson held that Judge Chambers had applied the incorrect legal test when
   considering  the  hypothetical  separation  of  the  parties  pending  an
   application for entry clearance, and that he had  further  erred  in  not
   applying  the  considerations  contained  within  Section  117   of   the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to the facts of the case. He
   therefore remitted the appeal to Judge Chambers for re-determination.

6. In a decision promulgated on the 13th June  2016,  Judge  Chambers  again
   allowed the appeal on the ground that the decision was incompatible  with
   the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the  1950  European  Convention
   for the Protection of Human Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms.  On  this
   occasion, however, he did so by looking at the matter through  the  prism
   of Section Ex of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules,  which  represents
   the Secretary of State's view of the operation of  Article  8  in  family
   life cases. Having concluded that the appellant and his  wife  met  those
   requirements, Judge Chambers decided that  it  was  unnecessary  "...  to
   consider section 117 of the 2002 Act or (sic) Article 8 of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights" [paragraph 8 of the decision].

7. Judge Chambers stated that on  the  facts  of  this  appeal,  "relocation
   would involve more than mere hardship  or  disruption",  and  that  there
   would be "very serious obstacles" to family life continuing  in  Pakistan
   [paragraphs 5 and 6]. He did  not  however  make  any  reference  to  the
   definition of "insurmountable obstacles" that is contained within Section
   Ex 2 of Appendix FM. That is to say, he did ask himself whether the "very
   significant difficulties" that would be faced by  the  applicant  or  his
   wife in continuing their family life together outside  the  UK  could  be
   overcome without entailing "very serious hardship for  the  applicant  or
   their partner" [emphasis added]. It cannot therefore be assumed  that  he
   applied that test to the facts of the appeal.

8. However, even if it were the case that Judge Chambers  had  in  mind  the
   correct legal test, the whole tenor of his reasoning in paragraphs 5  and
   6 suggests that he was considering the matter within  the  context  of  a
   forced application for entry clearance from abroad. That was not  however
   an appropriate context within which to  consider  the  application  under
   Section EX.

9. The principles in Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40  and  MA  (Pakistan)  v
   SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 953 apply where the Immigration Rules do not  permit
   an application to be  made  from  within  the  United  Kingdom  and  thus
   "insist" (to use the verb employed  by  Judge  Chambers  in  his  earlier
   decision) upon the application being made from abroad. Examples  of  this
   can be found in the prohibition  upon  an  applicant  seeking  settlement
   whilst in the UK as a visitor (see E-LTRP.2.1 of  Appendix  FM)  and  the
   requirement for those seeking settlement as an adult  dependent  relative
   to be "outside the UK"  (the  combined  effect  of  EC-DR.1.1(a)  and  E-
   ILDR.1.2). There is however no equivalent prohibition in the  case  of  a
   person seeking to remain as the spouse of  a  British  citizen  (provided
   that they are not in the UK as a visitor) and neither was it suggested by
   the Secretary of State that  the  appellant  was  required  to  make  the
   application from abroad when  she  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  his
   application. Indeed, as is pointed out in the grounds of appeal  and  was
   emphasised by Mr McVeety at the hearing, it would have been open  to  the
   appellant to make a further in-country application provided that  he  had
   made it within 28 days of the original refusal. It is likely that, had he
   done so, he would by that time have  been  in  a  position  to  meet  the
   requirement of providing proof of his wife's earnings for a period of  at
   least  6  months  thus  rendering  these  protracted  appeal  proceedings
   unnecessary.

10. There was thus no 'insistence' upon the appellant making an  application
   from abroad. Indeed, the only matter upon which the  Secretary  of  State
   had 'insisted' (as she was entitled to do) was that the appellant  either
   comply with the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules, or  show
   that he and his  wife  would  not  be  in  a  position  to  overcome  the
   difficulties  they  would  face  upon  settlement  in  Pakistan   without
   entailing "very serious hardship"  to  either  or  both  of  them.  Judge
   Chambers' reasoning thus appears to have lost sight  of  the  fundamental
   proposition that a State has the right  to  control  the  entry  of  non-
   nationals into its territory, and that the  duty  imposed  by  Article  8
   cannot be considered as extending to a general obligation on the part  of
   a Contracting State to respect the  choice  by  married  couples  of  the
   country of their matrimonial residence and  to  accept  the  non-national
   spouses for settlement in that county [Abdulaziz, Cabales and  Balkandali
   v United Kingdom [1985] ECHR 7, at paragraph 67].

11. I am satisfied that both of the above errors of  law  were  material  to
   the outcome of the appeal. The effect upon the outcome of the  appeal  of
   applying a weaker test than that which the law required is  self-evident.
   The effect of  applying  the  legal  test  to  an  inappropriate  factual
   scenario was also material. For example, whilst it may very well be  said
   to constitute "very serious hardship" for the  sponsor  to  give  up  her
   employment in the UK in  order  to  accompany  her  husband  to  Pakistan
   pending the outcome of his application for entry clearance, that is  less
   likely to be the case within the context of emigration  with  a  view  to
   permanent settlement in another country.

12. I did consider re-making the decision in this appeal  for  myself  given
   that this is now the second time that it has been listed for  hearing  in
   the Upper Tribunal. Indeed, I would have done so  had  I  not  felt  that
   further information was required  from  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
   concerning their social, family and cultural ties to the UK and  Pakistan
   respectively, and the fact that an appropriate interpreter had  not  been
   booked for the 'error of law hearing'. I could of course  have  adjourned
   the hearing until such time as an  interpreter  was  available.  However,
   given the infrequency with which I sit in the Upper  Tribunal,  this  may
   well have resulted in unacceptable delay.  With  the  agreement  of  both
   representatives, therefore, I have decided to remit  this  appeal  for  a
   second time for  hearing  at  the  Manchester  Hearing  Centre.  On  this
   occasion, however, it should  be  heard  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge
   Chambers.

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal of the Secretary of  State  is  allowed  and  the  matter  is
   remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester in order for it  to  be
   re-made by any judge other than Judge Chambers.

Anonymity is not directed


Signed: David Kelly                          Date: 21st November 2016

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

