
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/51608/2013
                                                               IA/00141/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21st July 2014                               |On 13th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                  Che charles fonchingong (first appellant)
               jennifer abong teke epse che (second appellant)
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellants are both citizens of Cameroon.  The first  Appellant  is
    the husband of the second Appellant.  He was born on 31st May 1970, and
    his wife on 6th October 1976.  They both first arrived  in  the  UK  in
    December 2004 when they were given leave to enter, the first  Appellant
    as a student and the second Appellant as his  dependant.   Subsequently
    the first Appellant was granted leave to remain in  the  same  capacity
    until January 2008, and as a work permit holder until 29th April  2013.
    The second Appellant was  granted  leave  to  remain  in  line  as  her
    husband's dependant.  On 4th April 2013, the  first  Appellant  applied
    for indefinite leave to remain as a work permit holder with his wife as
    his dependant.  That application was refused on 14th November 2013  for
    the reasons given in a refusal letter of that date.  At the  same  time
    it was decided to remove the Appellants under the amended provisions of
    Section  47  Immigration,  Asylum  and  Nationality  Act   2006.    The
    Appellants  appealed,  and  their  appeals  were  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Oliver (the Judge) sitting at  Richmond  on  14th  March
    2014.  He decided to allow the appeals on human rights grounds for  the
    reasons  given  in  his  Determination  dated  18th  April  2014.   The
    Respondent sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 8th  June  2014
    such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.  It is to be noted  that
    the Appellants have two children both born in the UK on 30th  September
    2005 and 13th August 2008 respectively.  Further, in  August  2011  the
    Appellants' leave to remain was curtailed as  from  16th  October  2011
    because  the  first  Appellant  had  changed  his  employment   without
    permission.  It is not in dispute that the Appellants were not notified
    of the curtailment.

 3. The Judge's reasons for allowing the appeal on human rights grounds are
    given at paragraph 10 of his Determination.  Applying the test given in
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640,
    the Judge found that there were sufficiently  compelling  circumstances
    to consider the Appellants' human rights outside the Immigration Rules,
    and then found that the Respondent's decision  was  not  proportionate.
    This was because the Judge was of the view  that  had  the  Appellants'
    explanation for  their  ignorance  of  the  curtailment  decision  been
    accepted, the application for indefinite leave  to  remain  would  have
    been successful.  The Appellants had been blameless in the  failure  to
    notify them of the curtailment, and had always been exemplary citizens.
     As a consequence of the curtailment which led to the  first  Appellant
    losing his employment in March 2013, the family had  suffered  hardship
    as a result of having no income.  Removal from the UK would result in a
    very substantial interference with the family and private life  of  the
    Appellants.  Further, the Judge found that the Appellants' elder  child
    met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 as she  had  resided
    in the UK for more than seven years.  It was not in her best  interests
    to remove her.

 4. At the hearing, Mr Kandola argued that the Judge had erred  in  law  in
    coming to this conclusion.  He referred to the two grounds  upon  which
    the application had been made.   The  first  was  that  the  Judge  had
    misdirected himself  as  to  the  Gulshan  test  in  that  he  had  not
    considered whether in this case the Appellants' circumstances were  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules.  The second ground
    was that when the Judge  concluded  that  the  elder  daughter  of  the
    Appellants satisfied the requirements of  paragraph  276ADE(iv)  of  HC
    395, he relied only on his finding  that  the  elder  child  had  lived
    continuously in the UK for at least seven years, and had not considered
    the second limb of the  requirement  which  was  whether  it  would  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the UK.  The Judge should  have
    dealt with the factors set out in Azimi-Moayed  and  Others  (Decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 00197 (IAC).  The Judge
    had clearly attached considerable weight to his erroneous finding  when
    assessing the Article 8 proportionality balancing exercise,  which  was
    accordingly infected.

 5. In response, Mr Burrett argued that there was no error of  law  in  the
    decision of the Judge.  He argued that the recent decision in MM v SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 was that the Gulshan test was no longer  necessary.
    In this case it was obvious that there was an Article  8  claim  to  be
    dealt with.  The facts of the case were not in dispute, and there was a
    compelling case to look at the Appellants'  human  rights  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 6. Finally, Mr Burrett submitted that even  if  the  Judge  had  erred  in
    respect of his paragraph 276ADE  decision,  the  circumstances  of  the
    Appellants' elder child still added weight to the balance in favour  of
    the Appellants.

 7. I did find an error of law in the decision of the judge.  I agree  with
    the submission of Mr Burrett that following the  decision  in  MM,  the
    Respondent's first ground has no merit.  However, I do  agree  with  Mr
    Kandola's argument that the Judge  made  a  flawed  decision  that  the
    Appellants'  elder  child  satisfied  the  requirements  of   paragraph
    276ADE(iv) of HC 395, which influenced to a large extent  his  decision
    in respect of the disproportionate breach of the Appellants' Article  8
    rights.  This amounts to an error of law requiring the decision of  the
    Judge to be set aside.

Remade Decision

 8. I then proceeded to remake the decision of the  Judge.   There  was  no
    further evidence apart from the statement of the Appellants dated  11th
    July 2014.  I did hear further submissions.  Mr  Kandola  addressed  me
    first when he argued that the removal of the Appellants did not  amount
    to a disproportionate breach of their Article  8  rights.   Mr  Kandola
    referred to the refusal letter, and said  that  it  was  accepted  that
    there had been no proper service of the curtailment decision.  However,
    the Appellants  did  not  satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  relevant
    Immigration Rule to qualify for indefinite leave to remain  as  a  work
    permit holder and his dependant.  Further, it was not the case that the
    Appellants' elder child met the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(iv) of
    HC 395.  It would be in the best  interests  of  the  child  to  remain
    living with her parents, and the family retained  ties  with  Cameroon.
    The education and qualifications obtained by the Appellants in  the  UK
    would be of beneficial value to them in Cameroon.

 9. In response, Mr Burrett submitted that the Appellants' removal would be
    disproportionate.  The Appellants had been left  in  a  very  difficult
    situation by the failure to serve the  curtailment  decision  properly.
    The Appellants and their children were a  law-abiding  family  who  had
    done nothing wrong.  Mr Burrett then referred  me  to  the  Appellants'
    Bundle of Documents which revealed that one of the Appellants' children
    had impaired hearing.  Mr Burrett argued that the best interests of the
    children had not been considered by the Respondent.

10. I will now consider if the removal of the Appellants would amount to  a
    disproportionate breach of their Article 8 rights.  In so doing I  will
    take account of the rights of the Appellants' children, treating  their
    best interests as a primary consideration.  It is not in  dispute  that
    the Appellants and their children have a family life together, although
    I find that there will be no interference with that family life if they
    return together  to  Cameroon.   It  is  also  not  disputed  that  the
    Appellants and their children have developed a private life in  the  UK
    since the first of them  arrived  towards  the  end  of  2004.   It  is
    undoubtedly the case that that private life will be interfered with  by
    their removal, but on balance I  find  that  such  interference  is  in
    accordance with the law and proportionate.

11. I find  that  considerable  weight  must  be  attached  to  the  public
    interest.  The Appellants have never had any form of  permanent  status
    in the UK, and they have always known that their permission  to  be  in
    the UK was granted on only  a  temporary  basis.   What  is  more,  the
    Appellants do not qualify in any way for indefinite leave to remain and
    it is therefore in the interests of immigration control  that  they  do
    not remain longer in the UK.  The Appellants have lived  unlawfully  in
    the UK since October 2011, although it is accepted that originally they
    were not aware of this.  However, I do not agree with the  argument  of
    Mr Burrett that the Appellants are entirely blameless in this  respect.
    The first Appellant's leave to remain was curtailed because he  changed
    employment without permission and in breach of the terms of  his  leave
    to remain as  a  work  permit  holder.   He  is  the  author  of  their
    misfortune.  Apparently the Appellants have not become  a  burden  upon
    the State, but they are now in a position  where  they  are  unable  to
    support themselves and have  become  dependent  upon  charity  and  the
    assistance of friends.

12. On the other side  of  the  scale,  I  will  first  consider  the  best
    interests of the children.  I accept that both children  were  born  in
    the UK and have never known any other society, although  they  are  not
    British citizens.  They are both settled in  schools  where  they  have
    formed relationships and made  progress.   There  is  evidence  in  the
    Appellants' Bundle that the elder child has  disabilities  relating  to
    her hearing and sight.  The letter of Dr F  Thomas  of  the  East  Kent
    Hospitals University dated 15 January 2014 states as follows:

         "Her parents report that Lorraine does struggle to  hear  when  she
         has an ear infection or a bad cold.  The most recent  cold  was  in
         November where she had some discharge from the ears.  She had  oral
         antibiotics to treat this.  Her  coordination  is  observed  to  be
         poorer when she has an ear infection.  Apart from this she has been
         doing well."

    From this I deduce that the impairment of  Lorraine's  hearing  is  not
    significant, and there was no evidence before me  that  she  could  not
    obtain the necessary treatment  in  Cameroon.   The  evidence  produced
    relating to Lorraine's sight is mostly illegible.  There is documentary
    evidence relating to Lorraine's special educational needs, but it  does
    not say what they are.  Upon this evidence, I find that it would not be
    unreasonable for Lorraine to leave the UK  on  medical  or  educational
    grounds.

13. There is no other direct evidence of how  the  best  interests  of  the
    children would be damaged by their removal.  I take  into  account  the
    factors to be considered as given in Azimi-Moayed.  The  younger  child
    is now still 5 years of age.  I note that he is to be treated as  being
    more focused on  his  parents  rather  than  his  peers  and  therefore
    adaptable.  The elder child is now 8 years of age and I take account of
    what is said in Azimi-Moayed as to the  circumstances  of  children  of
    that age who have lived all of their lives in the UK.  However,  it  is
    the starting point that it is in the best interests of such a child  to
    be with both of her parents, and I am satisfied that she is still of an
    age whereby  she  can  without  great  difficulty  adapt  to  life  and
    education in Cameroon.  There was no specific evidence before me as  to
    the detriment to the best interests of either  child  in  returning  to
    Cameroon.

14. Otherwise, I accept that this family have spent the best  part  of  the
    last ten years living in the UK and I accept that for most of that time
    the  Appellants  were  gainfully  employed  in  worthwhile  employment.
    However there is little or no evidence of the nature and extent of  the
    private life which the  Appellants  developed  over  that  period,  and
    considering all these factors together I find that they do not outweigh
    the public interest, and that therefore the decision of the  Respondent
    is proportionate.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  find  no
reason to do so.

Fee Award

In the light of my  decision  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
dismissing it, I have decided that no fee award can be made.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
