
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52061/2013
     IA/52068/2013
     IA/52064/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                          |Promulgated                       |
|On 11th June 2015                         |          On 16th June 2015       |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                            mr olatubosun adeyemi
                    Ms imisioluwa oluwanisunayomi adeyemi
                          ms modupe muyiwa adeyemi

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Furner (Birnberg Peirce & Partners)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Melvin (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an application to the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellants  in
    relation to a Determination and Reasons of Judge Gillespie  promulgated
    on 14th July 2014.  The   Appellants are Nigerian and are husband, wife
    and their daughter.  They came to the UK as  visitors  in  March  2006,
    when the child  was  two  years  of  age  and  overstayed.   They  made
    application to remain on Human Rights grounds in September 2013.  Those
    applications were refused by decisions dated 7th October 2013.  It  was
    their appeals against those decisions which came before Judge Gillespie
    in July 2014.  He dismissed the appeals.

 2. The application for permission to appeal was initially refused  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but then granted by an Upper Tribunal  Judge.   The
    main ground was that the Judge prevented the four additional  witnesses
    from giving evidence about their experiences in Nigeria.

 3. At the Upper Tribunal's direction the solicitor who represented in  the
    First-tier Tribunal provided an affidavit as to what occurred  and  the
    Judge's Record of Proceedings was provided.

 4. While the evidence that the Judge excluded may have been irrelevant,  I
    am unable to conclude that to be the case as it was  excluded.   It  is
    fair to say that it was not contained in the witnesses'' statements and
    the Home Office Presenting Officer objected to its inclusion.

 5. However, I find that  the  Judge  erred  in  excluding  evidence.   Its
    relevance and the weight to be attached to it can  only  be  determined
    after it has been  heard.   On  the  basis  that  the  Appellants  were
    prevented from adducing the evidence that they  wished  in  support  of
    their  appeals,  the  hearing  was  procedurally  unfair  and  so   the
    determination must be set aside in its entirety and the appeal  reheard
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. I direct the Appellants and their representatives to file full  witness
    statements of all the evidence that they intend to call and  additional
    evidence is unlikely to be permitted on the day next time.

 7. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed and the matter remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed                              Date 12th June 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin






