
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52621/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 July 2014                               |On 30th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                     miss helen heart macapagal bawingan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Dhanji, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes in  which  he  allowed  the
    appeal of the appellant under Immigration Rule 298 and under Article  8
    of the ECHR.
2.   The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines born on  16  March  2005.
    She entered the UK as a visitor on 27 April 2013.  On 8 October 2013 an
    application was made on her behalf for leave to remain  in  the  UK  on
    grounds of her private life.  The basis of  the  application  was  that
    there  were  inadequate  care  arrangements  for   her   abroad.    Her
    grandmother Helen Dukes was now her guardian, and was a  joint  sponsor
    to the application together with  her  husband,  the  appellant's  step
    grandfather.  The application explained that she had no family  in  the
    Philippines   aside   from   a   distant   aunt.    Her    grandmother,
    stepgrandfather  and  father  were   in   the   UK.    The   supporting
    representations set out the background to the  application,  explaining
    that she had spent only the first two years of her life with her mother
    (Luzvimidal Bawingan) and her father (Austin Bawingan): following their
    own relationship deteriorating her mother left the family home, it  was
    suspected to pursue another relationship.  Her whereabouts were unknown
    as shown by an affidavit to such effect sworn by the neighbours.

3.   She was subsequently cared for by her father with  some  help  from  an
    elderly aunt, though he struggled to meet his responsibility  for  her,
    and eventually left her wholly in the care of her Aunt Grace  Bawingan,
    who was from time to time helped by Milosav  Bawingam,  Helen's  uncle,
    her father Austin's brother.  Her father left the Philippines and  came
    to the UK to study.  On 2 October 2009 her Uncle Milosav  passed  away,
    leaving Aunt Grace as the sole carer.

4.   An application for a visit entry clearance was refused  on  2  November
    2012.  The appellant was seven years old at the time and the  intention
    was for her to stay with her father and  grandparents  for  two  months
    after which she would return to the Philippines.   The  appeal  against
    the refusal of the visit application was allowed by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Sweet on 12 November 2012.

5.   When Mrs Duke travelled to the Philippines to collect Helen  and  bring
    her to the UK, she learned that whilst her Aunt had provided Helen with
    a minimal level of food  and  accommodation,  her  care  was  otherwise
    inadequate.  Her living conditions were poor and Mrs. Duke  feared  for
    her well being.  The  neighbours  reported  that  the  Aunt  failed  to
    provide her with adequate food and clothing.  She had been seen roaming
    the streets at night.  Her aunt's ability to provide even  the  minimal
    historic level of care was now compromised by her own  sister's  recent
    incapacity having suffered a stroke.  In these  circumstances,  it  was
    argued  that  the  sponsors  in  this  country   had   effective   sole
    responsibility for Helen's care given that the grandmother had played a
    significant role in her life having been  involved  in  her  upbringing
    since her birth by  taking  important  decisions  in  relation  to  her
    accommodation, schooling and studies, holiday arrangements and  medical
    treatment, and having taken a decisive role in bringing to the UK.

6.   As already stated above, the judge allowed the appeal  under  paragraph
    298 of the Immigration Rules.  I was told by Mr  Dhanji  who  was  also
    Counsel below that a discussion  ensued  at  the  hearing  between  the
    parties regarding the application of paragraph 298 of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It was the understanding at the end of  the  hearing  that  the
    judge could be the primary decision maker in respect of  paragraph  298
    and that is what the judge appears to have done.

7.   The  respondent's  grounds  did  not  directly  challenge  the  judge's
    application of paragraph 298 but Mr Saunders submitted that the grounds
    which challenge the  well-foundedness  of  the  judge's  findings  will
    necessarily inform both issues i.e. the paragraph  298  and  Article  8
    findings made by the judge.

8.   Mr Saunders argued that  the  Secretary  of  State's  complaint  raises
    factual difficulties which were not sufficiently resolved by the  judge
    to enable him to justify allowing the appeal under  either  head.   For
    example the issue as to when the decision was made that  the  appellant
    should come and live in the UK for good; and the unsatisfactory  living
    conditions of the appellant, which were accepted  by  the  judge,  were
    apparent before she made the application  to  come  and  visit.   These
    matters were not satisfactorily resolved by the judge.

9.   When I made the point that in cases such as this it is the  appellant's
    intention that we are looking at, Mr. Saunders submitted  that  as  the
    appellant is a minor and as such does not have the capacity to have her
    own intentions, the sponsors' intentions would be attributable  to  the
    appellant.

10.  I took on board Mr Saunders' submission  that  the  challenges  to  the
    judge's findings on credibility and intention make the same point.

11.  In this case the judge found the sponsors to be reliable  witnesses  as
    to the evidence they gave.  He said at paragraph  29  that  he  had  no
    doubt that Mrs  Dukes  was  truly  surprised  when  she  made  a  visit
    unexpected by Aunt Grace, and discovered the conditions  in  which  the
    appellant lived.  Mrs Dukes' evidence on this point  was  detailed  and
    vivid, and was indeed effectively  unchallenged  in  cross-examination,
    unsurprisingly given that it  was  consistent  throughout  her  written
    statements and oral evidence.  Mrs Dukes  also  gave  evidence  of  the
    change in the appellant's demeanour and behaviour during  her  time  in
    this country, in that she had become increasingly confident the  longer
    she was here whereas on arrival, she was agitated and  disturbed.   The
    judge said such a presentation  would  be  expected  of  a  young  girl
    removed from her usual care arrangements with a person  with  whom  she
    had a long-term loving relationship in  appropriate  circumstances  and
    attached significant weight to it.

12.  The grounds of  appeal  argued  that  the  sponsor's  evidence  on  the
    appellant's living conditions in the Philippines was unsupported by any
    documentary  or  photographic  evidence  and,  in  the  light  of   the
    credibility issues, should not be relied upon as solely  indicative  of
    the conditions of the appellant upon return.  I find that these grounds
    do not undermine the judge's finding that the evidence of  the  sponsor
    Mrs Dukes was vivid and detailed and unchallenged in cross-examination.
     In the circumstances I find  that  it  is  rather  too  late  for  the
    respondent to now seek to challenge the evidence given by  the  sponsor
    when he should have done so at the hearing by way of cross-examination.
     As that was not done, I find no error of law in  the  judge's  finding
    which was based on the evidence of  the  sponsor  which  he  found  was
    reliable.

13.  At paragraph 30 the judge accepted that Aunt Grace's  ability  to  care
    for the appellant even to historic levels was now  further  compromised
    by the need for her to care for her sick sister.  This feature  of  the
    account has been advanced consistently throughout the  application  and
    appeal proceedings.  He said that Mrs Dukes plainly found it  difficult
    to provide dates in a structured fashion but once she was carefully re-
    examined, was satisfied that her evidence was not that Aunt Grace's own
    sister suffered a stroke shortly after her  son,  Milosav's  death  but
    rather it took place a significant period after his death and after Mrs
    Dukes and the appellant had returned to the UK.  The  notarised  letter
    from a qualified neurologist was plainly written as an updating  report
    specifically for the purpose of an inquiry from relatives, and so there
    was nothing surprising about it bearing a relatively recent date.   The
    judge accepted  that  Mrs  Dukes  had  found  it  difficult  to  obtain
    efficient and timely responses from the Philippines in general.

14.  The grounds argued that the sponsors were unable  to  provide  credible
    evidence on the subject of Auntie Betty's stroke.  In  particular  both
    sponsors provided conflicting evidence in respect of  when  this  event
    occurred.  The discrepancy was not minor, it spanned several years 2009-
    2013 and there were three potential dates  for  the  stroke's  date  of
    occurrence if the witness statements are also considered.   Documentary
    evidence in respect of Betty's stroke was  limited,  a  single  letter,
    produced on the day of the hearing purporting to support the  assertion
    of the family.

15.  I find that these grounds are an attempt to re-litigate the case.   The
    judge's findings at paragraph 30 adequately covered the  issues  raised
    in the grounds.  The judge's findings were reasonably open to him.

16.  The  grounds  submitted  that  the  sponsors  were  unable  to  provide
    credible evidence of the intended duration of  the  appellant's  visit.
    The appellant's grandfather  stated  that  the  visit  would  last  six
    months, whilst the appellant's grandmother stated two months.  This was
    not a minor discrepancy.

17.  I note that the judge dealt with the  intentions  of  the  sponsors  at
    paragraphs 32 and 34.  At 32 he said that  while  he  had  reservations
    about the state of mind of the sponsors when the application was  made,
    Mrs  Dukes  clearly  stated  under  cross-examination  that   she   had
    contemplated a settlement application for the appellant even before she
    left the Philippines with her to travel with her on her  visit  to  the
    UK.  Mr Dukes repeatedly denied that he had  held  such  thoughts.   He
    said that the planned visit was for a holiday, and when it was  put  to
    him that six months was excessive for the purposes  of  leisure  for  a
    girl attending school, he said that they had thought that she would  be
    able to catch up on any missed  schooling.   It  seemed  to  the  judge
    unlikely that they would not have carefully considered the impact of an
    extended stay away from school on  a  girl  whose  best  interest  they
    clearly had at heart.  Mrs Dukes said that the visit  was  intended  to
    last no more than two months.

18.  The judge then went on to find at paragraph 34 that whilst he had  some
    concerns about the intentions of the sponsors,  having  considered  all
    the evidence in the round he had resolved this issue in  their  favour.
    He did not find that the respondent had made good the  allegation  that
    they were positively dishonest in the visit application.   There  could
    be no doubt that they both wished to secure  the  appellant's  welfare.
    Nevertheless Mrs Dukes pointed to the purchase of a return  ticket  for
    her at significant expense to them as people of moderate means, and  to
    the lengthy and repeated discussions they had had with Aunt Grace after
    the appellant's arrival here.  Mrs Dukes stated that when she travelled
    to collect the appellant, Aunt Grace was very elusive during the  trip.
    Mrs Dukes was clearly a witness who  struggled  to  present  dates  and
    details in a chronological order, but the judge did not consider her to
    be an evasive witness.  Indeed it was her candour that had led  to  the
    consistent evidence being provided.  On the  balance  of  probabilities
    the judge found that whilst Mrs Dukes contemplated the  possibility  of
    looking after Helen on a long-term basis when  pursuing  the  visit  to
    this country and prior to passing  through  immigration  control,  this
    sentiment was more of a wish than it was a settled intention,  and  the
    question of settlement was not, he found, contemplated by the  sponsor,
    Mrs Dukes until some time after the appellant's arrival here.   He  did
    not accept that the label of dishonesty  could  properly  attach  to  a
    situation where one of the sponsors contemplated the possibility  of  a
    settlement application in the future without  that  possibility  having
    crystallised into a settled intention.

19.  I find that the respondent's grounds disclose no arguable error of  law
    in  the  judge's  findings.   The  judge  adequately  dealt  with   the
    intentions of the sponsor and made findings that were open to him.

20.  Whilst the appellant is a minor and therefore unable to  form  her  own
    intentions, I accept Mr. Saunders' submission that  the  intentions  of
    the sponsors which would be attributable to her.  The judge found  that
    the sponsors were reliable witnesses and their intentions regarding the
    appellant's visit application were not dishonest.

21.  I  find  that  the  judge  made  no  error  of  law  in  his  findings.
    Accordingly, the judge's decision allowing the appellant's appeal shall
    stand.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

