
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/52345/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 26 March 2015                     |On 27 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                             AMANDA AGYEI MINTAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Gibson-Lee, instructed by Jesuis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Ghana, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against  the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse   her
    application for leave to remain in the UK.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Beach  dismissed  the  appeal  and  the  appellant  now  appeals   with
    permission to this Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's case is that she entered the UK  in  August  2007  with
    leave to enter as a visitor. She joined her mother who had entered  the
    UK in 2001 to join her husband, the appellant's stepfather,  who  is  a
    British national.  On  8  September  2010  the  appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain as the step child of a  British  national
    until 8 September 2013. The respondent refused the current  application
    for the reasons set out in the reasons for refusal letter which  states
    that the application for discretionary leave was refused because at the
    time  of  the  application  the  appellant  was  living  independently,
    attending a college course and had a job offer.  Although  she  claimed
    that her mother was supporting  her  it  was  said  that  she  provided
    insufficient evidence of this. As she was leading an  independent  life
    the respondent refused  her  application  for  discretionary  leave  to
    remain. The  respondent  considered  her  application  under  paragraph
    276ADE of the Immigration Rules and did not accept that  the  appellant
    could meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE (vi).

 3. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  noted  that  although  the  appellant's
    mother was said to have appealed  against  a  decision  to  refuse  her
    application for leave to remain  her  appeal  had  not  been  processed
    because of an issue regarding payment of  the  fee  and  she  therefore
    decided that it was not appropriate to join the appeals. The First-tier
    Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  her  mother.
    It is not in dispute that the relevant version of paragraph 276ADE  for
    the purposes of this appeal was that in force between 9 July  2012  and
    27 July 2014 and thus at the date of the decision which provided;

         "276ADE. The requirements to be met by an applicant  for  leave  to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at  the
         date of application, the applicant:

         ...

         (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK
         for less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         has no ties (including social, cultural or family) with the country
         to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK."

 4.  The  Judge  considered  this  provision  at  paragraph   29   of   the
    determination and found that the appellant had not shown that  she  had
    no ties in Ghana. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  complain
    that the Judge erred in failing to follow the approach set out  by  the
    Upper Tribunal in the case of Ogundimu (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria
    [2013] UKUT 00060 (IAC). There the tribunal  was  considering  the  'no
    ties'  provision  of  paragraph  339A  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    concluded;

         "122.    We take note of the fact that the use of  the  phrase  "no
         ties (including social, cultural or family)  with  the  country  to
         which he would have to go if required  to  leave  the  UK"  is  not
         exclusive to paragraph 399A of  the  Rules;  it  is  also  used  in
         paragraph 276 ADE, in the context of the requirements to met by  an
         applicant for leave to remain based on private life in  the  United
         Kingdom when such person has lived in the United Kingdom  for  less
         than 20 years.

         123.     The natural  and  ordinary  meaning  of  the  word  'ties'
         imports, we think, a concept involving something more  than  merely
         remote and abstract links to the country of proposed deportation or
         removal. It involves there being a continued connection to life  in
         that country; something that ties a claimant to his or her  country
         of origin. If this were not the case then it would  appear  that  a
         person's nationality of the country of proposed  deportation  could
         of itself lead to a failure to meet the requirements of  the  rule.
         This would render the application of the rule,  given  the  context
         within which it operates, entirely meaningless.

         124.     We recognise that the text under the rules is an  exacting
         one. Consideration of whether  a  person  has  'no  ties'  to  such
         country must involve a  rounded  assessment  of  all  the  relevant
         circumstances and is not to be limited  to  'social,  cultural  and
         family' circumstances. Nevertheless,  we  are  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has no ties  with  Nigeria.  He  is  a  stranger  to  the
         country, the people, and the way of life. His father may have  ties
         but they are not ties of the  appellant  or  any  ties  that  could
         result in support to the appellant  in  the  event  of  his  return
         there.  Unsurprisingly,  given  the  length  of   the   appellant's
         residence here, all of  his  ties  are  with  the  United  Kingdom.
         Consequently the appellant has so little connection with Nigeria so
         as to mean that the consequences for him  in  establishing  private
         life there at the age of 28, after 22 years residence in the United
         Kingdom, would be 'unjustifiably harsh'.

         125.     Whilst each case turns on  its  own  facts,  circumstances
         relevant to the assessment of whether a  person  has  ties  to  the
         country to which they would have to go if  they  were  required  to
         leave the United Kingdom must include, but are not limited to:  the
         length of time a person has spent in the country to which he  would
         have to go if he were required to leave the United Kingdom, the age
         that the person left that country, the exposure that person has had
         to the cultural norms of that country, whether that  person  speaks
         the language of the country, the extent of the family  and  friends
         that person has in the country to which he  is  being  deported  or
         removed and the quality of the relationships that person  has  with
         those friends and family members."

 5. The grounds contend  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    consider the factors set out at paragraph 25 of  Ogundimu.  However  at
    paragraph 29 the Judge considered the fact that the  appellant  arrived
    in the UK when she was 13 years old; she had  at  that  time  spent  13
    years in Ghana; she spent her teenage formative years in  the  UK;  she
    still had contact with her grandfather when she left Ghana; although it
    may have decreased as a result of the appellant and her mother being in
    the UK, the evidence from the appellant and  her  mother  that  contact
    with the grandfather ceased when  the  appellant  left  Ghana  was  not
    credible; the appellant and her mother were evasive in  their  evidence
    at the hearing in relation to other family members in Ghana,  including
    step and half uncles and aunts,  their  evidence  changed  during  oral
    evidence; the culture in Ghana will not be strange to the appellant who
    spent her  first  13  years  there;  and  there  will  be  no  language
    difficulties for the appellant in Ghana. On the basis of these findings
    the Judge concluded that the appellant has not lost  ties  with  Ghana.
    These factors are all those set out by the Tribunal in Ogundimu and all
    relevant factors in considering whether the  appellant  has  'no  ties'
    with Ghana.

 6. Mr Kandola also relied on the decision in  further note the decision of
    the Upper Tribunal in Bossadi  (paragraph  276ADE;  suitability;  ties)
    [2015] UKUT 00042 (IAC) where the decision is summarised in head note 2
    as follows;

         "The requirement set out in paragraph 276ADE (vi) (in force from  9
         July 2012 to 27 July 2014) to show that a person "is aged 18  years
         or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less than  20  years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment) but has no ties (including
         social, cultural or family) with the country to which he would have
         to go if required to leave the UK", requires a  rounded  assessment
         as to whether a person's familial ties could result in  support  to
         him in the event of his return, an assessment taking  into  account
         both subjective and objective considerations and also consideration
         of what lies within the choice of a claimant to achieve."

 7. Mr Gibson-Lee submitted that the appellant's grandfather is in his  90s
    and could not be a support for the appellant in the short or long term.
    However there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  as
    to the grandfather's age so I do not accept that she could  have  taken
    this into account. Mr Gibson-Lee submitted  that  the  appellant  could
    speak but  not  write  Twi  and  that  the  Judge  therefore  erred  in
    concluding that the appellant spoke  the  language  in  Ghana.  However
    there was no evidence before the Judge to this effect  or  to  indicate
    that the appellant would have any language difficulties  in  Ghana.  In
    the absence of evidence to the contrary and in light of the  fact  that
    the appellant spent the first 13 years of her life there is was open to
    the Judge to find that the appellant could speak the language.

 8. I am satisfied that the Judge made findings of fact open to her on  the
    evidence before her. Her findings that the  appellant  and  her  mother
    were not credible in relation to the familial ties in Ghana  were  open
    to her. I am satisfied that she applied the principles of the  decision
    in Ogundimu and in considering  the  relevant  factors  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  undertook  a  rounded  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    familial ties in Ghana as she was required to do.  The  Judge  did  not
    accept that the contact with the appellant's grandfather had ceased  or
    could not be revived nor did she accept the evidence of  the  appellant
    and her mother set out at paragraphs 11 and 16  in  relation  to  other
    family members in Ghana. These were findings open  to  the  Judge.  The
    Judge did not err in her consideration of paragraph 276ADE (vi).

 9. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal further  contend  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   erred   in   her   assessment   of   the
    proportionality of the decision under Article 8 in that she  failed  to
    examine the relationship between the appellant and her brother. However
    there was little evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  as  to
    the relationship and no evidence from the appellant's brother  or  from
    the appellant to show the nature and depth  of  that  relationship.  In
    fact the Judge's finding that there is no  contact  and  no  subsisting
    relationship between the appellant and her brother [37]  has  not  been
    challenged.  The Judge did not therefore err in  her  consideration  of
    Article 8.

10. Accordingly I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    make an error of law in the determination of this appeal.

Conclusion:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Signed      Date: 26 March 2015

A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

