

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52925/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 May 2014                                |On 20th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SOLOMON AGYEI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M George, Legal representative


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant (hereafter SSHD) appeals with permission the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Deavin allowing the appeal of the respondent
      (hereafter the claimant) against the decision to refuse to  issue  him
      with a residence card as the spouse of an EEA national.


   2. Having heard submission from Mr Deller, my decision is to dismiss  the
      SSHD's appeal,

   3. The essential point relied on in the grounds is  that  the  judge  had
      failed to consider or apply the  reported  Tribunal  decision,  Kareem
      (Proxy marriages-EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC)  and  that  this  had
      resulted in legal error.

   4. The problem with that point is  that  whilst  plainly  the  judge  was
      remiss in overlooking Kareem, it has not been shown that this  failure
      resulted in any legal error.

   5. It is said in the grounds that  in  deciding  whether  the  claimant's
      Ghanaian customary marriage was valid the judge wrongly applied UK law
      rather than French law, but that ground  is  not  accompanied  by  any
      evidence to suggest that French law would adopt a  different  approach
      and I take judicial notice of the fact that at  private  international
      law the lex loci celebrationis principle is well-established.

   6. The grounds also appear to contend that it was the task of  the  judge
      to determine whether the marriage had  been  properly  evidenced.  The
      difficulty with that contention is that they make no challenge to  the
      judge's findings and  on  those  finding  the  claimant  had  provided
      satisfactory proof that a customary marriage had taken place in  Ghana
      and indeed it was one which had been the subject of an  authentication
      letter provided by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Ghana confirming
      that the marriage was duly registered in accordance with Ghanaian law.



   7. In the absence of any  challenge  to  the  viability  of  the  judge's
      findings on the proof of the marriage, this ground also falls away.

   8. For the above reasons I conclude that the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
      did not  err  in  law  and  accordingly  his  decision  to  allow  the
      claimant's appeal must stand.

   9. I would observe that the form completed by Mr George does not  on  its
      face demonstrate that he was authorised to provide representation, but
      as I did not call on him at all, I take the matter no further.




                               Signed                                  Date




                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
