
[pic]
IAC-FH-AI-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52169/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Issued            |
|On 28 May 2015                                  |On 19 June 2015            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR

                                   Between

                           SAI SUDHA RANI MARAPALA
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr A. Maqsood, instructed by Universal solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Holmes, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
                       ON AN APPLICATION TO REINSTATE

Introduction

 1. This decision relates to an application made by  the  Applicant  on  12
    February 2015 to reinstate her case before the Upper Tribunal, pursuant
    to rule 17(3) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
    ("the 2008 Rules").

 2. The Applicant is a citizen of India born  on  15  November  1990.   She
    appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  against  decisions  made  by  the
    Respondent on 20 November 2013 (i) refusing her leave to  remain  as  a
    Tier 4 (General) Student under paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules
    and (ii) to remove her from the  UK  pursuant  to  section  47  of  the
    Immigration Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed this appeal in a determination promulgated on the 4 July 2014
    concluding, inter alia, that the Applicant did not meet the maintenance
    requirement of the immigration rule and, further, that a grant of leave
    for the period required by the Applicant to complete her  course  would
    lead to her exceeding the maximum period of leave she is limited to  by
    operation of paragraph  245ZX(ha)  of  the  Rules.  The  Applicant  was
    legally represented at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  PJM  Hollingworth  granted  the  Applicant
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, in a decision signed on the
    1 September 2014. The covering letter sent to the  Applicant  with  the
    grant of  permission,  which  is  in  a  standard  form,  referred  the
    Applicant to enclosed  directions  and  notified  her  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal would not consider evidence which was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal unless the Upper Tribunal  had  specifically  decided  to
    admit such evidence. The directions enclosed referred, inter  alia,  to
    the steps the parties should  take  to  prepare  for  the  "forthcoming
    hearing"

 4. In a letter to the Tribunal dated 22 September 2014 the Applicant said:

           "Please note that I lodged notice of appeal against  refusal  of
           my leave to remain application and that appeal was dismissed  by
           the learned Tribunal.

           I then still lodged an application for permission to  appeal  to
           the First-tier Tribunal which is still pending in this Tribunal.

           Please note that I now intend to make a  fresh  application  for
           further leave to remain as such  have  decided  to  withdraw  my
           appeal. In this view of the matter, it is requested that  I  may
           kindly be allowed to withdraw my appeal with permission to  file
           fresh application. The above appeal may kindly be disposed of as
           withdrawn and notified to me."

 5. On 2 October 2014 the Upper Tribunal sent a notice to the Applicant  in
    the following terms, on the instructions of UTJ Kopieczek:

         "Thank you for your letter of 22 September 2014,  asking  that  the
         appeal before the  Upper  Tribunal  be  withdrawn.  The  Tribunal's
         procedure rules do not make provision, as such, for an appeal to be
         withdrawn, only for a party's case or part of it to  be  withdrawn,
         subject to the consent of the Upper Tribunal.

         In the circumstances, the Upper Tribunal has treated your letter as
         an application to withdraw your case, to which the  Upper  Tribunal
         consents. Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  gave  permission  to
         appeal to the Upper Tribunal, the position is now  therefore,  that
         the determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 4  July
         2014 dismissing your appeal is to stand."

 6. The next germane event in the procedural history of this matter is  the
    application authored by the Applicant's solicitors  dated  12  February
    2015, and received by the Upper Tribunal on 18  February  2015,   which
    relevantly states:

         "...As her permission was granted, she supposes to have  a  hearing
         at the Upper Tribunal. However, without receiving any legal opinion
         from an immigration expert or  a  legal  adviser  or  any  reliable
         sources, the Appellant has withdrawn her appeal from  the  Tribunal
         on 02 October 2014.

         The  applicant  confirms  that  she  thought  once  her  permission
         application was granted by the Tribunal, she would  be  issued  her
         Tier 4 visa and BRP card. The Appellant by mistakenly withdrawn her
         appeal from the Tribunal and it was her innocent mistake.

         Please be advised that the Appellant was not legally represented at
         permission stage and aftermath. Therefore she could not  understand
         the consequences of appeal withdrawal. As a result  of  the  appeal
         withdrawal the Applicant has become an overstayer in the UK...

         The Applicant now understands the consequences of appeal withdrawal
         and wants to continue her appeal at the Upper Tribunal so that  she
         can have a hearing date at the Upper Tribunal..."

 7. This application first came before me on  the  papers  on  23  February
    2015, at which time I directed that it be considered on  notice  at  an
    oral hearing.

Hearing

 8. Ms Marapala gave evidence at the hearing, initially adopting a  witness
    statement drawn in her name  and  dated  15  May  2015.  Much  of  this
    statement, which I have fully taken into account, related  not  to  the
    application to reinstate the appeal, nor  indeed  to  the  question  of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in its  decision,  but
    rather to the substance of the underlying appeal. The  statement  does,
    though, assert as follows:

         "[7]...Unfortunately I made a request to withdraw the appeal to the
         Tribunal, as I did not have any Legal  Representation  at  time  of
         Appeal and I was unaware of the Legal Terms and Circumstances.  Now
         I want to proceed to the appeal.

         [8] As I mentioned in the above paragraph that was unaware  of  not
         receiving the curtailment letter (60 days  letter)  by  withdrawing
         the  case.  So  after  getting  a  legal  advice  and  knowing  the
         consequences of the withdrawal I decided to proceed with the Appeal
         so that if I win the appeal I will receive my curtailment letter to
         make a fresh application to finish my course."

 9. There was no additional examination in chief.

10. Under cross examination, and questioning by the Tribunal, the Applicant
    stated that she did not seek legal  advice  prior  to  withdrawing  her
    appeal because she did not want to waste time on  a  hearing  and  felt
    that "it would be good" in  those  circumstances  to  withdraw  so  she
    "could get a letter to  make  a  fresh  application  for  the  60  days
    letter". She wanted to finish her course "as quickly as possible".

11. The Applicant was asked whether she had understood that by  withdrawing
    her appeal that would be the end of the proceedings  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal; she responded in the affirmative - adding that she had wanted
    to withdraw her appeal so that she could make a fresh application.  She
    continued by confirming that she had attended Coventry  University  and
    was informed whilst there that "the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    would have to come out and then [she] could  make  an  application  and
    [she] would be given a CAS. They said that they could not give [her]  a
    CAS whilst the appeal was ongoing. "

12. The Applicant thereafter told the Tribunal that she had seen  a  "known
    solicitor", named Cameron [or Kamrun], on 5 October 2014 -  this  being
    upon receipt of the Tribunal's notice of 2 October. He had informed the
    Applicant that she should wait for a hearing and that the Tribunal  did
    not have the power to withdraw the appeal. She  did  not  pay  for  the
    solicitor's advice and does not know which firm this  solicitor  worked
    for. She could not get another appointment with him, although she tried
    to do so.  Having heard nothing further from the Tribunal the Applicant
    went to see her current solicitors in February 2015.

Submissions

13. Mr Maqsood requested the Tribunal extend  time  for  the  Applicant  to
    lodge the request to reinstate her appeal, pursuant to rules 17(4)  and
    5(3)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   In
    support of such application reliance was placed on (i)  the  fact  that
    permission to appeal had been  granted  (ii)  that  the  Applicant  had
    diligently sought legal advice after having received the  notice  of  2
    October (iii) that the advice she had been given was  wrong  (iv)  that
    the Applicant had been entitled to rely on such  advice  and  (v)  that
    once she had instructed her current solicitors the application was made
    expeditiously.

14. As to the substance of the application  to  reinstate  the  Applicant's
    appeal, it was submitted that this should  be  granted  given  (i)  the
    Applicant had been granted permission to appeal, (ii) she had withdrawn
    her appeal on the basis of a misunderstanding i.e. she had thought that
    by doing so she would receive a letter granting her leave to remain  in
    the UK, and (iii) it would be in the interests of justice and  fairness
    to reinstate her appeal.

15. In response Ms Holmes commended to the Tribunal that the application to
    extend time should be refused,  given  the  paucity  and  contradictory
    nature of the explanation provided in this regard by the Applicant. She
    further submitted that if time were to be extended the  application  to
    reinstate the appeal should be refused; the Applicant having been fully
    aware that by withdrawing her appeal she would  bring  an  end  to  the
    proceedings before the Upper Tribunal.

Discussion

16. I turn first to rule 17 of the 2008 Procedure  Rules  which  relevantly
    states as follows:

         "17(1)   Subject to paragraph (2), a party may give notice  of  the
                withdrawal of its case, or any part of it -

                (a)    at any time before a hearing to consider the disposal
                    of the proceedings... by sending or  delivering  to  the
                    Upper Tribunal a written notice of withdrawal...

         (2)  Notice of withdrawal will not take  effect  unless  the  Upper
                Tribunal consents to withdrawal except  in  relation  to  an
                application for permission to appeal.

         (3)  A party which has withdrawn its case may apply  to  the  Upper
                Tribunal for the case to be reinstated.

         (4)  An application under paragraph (3) must be made in writing and
                be received by the Upper Tribunal within one month after -

                (a)    the date on  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  receives  a
                    notice under paragraph (1)..."

Application to extend time

17. By rule 17(4) of the 2008 Rules  any  application  made  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to reinstate a case that has previously been  withdrawn,  must
    be made in writing and received by the Upper Tribunal within one  month
    after the  date  on  which  the  Upper  Tribunal  received  the  notice
    requesting such withdrawal.  In  the  instant  matter  such  notice  is
    stamped as having been received by the Upper Tribunal on  29  September
    2014.  The application to reinstate the appeal was not  received  until
    the 16 February 2015 i.e. approximately 3 � months outside of  the  one
    month time limit imposed by the Rules.

18. There has plainly been a serious and significant delay  in  making  the
    application to reinstate this appeal. No explanation for this delay  is
    provided in the letter of 12 February 2015 from  Universal  solicitors,
    nor indeed is an application for an extension  of  time  made  therein.
    Furthermore,  the  Applicant's  statement  does  not  allude   to   the
    circumstances which led to her delaying in the making such application.



19. Evidence was, belatedly, given in this regard under  cross-examination.
    Having considered that evidence in the round  with  all  of  the  other
    evidence and information  before  me,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    Applicant has established on the balance  of  probabilities  that  such
    evidence is wholly truthful. I find  it  wholly  implausible  that  she
    would have been provided advice by a solicitor to the effect  that  the
    Upper Tribunal  has  no  power  to  act  as  it  did,  particularly  in
    circumstances  where,  as  the  Applicant  claims,  she  provided  this
    solicitor with a copy of the Tribunal's notice of 2 October 2014. It is
    equally implausible, having advised the  Applicant  that  the  Tribunal
    could not do something that it had already done,  that  further  advice
    would be given to the effect that the Applicant should simply wait  for
    a hearing date. It would have been obvious  to  any  legally  qualified
    person that there was no prospect of a hearing date being  provided  in
    such circumstances.

20. These conclusions are reinforced by the lack  of  evidence  as  to  any
    attempt having been made to contact this solicitor in  order  to  seek,
    for the purposes of this hearing, confirmation from him of  the  advice
    he gave to the Applicant. Although the Applicant states that she  could
    not recall his full name, did not meet him in an  office  and  did  not
    know the name of the firm he worked for, on her own  evidence  she  did
    manage to contact him in order to seek advice in the  first  place  and
    had sufficient information to make  an  attempt  to  obtain  a  further
    appointment with him.

21. I  also  observe  that  Applicant  did  not,  at  any  point  prior  to
    instructing her current solicitors, make further contact with the Upper
    Tribunal in order to  ascertain  the  current  position  regarding  her
    appeal. She is a person with a good command of the English language, as
    was evident before me. The contact details for the Upper  Tribunal  are
    readily available online and were on the notice sent to her in  October
    2014; indeed she  contacted  the  Upper  Tribunal,  apparently  of  her
    volition, when withdrawing her appeal.

22. Having considered all of the circumstances of the case,  including  the
    length of the delay and the explanation for it, and having  taken  into
    account the overriding objective of the 2008 Procedure Rules, I am  not
    persuaded to extend time in relation to the Applicant's application  to
    reinstate her appeal. It does not  seem  to  me  that  this  conclusion
    affronts the interests of justice or the overriding  objective  of  the
    2008 Rules. The application to reinstate the appeal  was  made  out  of
    time and I  refuse  to  admit  it.  This  conclusion  disposes  of  the
    application before me.

Application to reinstate the appeal

23. Even if I were to  have  extended  time  I  would,  nevertheless,  have
    refused the Applicant's  application.  It  is  clear  to  me  that  the
    Applicant understood, at the time she  withdrew  her  appeal,  that  by
    doing so she would bring an end to the  proceedings  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal. The Applicant gave clear evidence to this  effect  orally  at
    the hearing and  such  evidence  also  corresponds  with  what  can  be
    understood from the terms of the letter of 22 September, in  which  the
    Applicant uses the phrase "the appeal may be disposed of as  withdrawn"
    (emphasis added).  I remind myself again that the Applicant has a  good
    command of the English language. I find the  fact  that  the  Applicant
    understood that her appeal before the Upper Tribunal would  be  brought
    to end by her application of the 22 September  2014  to  be  a  weighty
    factor in my consideration of whether her appeal should be reinstated.

24. Mr Maqsood places great store on (i) the fact that  the  Applicant  was
    granted permission to appeal and (ii) that the decision to withdraw her
    appeal was undertaken without legal advice and  was  therefore,  it  is
    said, taken on the basis of a misunderstanding of the consequences that
    would flow therefrom.

25. As to the former, the  fact  that  permission  to  appeal  was  granted
    carries little weight. An Applicant does not have 'a case'  before  the
    Upper  Tribunal  until  permission   is   granted.   Consequently,   an
    application to reinstate a case can only be made in such  circumstances
    where it has.

26. As to the latter point made by Mr Maqsood, even if correct I find  this
    to be little assistance to the Applicant in the circumstances  of  this
    case. It was the Applicant's choice not to  seek  legal  advice  before
    taking  the  course  she  did.  She  had  recently   instructed   legal
    representatives to appear on her behalf at the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal, and she has offered no satisfactory  explanation  as  to
    why she did not seek further advice from the same firm, or indeed  from
    any other person qualified to give  advice  in  this  field,  prior  to
    withdrawing her appeal. She did receive some advice from  a  member  of
    staff at Coventry University at  this  time  and,  significantly,  that
    advice did not include an indication that the Applicant's appeal should
    be withdrawn.

27. Looking at all of the evidence in the round, I conclude that it is  the
    terms of the letter of 22 September  2014  which  best  represents  the
    truth of the Applicant's intentions  and  motives  in  withdrawing  her
    appeal, and her understanding of the consequences of doing so. It is in
    this  letter  that  the  Applicant  first  chose  to   articulate   her
    understanding of the position. There is no mention in the letter of  22
    September that the Applicant understood that, without more,  she  would
    be granted a period of leave upon withdrawing her appeal, and I observe
    that she twice refers therein to her intention to make  an  application
    for further leave.

28. I, therefore, conclude that at the  time  the  Applicant  withdrew  her
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal she was aware that in  doing  so  that
    would be the end of the proceedings before the Upper Tribunal  and  the
    end of her appeal. She was also aware at that time that she had  failed
    in her appeal before the First-tier Tribunal. She withdrew  her  appeal
    in order to facilitate  the  making  of  a  fresh  application  to  the
    Secretary of State.

29. I do not accept, having taken into account all of the circumstances  of
    the case, that the interests of justice dictate that this appeal should
    be reinstated.

Decision

The Applicant's application to reinstate her appeal is not admitted.



Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
Date: 2 June 2015

