
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/52393/2013
     IA/52395/2013
     IA/52394/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th September 2014                       |On 22nd October 2014          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                           A S M (first Appellant)
                           M U M (second Appellant)
                           A A M (third Appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss Hashmi, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first Appellant was  born
    on 18th May 1971.  The second Appellant  is  his  wife,  born  on  25th
    October 1977.  The third Appellant is their minor child  born  in  July
    2007.  The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order so  far  as  the
    third Appellant is concerned and no application is made  to  vary  that
    order.  Unless specified to the contrary all references herein  are  to
    the first Appellant.  The claims of the  second  and  third  Appellants
    rise and fall on that of the first Appellant.

 2. The first Appellant's  immigration  history  is  extensive.   He  first
    arrived in the United Kingdom on  23rd  September  2003  subject  to  a
    condition prohibiting employment to a maximum of twenty hours per  week
    during term time and prohibiting recourse to  public  funds.   He  thus
    arrived as a student.  Extensions were subsequently granted to  him  on
    four further occasions, the last  extension  being  until  18th August
    2014.  His leave however was curtailed by his Sponsor Kinnaird  College
    and his leave thereafter expired on 19th August 2013.  On  17th  August
    2013 the first Appellant's solicitors applied for leave  to  remain  on
    his behalf.  Consideration was given to his family life under Article 8
    which from 9th July 2012 fell under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant's application to vary leave was  refused  by  the
    Secretary of State on 2nd December 2013.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Malik sitting at Manchester on  2nd  April  2014.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 15th April 2014  the  Appellant's  appeals
    were dismissed on all grounds.

 4. On 30th April 2014 the Appellant sought permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  On  2nd  May  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant
    granted permission to appeal.   She  noted  that  the  Appellants  were
    citizens of Pakistan who initially had  applied  for  leave  to  remain
    whilst the first Appellant  sat  his  English  language  test  required
    before he could be issued with a CAS and then  separately  applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis  of  long  residence  (ten  years'  lawful
    residence) and asked that the fees for the first application be  offset
    against the second application which  was  a  variation  of  the  first
    application.  Their appeal was dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge who found their appeals were not valid  for  non-payment  of  the
    required fee.  Judge Grant noted that the grounds complained  that  the
    judge had failed to make any findings on the issue before her which  is
    the first Appellant's appeal against refusal of permanent residence  on
    the basis of ten years' lawful residence in the  United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph 276B of HC 395 (as amended).

 5. Judge Grant noted that the Appellants applied for leave  to  remain  on
    16th August 2013 when the Appellant was six days short  of  ten  years'
    lawful residence.  Soon thereafter when he  had  completed  ten  years'
    lawful residence he applied for leave to remain on the  basis  of  long
    residence and asked that the fees from the  first  application  be  set
    against the second application and that no decision  be  taken  on  the
    first application.

 6. On 2nd December 2013 the Respondent issued a decision against the first
    application and refused it.   The  Appellants  appealed  that  refusal.
    Judge Grant considered it was clear that by virtue of Section 3C  leave
    the first Appellant had accrued ten years' lawful residence by the time
    of his appeal before the judge.  As the correct fee was paid  with  the
    first application which was the subject of the refusal (albeit arguably
    varied by the second application)  he  considered  there  was  a  valid
    appeal before the judge.  He therefore considered it was arguable  that
    the judge had erred in law becoming confused with the two  applications
    and what was before her.  Judge Grant  states  that  he  had  read  the
    Record of Proceedings and that the judge was not assisted by either  of
    the representatives who appeared before her.  What  he  considered  was
    before her was the appeal against the refusal in respect of  the  first
    application, the decision maker  having  not  taken  into  account  the
    second application at all or as a variation of the first.  Consequently
    he considered that the decision maker did not refer to  paragraph  276B
    in the refusal.  He pointed out that a period of Section 3C  leave  can
    count towards long residence.  Ten years' lawful residence was an issue
    in the appeal and raised in the grounds.  Following MU  ("statement  of
    additional grounds" - long residence - discretion) Bangladesh  [2010]
    UKUT 442 (IAC) Judge Grant  considered  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge arguably should  have  made  findings  on  long  residence  under
    paragraph 276B which was raised as a Ground of Appeal before her.

 7. On 22nd May 2014 the Secretary of State responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The appeal was opposed and the Rule 24 statement
    contends  that  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   directed   herself
    appropriately.   The  notice  points  out  that  there  was  no  proper
    variation of the first application made by the Appellant because he did
    not pay the appropriate fee for the second  application  and  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was  only  obliged  to  consider  long
    residence as an additional ground under Section 120 of NIA 2002 only if
    the Appellant made a statement under Section 120 to  the  Secretary  of
    State of which there was no evidence.

 8. It is on that basis that the appeals come before  me.   The  Appellants
    are  represented  by  their  legal  representative  Miss  Hashmi.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Harrison.

Submissions/Discussions

 9. Mr Harrison submits that it is necessary to look carefully at the dates
    in this matter and the finding on the Rule 24 statement that the  first
    application was clearly made and that thereafter the  Appellant  sought
    to vary that leave but did not pay the full fee.  He acknowledges  that
    what the Appellant sought to do was  to  use  the  fee  for  the  first
    application and to pay the difference only when sending in  the  second
    application and that  no  fee  was  paid  in  full  for  the  variation
    application.  He submits that where the judge  granting  permission  to
    appeal is wrong is that the judge has taken (and I  use  Mr  Harrison's
    words) "a sensible approach of considering  that  the  money  for  fees
    should be in one pot," but that that is not the way in which the system
    works and until the first  application  is  withdrawn  and  the  second
    application paid for, then the Secretary of State will not consider the
    second application.

10. Mr Harrison goes on to state that no One-Stop  Notice  (a  Section  120
    statement) was made and that no statement was  sent  in  to  amend  the
    first application by the Appellant.  He  reminds  me  that  the  second
    application was made prior to there  being  a  decision  on  the  first
    application and that the second application was refused  as  there  was
    insufficient fee paid.  He submits that the  judge  had  before  her  a
    valid appeal on the first decision, but that the first decision had  to
    fail and that the second decision was not before the judge as an appeal
    and that the judge has made findings at paragraph 21 with regard  to  a
    lack of  exceptional  circumstances  for  granting  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules and that these  are  findings  she  was  entitled  to
    reach.

11. He acknowledges that the Appellant has  fallen  foul  of  a  procedural
    requirement and that the correct approach would be for him  to  reapply
    on the correct form with the correct fee and then for the Secretary  of
    State to consider whether or not the Appellant meets  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  He submits there is no material error of law
    in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and asked me to dismiss  the
    appeal.

12. Miss Hashmi challenges the comments of Mr Harrison contending that when
    the second application was made the first application was withdrawn and
    that the difference of fee was paid and therefore the Respondent should
    not have dealt with the first application as the correct fee  had  been
    paid for the second application.  Consequently as it was withdrawn  the
    Secretary of State should  not  have  made  a  decision  on  the  first
    application.

13. She further points out that if an appeal is to  be  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State then it is necessary for the Secretary of  State  to
    look at the correct  Rule  and  in  this  instance  that  is  when  the
    Appellant has been here for some ten years.  She further contends  that
    the position under Article 8 has not been considered  appropriately  by
    the judge.  She acknowledges that the Appellant had not been in the  UK
    for ten years (by six days)  when  he  submitted  his  application  for
    variation and  that  it  was  clear  that  the  first  application  was
    withdrawn and that it was the second application that should have  been
    processed by the Secretary of State.   She  relies  considerably  on  a
    detailed letter submitted by Latitude Law (who appeared  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal) explaining the  scenario.
    She asked me to find that there is a material error of law.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

16. The issue effectively upon which I am required to determine is  whether
    or not there was a material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge due to the judge  misinterpreting  and  misapplying
    the procedural aspects of this matter.  It is difficult in many ways to
    criticise the judge and if criticism is to be  levelled  it  is  to  be
    levelled at the administration process and the  manner  in  which  both
    parties have sought to apply it.  However consideration of  the  papers
    in this matter does appear to show that  on  23rd  September  2013  the
    first Appellant sought to vary his outstanding application for  further
    leave by converting that application into an application for indefinite
    leave to remain under paragraph 276A-D of the Immigration Rules.  It is
    interesting to note that at the same time  an  FLR(M)  application  was
    submitted in respect of both the second and  third  Appellants.   There
    was then an exchange of correspondence with  the  Secretary  of  State.
    That correspondence does clearly indicate that by submitting the second
    application it is inevitable that the first application was effectively
    withdrawn.  In such circumstances there was no appeal extant before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I am satisfied that the first  application
    was withdrawn on 23rd September.  In that  case  there  is  a  material
    error of law because there was  nothing  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge to hear an appeal  against  and  I  consequently  set  aside  her
    decision.

Findings on the Procedural Position

17. It is quite clear that the issues in this matter need  to  be  properly
    resolved.  My finding is that the application that the Appellant sought
    to have processed both on his own behalf and his wife and child was  an
    application based on ten years' residence and  on  the  basis  that  he
    meets the Immigration Rules.  It would appear that that application has
    not been processed.  It is equally unclear as to  what  fees  have  and
    have not been returned or are still outstanding.  In such circumstances
    the correct and pragmatic approach is to remit this matter back to  the
    Secretary of State and for consideration by the Appellant's solicitors.
     If there is lying dormant  an  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain along with a fee that has been paid then no doubt the  Secretary
    of State will process it.  If that is not the case then the correct




    approach will be for a fresh application to be lodged by the  Appellant
    and for the correct fee to be paid.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law.  The decision is set aside and for the above reasons the matter is
    remitted back to the Secretary of State for  further  consideration  on
    the basis of the position set out above in paragraph 17.

19. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  No application
    is made to vary that order and none is made  and  the  order  therefore
    remains in force.






Signed                              Date 16th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

