
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/52956/2013
                                                               IA/52963/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 August 2014                              |On 17 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                         Mrs Karmijit Kaur Dhaliwal
                             Mr Prabhdeep Singh
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Rahman, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants appeal with leave against the  determination  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Osborne dismissing  the  first  appellant's  appeal
    against refusal to grant her leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant under paragraph 245ZX(c) with  reference  to  paragraph
    116(e) of Appendix A and paragraph 245ZX(d) of HC 395 (as amended)  and
    under paragraph 322(1A).  The second appellant  was  refused  leave  to
    remain as a dependant of the first appellant.

2.   The first appellant is a citizen of India born  on  25  December  1988.
    She arrived in the UK on 17 February 2011, in possession of a visa that
    conferred leave to  enter  until  30  September  2013.   Her  dependent
    husband also arrived in the UK with her on 17 February  2011  and  also
    was granted leave to enter until 30 September 2013, both subject  to  a
    condition  restricting  employment  and  recourse   to   public   funds
    prohibited.

3.   The respondent  raised  three  issues  for  rejecting  the  appellants'
    application.  The first was that the respondent was not satisfied  that
    the first appellant had a valid CAS because the Tier 4 Sponsor Register
    was checked on 28 November 2013 and  Vista  Business  College  was  not
    listed as of that date.  Secondly, the appellant had claimed ten points
    for maintenance (funds) under Appendix C but failed to provide a  valid
    CAS in support of the application.  Thirdly, the  first  appellant  had
    provided a student progress report from College  of  Technology  London
    dated 6 June 2013.  College of Technology London  was  checked  on  the
    Companies House register.  It was confirmed  that  the  college  ceased
    trading on 12 April 2013.  The respondent was not  satisfied  that  the
    progress report was issued by College of Technology London.

4.   The first appellant in evidence confirmed that the date of  the  letter
    from College of Technology London was dated 6 June 2013.  She  conceded
    that the Companies House register revealed on 12 April  2013  that  the
    college/company had ceased trading and that it had  been  wound  up  on
    that date.

5.   She confirmed that the last time she attended the college was when  she
    finished her last examination during the first week of April 2013.  The
    college had told her that they would send her the exam results by post.
     She received nothing before the letter  dated  6  June  2013  and  has
    received nothing from the college after that letter.

6.   She confirmed in cross-examination  that  her  course  was  a  Business
    Management Degree.  When asked what grade she  achieved  she  confirmed
    that she had  passed.   When  Mr  Johns,  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, asked her whether she  knew  what  he  meant  by  first  class
    degree, second class or third class degree, the judge noted that it was
    manifestly the case that  the  first  appellant  had  no  understanding
    whatsoever of what was meant by that terminology.  The first  appellant
    asked Mr Johns whether he was referring to terms  during  the  academic
    year.   Mr  Johns  then  put  the  original   letter/student   progress
    certificate which the appellant had submitted to  the  Home  Office  to
    her.  He asked whether she accepted that the letter was on  photocopied
    headed notepaper.  She replied that, "It is a genuine letter.  I  don't
    know the admin officer".

7.   The first appellant confirmed in evidence that she started  the  course
    in February 2011 and that her last exam was in the first week of  April
    2013.  When asked by Mr Johns why the degree course took only two years
    and not the usual three years, the first appellant  replied  that  that
    was what the college had said.

8.   The judge said a fundamental issue in this appeal was the  authenticity
    (or lack of it) of the letter dated  6  June  2013  which  is  entitled
    student progress.  Mr Rahman, the appellants' solicitor, submitted that
    the lack of professionalism shown on the face  of  the  document  could
    well have been the reason why the college closed.  He accepted that  on
    its face there  were  a  number  of  discrepancies  both  in  terms  of
    grammatical language used and format but submitted  that  the  document
    did not have to be forged.  The fact that the college ceased trading in
    April did not mean that  the  letter  issued  on  6  June  2013  lacked
    authenticity.  Mr Rahman further submitted that the course embarked  on
    by the first appellant was not a complete degree course but was a  step
    along the way to a degree.

9.   The judge noted that this was the first time that  such  an  issue  had
    been raised and she found that that did not reflect  the  evidence  and
    was not what the certificate itself stated.

10.  Additionally, the judge found that the first appellant  confirmed  that
    she had not had a graduation ceremony, had not  received  a  graduation
    certificate, and had not asked anyone either at the college  itself  or
    at the University of Wales Trinity St David which institution worked in
    partnership with College of Technology London about the whereabouts  of
    her degree certificate.  The judge found that in itself was at the very
    least surprising.

11.  The judge then considered the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Johns  and  I
    quote:

         "(xii)   Mr Johns submitted that the document  is  not  on  genuine
             notepaper.  It is on copied notepaper as can be seen from  the
             bottom of the document which has a faded red stripe (which  is
             not of equal quality to  the  red  logo  at  the  top  of  the
             document; the printing on the stripe is not  properly  centred
             and is partially cut off with the print quality having faded).
              The  print  quality  of  the  BAC  accredited  logo  is  also
             inappropriately faded.  The red stripe itself at the bottom of
             the document is not 'square' and is  at  an  angle  whereas  a
             genuine document would  have  a  straight  stripe.   Mr  Johns
             further submitted that the date of 6 June 2013  is  after  the
             date of liquidation and winding up of the  college  which  was
             completed in April.  He further  submitted  that  a  two  year
             degree course is unusual as degree courses are  usually  three
             years and need to be accredited.  There are  no  grades  which
             appear upon this document.  The  result  in  respect  of  each
             module is recorded as 'passed'.  It is unusual that  there  is
             no differentiation between any of the modules.


              The English used in the narrative at the bottom of the form is
             ungrammatical and makes  little  sense.   A  genuine  document
             produced by a college would show a higher standard of  English
             grammar,  particularly  one  responsible   for   pre-sessional
             academic English and BA (Hons) Business Management.


              The document is signed 'Yours truly' which is not usual for  a
             formal document and is signed by  an  'Admin  Officer'  rather
             than an Administrative Officer, who is not named but  who  has
             added an indecipherable signature.


         (xiii)   There is merit in all of those  submissions.   The  burden
             falls upon the Respondent to establish that the document lacks
             authenticity.  The Respondent has to establish  that  lack  of
             authenticity on the balance of probabilities.  I confirm  that
             having scrutinised the document, I am satisfied that it is not
             a genuine document and that it lacks authenticity for all  the
             reasons submitted by Mr Johns on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.
             The points raised by him in respect of authenticity are  well-
             made.  Indeed, I find that one or two  of  those  defects  may
             have been sufficient to merit  a  finding  that  the  document
             lacks authenticity.  The fact that there are so  many  defects
             appearing  on  the  face  of  this   unsatisfactory   document
             undermines its authenticity.


         (xiv)    The Appellant has had approximately  one  year  since  she
             received that document to obtain any supporting  documentation
             from either College of  Technology  London  or  University  of
             Wales Trinity St David.  No additional documentation has  been
             filed to either corroborate the First Appellant's progress  or
             to corroborate the authenticity of the document  itself.   The
             Appellant and those representing her have known since the  end
             of November 2013 that the authenticity of the document was  an
             issue and was a point taken by the Respondent in  the  refusal
             of the Appellant's application.  It is most surprising that no
             evidence has been adduced by the First Appellant to assist her
             appeal in this respect.


         (xv) Were it not for the lack of authenticity of the document dated
             6 June 2013, the Appellant should properly have  been  granted
             an additional 60 days' leave in which to  obtain  a  new  CAS.
             However, in the light of  the  lack  of  authenticity  of  the
             letter dated 6 June 2013 there is no merit in  any  additional
             leave being granted to the First Appellant for  the  obtaining
             of a new CAS.  Additionally the appeal therefore fails on  the
             merits."

12.   The  grounds  upon  which  permission  was  granted  argued  that   in
    dismissing the appeal the judge found that a key document in the appeal
    had "poor  authenticity"  and  also  that  the  burden  fell  upon  the
    respondent to establish this "on  a  balance  of  probabilities".   The
    grounds argue that the judge erred in not following the authority of RP
    (Proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT  00086  and  that  this  is  an
    appeal  where  there  is  an  absence  of  evidence  to   support   the
    respondent's claim that the appellant's college letter was not genuine.

13.  Mr Rahman relied on the grounds upon which permission was granted.   He
    submitted that the respondent had failed to put forward any evidence in
    support of her claim that the college letter was not genuine.  Although
    they accept  that  the  college  letter  did  contain  some  error  and
    mistakes, however, this did not  establish  that  the  letter  was  not
    genuine.  The grounds further argue  that  in  the  absence  of  expert
    evidence in relation to the document not being genuine, the  respondent
    had failed to discharge the burden of  proof  upon  her.   Mr  Rahman's
    second argument was that the judge failed to make credibility  findings
    in relation to the first appellant's evidence.

14.  He relied on the Tribunal's decision in VVT  (LCPS:  no  post  graduate
    diplomas) India [2011] UKUT  162  (IAC)  where  the  Tribunal  held  at
    paragraph 57:

         "Where there are general grounds for refusal under part  9  of  the
         Immigration Rules - Rule 322(1A) in  this  appeal  where  leave  to
         remain in the UK is to be refused if proven - the burden  of  proof
         falls on the respondent.  As discussed at paragraphs 98-102  of  NA
         and Others (Cambridge College of Learning)  Pakistan  [2009]  UKAIT
         00031 having regard to Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL 35 there is  but
         a single civil standard of proof in appeals of this nature which is
         that of the balance of probabilities,  but  in  the  light  of  the
         possible  serious  consequences  of  refusal  under  part   9   the
         respondent needs:

             '...to furnish evidence of sufficient strength and quality and
             he  (and  the  Tribunal)  would  need  to  subject  it  to   a
             'critical', 'anxious' and 'heightened' scrutiny.'"

15.  Mr Rahman submitted that the appellant  had  no  control  or  authority
    over the document she received from the college.  The respondent  could
    have made further enquiries in order to verify the authenticity of  the
    document but failed to do  so.   He  accepted  that  the  document  was
    deficient in some ways but that did not make it a forgery.  Even if the
    document was forged, there was no finding that the appellant  knowingly
    used the document or was party to the fraud or was aware that it was  a
    forged document.

16.  I accept Mr Jarvis' submissions that the judge had  applied  the  right
    legal approach and accepted  that  the  burden  of  proof  was  on  the
    Secretary of State to prove on a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant's document was a forgery.  I also accept his submission  that
    the appellant's own evidence about the course was unreliable and  there
    was no rebuttal evidence from  the  appellant  to  establish  that  the
    document was not a forgery.

17.  The judge records at paragraph 13(iii) that Mr  Rahman  and  the  first
    appellant appeared to be surprised by the position adopted by Mr  Johns
    on behalf of the Secretary of State.  The position  was  identified  at
    paragraph 13(ii) in which Mr Johns had  emphasised  that  the  document
    dated 6 June 2013 submitted by the  first  appellant  from  College  of
    Technology London was not an  authentic  document  and  that  in  those
    circumstances  the  respondent's  refusal  of   the   application   was
    appropriate and the appeal should fail.  The judge said she had noticed
    that the skeleton argument dealt only with the 60  days'  extension  in
    which to obtain a new CAS and failed to deal  with  the  refusal  under
    paragraph 322(1A) at all.  In the context of this appeal she found that
    it amounted to something approaching an astonishing omission.   I  find
    that this would explain why  the  appellant  did  not  submit  evidence
    rebutting the respondent's decision that the document from  College  of
    Technology London was not an authentic document.

18.  I accept that the judge applied the correct standard of  proof  as  set
    out in paragraph 98 of NA and Others (Cambridge  College  of  Learning)
    Pakistan [2009] UKAIT 00031.  In that paragraph the Tribunal relied  on
    JC (Part 9 - HC 395 - burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT  00027  where
    the Tribunal confirmed its view that in respect of the general  grounds
    of refusal the burden of proof rests on the respondent.  That  was  the
    standard of proof rests on the balance of probabilities, for matters of
    false  representation  and  documents  it  is  a  higher   balance   of
    probabilities than normal.

19.  I find on the evidence that the Secretary of State made out her case.

20.  As to the argument that the judge made no  findings  about  whether  or
    not the appellant's evidence  was  credible  and  whether  or  not  the
    documents were unreliable, I find that the judge's failure to make such
    a finding does not amount to a material.  I rely on paragraph 67 of  AA
    (Nigeria) [2010] EWCA Civ  773  where  the  Court  of  Appeal  held  as
    follows:

         "First, 'false representation' is aligned in the Rule  with  'false
         document'.  It is plain that a false document is one that  tells  a
         lie about itself.  Of course it is possible for a  person  to  make
         use of a false document (for instance a counterfeit currency  note,
         but that example, used for its clarity, is rather distant from  the
         context of this discussion) in total ignorance of its  falsity  and
         in perfect honesty.  But the document itself is dishonest.   It  is
         highly likely  therefore  that  where  an  applicant  uses  in  all
         innocence a false document  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  entry
         clearance, or leave to enter or remain, it is  because  some  other
         party, it might be a parent, or sponsor, or agent, has  dishonestly
         promoted the use of that document.  The response of  a  requirement
         of  mandatory  refusal  is  entirely  understandable  in   such   a
         situation.  The mere fact that a dishonest document has  been  used
         for such an important application is  understandably  a  sufficient
         reason for a mandatory refusal.  That is  why  the  Rule  expressly
         emphasises that it applies  'whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's
         knowledge'."

21.  For these reasons I find that the judge did  not  err  in  law  in  her
    decision.

22.  Mr Rahman said that he was not pursuing Article 8 of the ECHR.

23.  The judge's decision dismissing the appeals of  both  appellants  shall
    stand.



Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

