
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52843/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 20th August 2014                             |On 2nd September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD


                                   Between


                                MR osman goni
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Osman Goni, a citizen of Bangladesh born  1st  May
    1982.  He appeals against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Seelhoff  issued  on  10th  June  2014  dismissing   under   the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds his  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Respondent made on 26th November 2013 to refuse to vary
    his leave to remain and to  remove  him  by  way  of  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 2. On 27th June 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson granted  permission
    to appeal.  She noted that the  grounds  seeking  permission  submitted
    that the Judge had made an error of fact in that  the  Appellant's  CAS
    was withdrawn while his application was pending with the Home Office so
    he had no passport with which  to  attempt  to  obtain  a  transfer  to
    another educational institution and could not take advantage of the  60
    day grace period.  It is further submitted that the Judge ought to have
    applied the principle of common law fairness as set out in Thakur  (PBS
    decision - common law  fairness)  Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT  151,  Patel
    (revocation of Sponsor licence - fairness) India [2011]  UKUT  211  and
    Naved (student - fairness - notice of points) Pakistan [2012]  UKUT  14
    She concluded that it is arguable that the Judge had made an  error  of
    fact.

 3. Mr  Goni  did  not  appear  before  Judge  Seelhoff.   His  appeal  was
    determined on the papers.  He did not appear at the hearing before  me.
    Representatives of the Appellant submitted written submissions  to  the
    Tribunal on 24th July 2014 advising that they had  been  instructed  to
    submit these by the Appellant who would not be attending the hearing.

 4. There is a Rule 24  response  from  the  Respondent  to  the  grant  of
    permission  in which it  is  submitted   that  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    suggest  that  Judge  Seelhoff  clearly  failed   to   understand   the
    Appellant's circumstances i.e. that the  Respondent  had  retained  his
    passport,  but particularly given that the appeal was dealt with on the
    papers,  it is not clear whether the Judge had been provided with  that
    information and in any event the grounds do not address the finding  of
    the Judge that the sponsorship was withdrawn before  the  college  lost
    its licence.

 5. Judge Seelhoff relied on Patel.  He noted that the evidence showed that
    the Appellant's  personal  certificate  of  sponsorship  was  withdrawn
    before the college lost its licence which would normally indicate  that
    the withdrawal of the certificate was related to  the  Appellant's  own
    conduct.  He said there was no evidence before him of  any  attempt  by
    the Appellant to study since the college withdrew his  CAS  or  of  any
    attempt to enrol in another college.  In his  statement  the  Appellant
    appeared to acknowledge that he had not studied at all since the  start
    of 2013 and gave no evidence of new colleges he had approached.

 6. At the hearing before me Mr Melvin said that the Appellant  had  indeed
    been given 60 days to find a new college.  Efforts had been made by the
    Home Office to serve a Notice of Curtailment of leave on the  Appellant
    but it had been returned from the address they  had  on  record  marked
    "Gone away".  The Appellant had attempted  no communication at all with
    the Home Office.  He did not give them his new address.  His  visa  was
    revoked.  He asked me to take into account that the Appellant chose not
    to appear at the hearing.

Decision

Having considered the determination, the  grounds  of  application  and  the
Section 24 response I find that the grounds disclose no  material  error  of
law and that the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  shall  therefore
stand.

No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date: 1st September 2014

N A Baird
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Baird

