

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal nos: ia 52484, 90, 93, 98-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   25.07.2014|
|on    25.07.2014                              |sent out: 30.07.2014         |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                     Gabriel Toyin OGUNBAYEJE & 3 others
                                                                  appellants
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr Hakeem Allison, solicitor
For the respondent: Mrs Rhona Petterson

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Vincent Fox), sitting at Richmond on 30 April 2014,  to
    an  appeal against refusal of indefinite leave to remain as  a  points-
    based system [PBS] migrant, on the basis of  five  years'  stay,  by  a
    citizen of Nigeria, born 10 February 1968, and his dependent  wife  and
    children. The appellant has been in salaried employment as  a  minister
    of religion.

 2. Mr Allison conceded for the appellant before the judge that he couldn't
    succeed under the terms of the Immigration Rules themselves, owing to a
    gap in his qualifying residence. This, as the judge found, was owing to
    events outside the appellant's control, concerned  with  how  the  Home
    Office had dealt in the past with his church employer's registration as
    a sponsor. The judge  however  went  on  to  allow  the  appeal,  first
    (paragraph 29) on the basis that the decisions were "not in  accordance
    with the Immigration Rules", owing to failure  to  apply  the  relevant
    policy guidance (23 January 2014); he went on to  recognize  that  this
    might involve the application of a discretion by the Home  Office,  and
    concluded (30)

       It therefore follows at minimum that the matter should be returned to
       the respondent for her to consider her decisions in the light  of  my
       findings.

 3. Both sides before me were agreed that this last  part  of  the  judge's
    decision should stand, and that his decision to allow the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules must be quashed. Of course  the  policy  guidance
    formed no part of those: see Pankina  [2010] EWCA Civ 719 if  authority
    were required. The only difference lay in what should be done about the
    judge's further decision (at 31 - 34) to allow the appeal under article
    8 of the Human Rights Convention, which he did for the sole reason that
    the difficulties over the  continuity  of  the  appellant's  qualifying
    residence were outside his control, but within that of the Home Office,
    so that his removal would be disproportionate to the legitimate purpose
    of .

 4. Mr Allison argued that the judge was entitled to make this part of  the
    decision, for the reasons he gave. Judges are certainly  entitled,  and
    encouraged to deal with any article 8 grounds, even where they allow an
    appeal under the Rules, as an alternative  basis  for  their  decision.
    However, that assumes a valid decision under appeal in the first place,
    which can be dealt with on its merits, one way or the other.

 5. The difficulty in this case is that the jurisdiction to allow an appeal
    where there has been a failure to follow policy  guidance,  depends  on
    the jurisdiction to allow it as 'not in accordance with the  law'  (see
    Abdi [1995] EWCA Civ 27) . There are exceptional cases, where it is  so
    clear that applying the policy guidance can have only one result,  that
    the appeal has to be allowed outright forthwith on the  basis  that  no
    other result would be in accordance with the Rules; but it has not been
    argued that this is one of them.

 6. The discretion to dispense with the strict requirements  of  the  Rules
    remains the Secretary of State's, and the basis  for  the  exercise  of
    that discretion was the real ground for the judge's allowing the appeal
    under article 8.  In  those  circumstances,  he  should  have  confined
    himself to the part of his decision set out at paragraph 30: the  right
    way to say it would have been that the  decision  on  the  applications
    remained for the Secretary of State to consider, on the  basis  of  the
    judge's findings of fact and the policy guidance of 23 January 2014.

Home Office appeal
Appellants' appeals allowed, to the  extent  that  the  decisions  on  their
applications remain to be considered by the Secretary of State
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
