
[pic]
st


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52037/2013
                                                               IA/52063/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th May 2015                     |On 15th July 2015                     |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                        MR ABBAS MAHMOOD MOUSTAFA ALY
                        MRS HANNA ABBAS MOUSTAFA ALY
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M. Cross of Duncan Lewis and Co, Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The first appellant was born on 8 October 1950. The second appellant is
    his daughter, born on 19 January 1978. Both are citizens of Egypt.  For
    convenience I will refer to them respectively as Abbas and Hanna.

 2. Their joint appeal was allowed in part  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Harris and they have been given  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. I will set out the background  in  some  detail  to  put  the
    European Treaty obligations and freestanding Article 8  assessments  in
    context.

History

 3. Hanna's parents separated when she was a  child  and  both  established
    there own families. Hanna went to live with her mother but was sexually
    abused by her stepfather. At around the age of 14 she then went to live
    with her father. Unfortunately, she did not have  a  good  relationship
    with her father's new wife. Time passed and she and her father went  to
    France and then in or about 2002 to London. There they were joined by a
    relative whom Hanna married on 11 April 2003. She was granted a  family
    residence card valid until 7th May 2008 as his  family  member  on  the
    basis her  husband  was  exercising  Treaty  rights.  Her  father  also
    obtained documentation as a dependent relative.

 4. Her relationship with her husband was not happy and he was abusive.  In
    or around 2006 he left her  and  ended  the  relationship  by  a  talek
    divorce. There has been no contact since and no details  are  available
    as to what has become of him.

 5. A relationship developed between Hanna and a man called Melvit whom she
    had known for a number of years. He was born on 10 February 1962. He is
    Turkish Cypriot and has British nationality. On 27 July 2011 Hanna went
    through an Islamic ceremony of marriage to  Melvit.  They  subsequently
    had a child, born on 24 July 2013.

 6. All of the parties  have  health  problems.  Abbas  has  mental  health
    issues,  arthritic  knees  and  stomach  problems.  Hanna  has   visual
    impairment and has self harmed in the past. Melvit is  profoundly  deaf
    and has a hearing implant. He  has  various  other  health  conditions,
    including cardiac problems; difficulties with his back;  and  shortness
    of breath. He is  a  heavy  smoker,  consumes  excess  alcohol  and  is
    overweight.  He  is  unemployed  and  in  receipt  of  State  benefits,
    including  disability  living  allowance.  Abbas  and  Hanna  were   in
    employment until around 2012. Abbas then enrolled  in  English  courses
    and Hanna took courses in beauty therapy.

 7.  Various  immigration  applications  were  made  by  Abbas  and  Hanna.
    Applications under Treaty  provisions  where  made  in  May  2012.  The
    parties complained of delay on the part of the respondent in reaching a
    decision. Their representatives advised the respondent that a  judicial
    review of the delay was being considered. A decision was taken on  23rd
    November 2012 to refuse the applications. Their appeals where heard  by
    First tier Judge Archer on the 6th March 2013 who focused  on  domestic
    violence and found the respondent's decisions not  in  accordance  with
    the law because policies had not been  referred  to  and  referred  the
    matter back to the respondent. The respondent then made decisions on 19
    November 2013 again refusing the applications. This  then  led  to  the
    appeals before First  tier  Judge  Harris.  By  that  stage  Hanna  had
    obtained a decree absolute on 24 April 2013 in  respect  of  her  first
    marriage.

The First tier Tribunal.

 8. In respect of Abbas the argument in the First tier Tribunal was  solely
    on Article 8 grounds outside the immigration rules.  The  existence  of
    family life was relied upon. A close  relationship  with  his  daughter
    Hanna and their support for each other was emphasised.  Added  to  this
    was the prospect of his relationship with his  grandson.  Private  life
    was also raised. He had  been  in  this  country  since  2002;  he  had
    lawfully entered; and had been in employment until  2012.  His  various
    health problems were referred to.

 9. Judge Harris applied the sequential approach in  Razgar  and  dismissed
    Abbas's appeal on the basis the decision was proportionate.  The  judge
    accepted that family life  existed  as  did  private  life.  The  judge
    progressed  to  the  proportionality  assessment  and   concluded   the
    respondent's decision was proportionate.

10. The judge referred to the fact that Hanna now had family life with  her
    husband, with whom she enjoyed a good  relationship.  It  was  accepted
    that Abbas  provided  emotional  support  for  his  daughter  and  some
    childminding duties. However, it was considered this did not render the
    decision of the respondent disproportionate. The health  of  Abbas  was
    considered but the judge concluded this would not render  the  decision
    disproportionate.  The  judge  suggested  that  Hanna's  husband  could
    provide some financial support to Abbas when he returned to Egypt which
    would help his resettlement.

11. Regarding Hanna, the focus was her rights under the Treaty relating  to
    freedom of movement. The first claim was that she had a retained  right
    of  residence  further  to  regulation  10(5)(d)  of  the   Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred  to  as
    `the 2006 regulations'). A difficulty she faced was in obtaining proofs
    about her former husband situation given  the  acrimonious  background.
    The respondent did carry out some checks and there were no PAYE records
    in respect of him  from  2005  onwards.  Judge  Harris  concluded  that
    because it could not be established he  was  exercising  Treaty  rights
    then she could not established a retained right of residence.

12. The next argument  advanced  was  that  Hanna  had  derived  rights  of
    residence through her child, who was a British  citizen.  Judge  Harris
    concluded that the requirements of Regulation  15A(4)  were  satisfied.
    Hanna was the mother of a British child. She had primary responsibility
    for the care of the child. If Hanna had to  leave  the  United  Kingdom
    then in reality so would  her  child.  The  judge  found  that  Hanna's
    husband could not care for the child on his own in the United  Kingdom.
    One feature was that his hearing impairment created  safety  issues  in
    relation to the infant's care. Consequently, Hanna's appeal was allowed
    on the basis she had a derived right of residence. This does not confer
    a permanent right of residence.

The Upper Tribunal.

13. The appellant's representative prepared detailed grounds  over  several
    pages as to why leave  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  be
    granted. I have an extensive skeleton argument  which  largely  repeats
    the points made upon which leave was granted.  The  grounds  are  under
    four headings. At hearing the  appellant  representative  set  out  the
    points made in the skeleton argument.

14. The first challenge relates to the adequacy of  the  findings  made  by
    Judge Harris in relation to regulations 10 (5)(d)(i)(iv) and (6)(a) and
    regulation 15 (1)(f)(i) of the 2006 regulations. The complaint is  that
    the judge did not adequately deal with the domestic  violence  suffered
    by Hanna from her stepfather and from her first husband. Reference  was
    made to the findings of Judge Archer in the original appeal decision of
    22 March 2013.

15. The next three challenges  relate  to  the  proportionality  assessment
    under Article 8. It was contended that the history of domestic violence
    suffered by Hanna and her relationship with, and the mutual  dependence
    between her and Abbas, was  not  adequately  considered.  It  was  also
    submitted that the judge had not had adequate regard to the actual  and
    potential relationship between Abbas and his  grandchild.  Finally,  it
    was contended that the private life of Abbas had  not  been  adequately
    dealt with bearing in mind his health, the  passage  of  time  and  the
    delay in reaching a decision.

Consideration

The 2006 regulations.

16. With regard to the 2006 regulations, the judge found that Hanna  had  a
    derived right of residence. In  order  to  have  a  retained  right  of
    residence she had to meet the conditions  set  out  in  regulation  10.
    Under reg 10(5) (a) "termination of  the  marriage"  means  the  lawful
    ending of the marriage by legal proceedings (i.e. divorce); it does not
    mean the breakdown of the relationship. (see OA (EEA -  retained  right
    of residence) Nigeria [2010] UKAIT  00003).  Therefore,  following  her
    divorce in April 2013 she ceased to be a family member  of  her  former
    husband.

17. To achieve a permanent right of residence on the strength of a retained
    right of residence it is necessary to show residence in the  UK  for  a
    continuous period of five years. To count as  a  qualifying  period  of
    residence under reg 15(1)(b) she must show, inter alia, that  the  five
    years are ones in which residence  has  been  in  accordance  with  the
    Regulations. During those five years  the  EEA  national  on  whom  the
    family member relies in order to establish their right must  have  been
    continuously in the UK exercising Treaty rights. Reg 15(1)(f)  provides
    a route for acquiring  a  permanent  right  of  residence  based  on  a
    retained right of residence. But, as under Reg 15(1)(b), so  under  Reg
    15(1)(f) the family member has to show that the EEA national  concerned
    was exercising Treaty rights continuously over the relevant  period  of
    five years.

18. The spouse of an EEA national citizen does not acquire a retained right
    of residence upon divorce unless the EEA national  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom and  exercising  Treaty  rights  at  the  date  of  the  lawful
    termination of the marriage.(Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552). It is not known
    were the appellant's former husband is. At paragraph 14 of the decision
    Immigration Harris finds a lack of evidence to demonstrate  her  former
    husband was exercising Treaty  rights.  The  respondent  had  tried  to
    facilitate the appellant in obtaining proofs and the enquiries did  not
    indicate any employment from 2005. Therefore,  the  judge's  conclusion
    was in accordance with the law as it is currently understood.

19. Section 6.2 of the skeleton  argument  suggests  that  the  immigration
    judge erred in  concluding  it  was  Hanna's  husband  who  had  to  be
    exercising Treaty rights at the termination of the marriage.  Reference
    was made to Amos [2011] EWCA Civ 552 as supporting the proposition that
    appellant's should not be required to show that their  former  partners
    were working for a continuous period  of  five  years  prior  to  their
    applications.  In  Amos,  following  Land  Berlin,  it  was  said  that
    separation short of divorce does not  affect  the  right  of  the  non-
    national spouse under Article 16 of  the  Directive  if  both  the  EEA
    national and his or her non-national spouse continue to reside  in  the
    same Member State. Applicants were not  required  to  show  that  their
    former spouses were working for a continuous period of 5 years prior to
    their applications for the right of permanent residence. However,  were
    the marriage terminated and reliance was on  retained  rights  then  to
    acquire a permanent right they must show  their  former  spouse  was  a
    qualified person up to the divorce.There has been  a  referral  to  the
    CJEU by the Court of Appeal  as to whether a third country national ex-
    spouse must be able to show that their  former  spouse  was  exercising
    Treaty rights  at the time of their divorce in order to retain a  right
    of residence under Article 13(2) of  Directive  2004/38/EC  (see  NA  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 995).

20. Regulation 10(5)(iv) is dealing  with  a  situation  where  there  were
    particularly difficult circumstances when the marriage was  subsisting,
    such as domestic violence. At paragraph 16 of the grounds of appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal there was reference to Hanna  having  been  the
    victim of domestic violence and an explanation given for  the  lack  of
    proofs on this.

21. Immigration Judge Harris does not specifically refer  to  this  but  in
    paragraph 10 states "I am not satisfied that the second  appellant  has
    retained the right residence in any manner under  regulation  10(5)  of
    the 2006 regulations." I imply from this  wording  that  not  only  was
    regulation 10(5)(b) considered but also the other provisions in10(5).

22. I note from paragraph 8 of Judge Harris's  decision  that  the  earlier
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Archer, promulgated on 19  April  2013,
    had been supplied. That decision  is  contained  at  page  132  of  the
    appellant's bundle with the covering letter dated 19 May  2015.  First-
    tier Tribunal Archer under `findings of fact' dealt in detail with  the
    allegation of domestic violence.  This  is  set  out  at  paragraph  24
    through to 30 of the decision and accepts this occurred  and  concludes
    that the respondent had  not  given  any  consideration  to  regulation
    10(5)(d) (iv) beyond rejecting the claim. It was for  this  reason  and
    the reference  to  domestic  violence  policies  that  the  matter  was
    referred back to the respondent.

23. The respondent's letter of 19 November 2013  is  a  response  to  Judge
    Archer's referral. It states  that  regulation  10(5)(d)(iv)  does  not
    assist Hanna as it refers to the situation  at the  time  her  marriage
    terminated on the 24 April 2013. As I read regulation 10  (5)  this  is
    correct. Regulation 10 (5) provides a retained right  of  residence  in
    specific circumstances when the person ceases to be a family member  of
    a qualified person on the termination of the  marriage.  They  must  be
    residing in accordance with the regulations at the date of  termination
    and 10(5)(d) is satisfied (my emphasis) . The latter is subdivided into
    four  categories,  the  last  of  which,  (iv),  deals  with  difficult
    circumstances such as domestic  violence.  Consequently,  the  domestic
    violence provisions would not have  assisted  due  to  the  failure  to
    demonstrate a qualified person within  the  meaning  of  regulation  6.
    Consequently, the fact Judge Harris did  not  reach  specific  findings
    here was not material.

24. My conclusion is that there is no material error  in  relation  to  how
    Judge Harris dealt with the 2006 regulations.

Article 8

25. The applications made by both appellants was for confirmation of  their
    right  to   permanent   residence   further   to   Treaty   provisions.
    Consequently, they were seeking a declaratory document. There  were  no
    removal directions and if these were issued they would confer rights of
    appeal. The grounds of appeal did  raise  Article  8  at  paragraph  18
    onwards.  It is arguable it was premature to consider Article 8. It  is
    always open to the appellant to make a fee-based application under  the
    immigration rules in respect of  their  private  and  family  life.  An
    authoritative view on the correct way to proceed in this  situation  is
    awaited. Judge Harris referred to JM Liberia [2006] EWCA Civ  1402  and
    based on this proceeded to consider Article 8.

26. The focus in relation  to  Article  8  was  upon  Abbas.  However,  his
    situation could not be considered in isolation as it interacts with his
    relationship with Hanna and her husband and their child.

27. The judge referred to the immigration rules  dealing  with  family  and
    private life and that these were not being relied upon. The  new  rules
    only accommodate certain types of Article 8 claims. A judge must  still
    consider whether the decision is in compliance with  a  person's  human
    rights under s.6 of the Human Rights Act (see s.84(1)(c), (g)  and  (e)
    and s.86(2) and (3) of the 2002 Act). It remains the case,  as  before,
    that 'exceptional circumstances' is not to be regarded as a legal  test
    and 'insurmountable obstacles'  is  to  be  regarded  as  an  incorrect
    criterion.

28. Judge Harris referred to Izuazu (Article 8 -  new  rules)  [2013]  UKUT
    00045 (IAC) which held there is no  presumption  that  the  rules  will
    normally be conclusive of the Article 8  assessment  or  that  a  fact-
    sensitive inquiry is normally not needed.

29. The judge  then  proceeded  to  carry  out  a  freestanding  Article  8
    assessment applying the sequential approach set out  in  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27. The family dynamics were set out, noting that the relationship
    was between a parent and adult child and  the  judge  referred  to  the
    decision of  Ghising  [2012]  UKUT  160.  The  judge  referred  to  the
    submission that the appellants were  mutually  dependent,  particularly
    because of childhood and domestic abuse suffered by  Hanna  .The  judge
    accepted that there is a close emotional tie going beyond that normally
    expected (See para 33). At paragraph 39  the  judge  also  referred  to
    Abbas's relationship with his grandson. The judge concluded that  Hanna
    was her child's primary carer and this was recognised in the finding of
    a derivative right. The judge referred to the emotional  support  given
    between father and daughter and concluded that Abbas  nevertheless  was
    capable of fending for himself, including tending to his medical needs.
    Having set these factors out the judge accepted there was family  life.
    Judge Harris also accepted that Abbas had established a private life in
    the United Kingdom. The judge acknowledged that the consequence of  the
    decision was of such gravity as to engage Article 8.

30. The determinative issue was proportionality. Judge Harris did not refer
    to the new Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,
    which specify public interest provisions  to  be  taken  into  account.
    However, Part 5A does not apply to appeals brought under Regulation  26
    of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic   Area)   Regulations   2006.
    Consequently, Judge Harris was correct in making no reference to  these
    provisions when considering proportionality.

31. Ultimately, Judge Harris concluded that the decision was  proportionate
    and did not breach the right to family life. Each case depends upon its
    specific facts and it is essential that a judicial decision be  reached
    applying an even-handed application of the  proportionality  test.  The
    judge set out the considerations and also referred to the health issues
    raised and Abbas's ties with Egypt. I have considered the  points  made
    by  the  appellant's  representative  but  find  they   amount   to   a
    disagreement with Judge Harris's conclusions. I find that Judge  Harris
    correctly applied the sequential approach set out in Razgar. The  judge
    referred to the relevant factors in carrying  out  the  proportionality
    exercise and made an evaluation. I do not see any error of law  in  how
    this was done.

Decision.

32. The decision of Immigration Judge Harris does not  contain  a  material
    error of law and shall stand.



FJFarrelly
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
