

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)          Appeal Number: IA/52177/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Field House                                            Notice sent
On 4 September 2014          On 4 September 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                             Daniel Ohene Addae
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                   Respondent
Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Bajwa of Counsel instructed by A. Bajwa & Co.
For  the  Respondent:             Mr.  I.  Jarvis,  Home  Office  Presenting
                            Officer.


                            NOTICE OF WITHDRAWAL
           Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 r.17(5)


   1. This case was listed before the Upper  Tribunal  today  as  an  appeal
      against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet  promulgated
      on  16  May  2014,  dismissing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the
      Respondent's decision dated 16 November 2013  to  refuse  to  issue  a
      Residence Card as confirmation of a right of residence as  the  family
      member of an EEA national.


   2. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on  9  September  1983.  His
      application for a Residence Card made on 17 June 2013 was based on his
      relationship with Ms Isabel Da Silva, a Portuguese  national.  It  was
      the Appellant's case that he was married to Ms Da Silva by proxy in  a
      customary marriage ceremony conducted in Ghana in the absence  of  the
      parties to  the  marriage.  The  Respondent  refused  the  Appellant's
      application for reasons set out in  a  'reasons  for  refusal'  letter
      dated 16 November 2013, and  a  Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  was
      prepared on the same date.


   3. The Appellant appealed to  the  IAC.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      dismissed the appeal for reasons set out  in  her  determination.  The
      Judge made three adverse conclusions: she was not satisfied  that  the
      Appellant was duly married in accordance with the law of Ghana; in any
      event there was no evidence that the claimed marriage  was  recognised
      in Portugal; in the alternative, the Judge was not satisfied that  the
      Appellant was in a durable relationship with Ms Da Silva (who had  not
      attended the appeal  hearing  and  from  whom  there  was  no  witness
      statement).


   4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted by  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth on 14 July 2014.


   5. It is to be noted that the grounds in support of the  application  for
      permission to appeal only sought to challenge the  Judge's  conclusion
      in respect of the validity of the marriage in Ghana. The  grounds  did
      not challenge either the Judge's conclusions pursuant to the  case  of
      Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024 (IAC)  in  respect
      of the absence of any evidence  of  recognition  of  the  marriage  in
      Portugal, or the adverse findings in respect of the durability of  the
      relationship. In such circumstances I  am  unable  to  understand  the
      basis upon which permission to appeal was granted.


   6. Be that as it may, Mr Bajwa was quick and  commendably  frank  in  his
      recognition of the difficulty presented in pursuing the  appeal  today
      in circumstances where there was no challenge  raised  in  respect  of
      Kareem or durability. In such  circumstances,  and  after  some  brief
      discussion, Mr Bajwa indicated that he wished to withdraw  the  appeal
      on behalf of the Appellant. Mr Jarvis raised no objection  to  such  a
      course of action.



   7. Pursuant to rule 17(1)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2008 "a party may give notice of the withdrawal of  its  case...
      orally at a hearing". Mr Bajwa  is  the  Appellant's  duly  authorised
      representative and gives such notice orally today The Upper Tribunal's
      consent is required for a notice of withdrawal to  take  effect  (rule
      17(2)).  In  circumstances  where  there  is  no  objection  from  the
      Respondent, and  further  where  there  is  no  meritorious  basis  of
      challenge to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I  give  that
      consent.



   8. Necessarily the consent is to the withdrawal of the  Appellant's  case
      as it stands before the Upper Tribunal. The effect of  the  withdrawal
      of his case before the Upper Tribunal is that  his  challenge  to  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal comes to an end, and the  decision
      of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


   9. This Notice is given pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Procedure Rules.



Outcome

  10. The Appellant's challenge to the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      is withdrawn.


  11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.




Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     4 September 2014
