

                                       [pic]


The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)         Appeal number: IA/52106/2013

                               THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House            |    Determination          |
|                                |Promulgated                |
|On November 28, 2014            |    On December 2, 2014    |
|                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR YAHIA ABDENNOUR AIT
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Deller (Home Office Presenting (Officer)
For the Respondent:    In person


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, born November 11, 1979 is a citizen of Algeria. On April
    11, 2008 he was issued with an EEA residence card  and  on  August  29.
    2013 he applied for permanent residence. This application was  rejected
    by the respondent on November 28, 2013.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and  Regulation  26
    of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  on
    December 9, 2013. On June 3, 2014 Judge  of  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
    Wyman (hereinafter referred to as the  "FtTJ")  heard  his  appeal.  He
    allowed the appeal  under  the  2006  Regulations  in  a  determination
    promulgated on June 19, 2014.

 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on June 21, 2014 and on July 3,
    2014 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  McDade  granted  permission  to
    appeal finding it arguable the  FtTJ  had  erred  by  failing  to  give
    reasons why he was satisfied the appellant  had  provided  satisfactory
    evidence that the EEA spouse had medical insurance  between  June  2010
    and June 2011 when no evidence had been submitted.

 5. The matter originally came before me on  August  26,  2014  and  I  was
    satisfied the FtTJ had made an error but the materiality of  the  error
    was the issue as the appellant argued that medical  insurance  was  not
    needed because his EEA  spouse  already  had  permanent  residence.  Mr
    Deller looked at the document issued on May 18, 2006 and said there may
    be something in what the appellant was saying and  he  asked  that  the
    case be adjourned for further enquiries and evidence to be sent to  him
    by the appellant.

 6. I adjourned that hearing with no decision on the error in  law  on  the
    understanding the respondent would liaise with the respondent over  the
    matter. The matter  came  back  before  me  on  October  20,  2014  and
    regrettably Mr Deller had been taken ill shortly after the last hearing
    and had been unable to complete his enquiries as he had  only  returned
    to work that day. I adjourned the matter further and issued directions.

 7. On November 25, 2014 Mr Deller faxed the Tribunal and indicated he  was
    satisfied with the evidence and more particularly he was satisfied  the
    appellant acquired his right of permanent residence in 2013 as  he  had
    been a family member of an EEA national with such a right for over five
    years. He  submitted the appeal had been allowed for the  wrong  reason
    but in light of the evidence he  accepted  this  was  not  material.  A
    request was made to deal with the case in the absence of  both  parties
    but the Tribunal directed the case remain listed.

    MY FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

 8. The FtTJ allowed the appellant's appeal on the basis he had produced  a
    current medical insurance. This document did not  demonstrate  the  EEA
    national had medical insurance when she was a  student.  This  decision
    was wrong and in the absence of anything else I would  have  set  aside
    the decision and allowed the appeal because the appellant had failed to
    satisfy the FtTJ his wife was working for the relevant dates.

 9. However, the respondent was now  satisfied  that  the  appellant's  EEA
    national wife's employment history began in 2000 and she  acquired  her
    right of permanent residence at some point before her marriage  to  the
    appellant.  A  document  had  previously  been  produced   showing   an
    "indefinite residence permit" was issued to the EEA national on May 18,
    2006. The respondent further accepted they had been together  for  five
    years by 2013 and he was entitled as of right to his permanent right of
    residence having been given a right of residence on April 11. 2008.

10. I am satisfied that Mr Deller's approach is  correct  and  consequently
    whilst the FtTJ's reason for granting the appellant was  incorrect  the
    decision nevertheless remained  correct  in  light  of  this  important
    concession and there was no material error in law.

11. The Tribunal thanks Mr Deller for his assistance and approach  in  this
    appeal.

    DECISION


12. There was no material error of law The original decision is upheld.


13. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

Mr Deller did not oppose the making of a fee award. I therefore alter the
previous fee award decision and I make a fee award.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
