
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52381/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th November 2014                            |On 1st December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                     Z S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Bartram, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. On 26th September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Nicholson  gave
    permission to the appellant to  appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Morrison in  which  he  dismissed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds against the decision of  the  respondent
    to refuse  leave  to  remain  on  human  rights  grounds  applying  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. Judge Nicholson thought it arguable that the judge had failed  to  give
    consideration to the best interests of the child, R, born as  a  result
    of a relationship between the appellant and Ms M and  also  her  child,
    Rn, a British citizen.  Ms M and R had been granted discretionary leave
    to remain with Rn.  Further, Judge Nicholson also thought  it  arguable
    that the judge had mixed up the two children when considering the human
    rights appeal.

 3. At the hearing before me in the Upper Tribunal I heard submissions from
    both representatives which I now summarise.

 4. Mr Bartram confirmed that the appellant relied on the  grounds.   These
    point out that, at paragraph 7(iii) of  the  determination,  the  judge
    wrongly stated that Ms M and her elder son, Rn, were granted  a  period
    of discretionary leave.  In fact discretionary leave was granted to  Ms
    M and R.  Rn is a  British  citizen  and  leave  would  not  have  been
    required for him.  The grounds also point out that the  best  interests
    of both children were not expressly considered  in  the  determination.
    It was wrong of the judge to consider that the appellant  could  return
    to Uganda and make a further application  from  there  because  it  had
    already been shown that the appellant did  not  qualify  for  leave  to
    remain under the Immigration Rules and, for the same reasons, would not
    be able to obtain entry clearance on return.  The judge  was  wrong  to
    base his decision on an anticipated short interference to  family  life
    for that reason.

 5. Mr Bartram also submitted that, at the time of the appeal in 2012,  the
    parties had a home together even though it had been said in the refusal
    that the partnership Rules could not be met.  He also  emphasised  that
    the judge's consideration of the best interests  of  the  children  was
    inadequate.  He submitted that, if an error was found  on  that  basis,
    the appeal should be remitted bearing in mind that human rights  issues
    only were the subject of the appeal and the circumstances should be re-
    evaluated at the time of the next hearing.  He also  pointed  out  that
    Section 117B of the 2002 Act should then be  taken  into  consideration
    when evaluating the proportionality of the respondent's decision in the
    light of the interests of the children.  He also thought  that the case
    was unusual because, at the time the application was made, neither  the
    appellant nor Ms M had leave but the respondent granted Ms  M  and  her
    Ugandan child, R, leave following the application but the appellant was
    refused leave.

 6. Mr Tufan pointed out that the  judge  had  applied  the  provisions  of
    Section 117B in relation to the appellant's  alleged  partnership.   He
    emphasised that  Ms  M  had  only  discretionary  leave.   Further,  no
    evidence had been put forward of contact between the British child, Rn,
    and his father.  The appellant had started his relationship with  Ms  M
    when his status was precarious.  Although the  best  interests  of  the
    children were not specifically considered they were not material in the
    facts of the case.

Conclusions

 7. The determination shows that the judge dealt with human  rights  issues
    on the basis of the guidance set out in Gulshan (Article 8 - new  Rules
    - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) by considering whether or not
    there were any factors put forward in the appellant's case which  would
    give rise to  arguably  good  grounds  for  conducting  a  freestanding
    approach to Article 8 issues.  That approach would  now  appear  to  be
    wrong in the light of the comments of the Court of Appeal in MM  [2014]
    EWCA Civ 985 where the  court  considered  that  an  intermediary  test
    before proceeding to consider human rights issues outside the Rules was
    unnecessary.

 8. However, the  judge's  adoption  of  the  Gulshan  approach  might  not
    necessarily lead to a material error  if  he  had  given  comprehensive
    consideration to all of the issues relevant to the human  rights  claim
    made by the appellant.  Unfortunately, he did not.  Paragraph 19 of the
    determination shows that the  judge  only  gave  consideration  to  the
    effect of the return of the appellant to Uganda and the possibility  of
    him returning after a successful application for  entry  clearance.  He
    did not consider the best interests of the two  children,  particularly
    when his own child had been granted  discretionary  leave  and  Ms  M's
    oldest child is a British citizen.  Further, no consideration was given
    to whether or not it would be reasonable to expect Ms M  to  leave  the
    United Kingdom taking into consideration the  wider  interests  of  the
    children particular, Rn.  Such wider consideration of  the  issues  was
    essential when the judge had found, contrary to the conclusions of  the
    respondent, that  the  appellant  and  Ms  M  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting  relationship  even  if   the   appellant's   position   was
    precarious.  If the judge had considered such issues then there is  the
    possibility  that  his  decision  would  have  been   different.    The
    determination therefore shows an error on a point of law such  that  it
    should be re-made.

 9. As the sole issue is the application of human rights to the appellant's
    situation bearing in mind his relationship  with  Ms  M  and  the  best
    interests of the children involved and because fresh  evidence  can  be
    considered in relation to those matters, it is  appropriate  that  this
    appeal should be heard afresh before the First-tier  Tribunal.  I  have
    regard  to  the  provisions  of  paragraph  7(2)(b)  of  the   practice
    statements of the Senior President of 25  September  2012  in  reaching
    that conclusion.

Anonymity

As this appeal involves the interests  of  children  I  make  the  following
direction which will, no doubt, be renewed in the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

OTHER DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is to be heard afresh before the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Hatton Cross (or one of its satellite courts).

 2. The appeal should take place on a date to be set by the Regional  Judge
    at Hatton Cross.

 3. The appeal should not be heard  by  Judge  of  the  Firs-tier  Tribunal
    Morrison.

 4. No interpreter will be booked for the  hearing  unless  representatives
    indicate to the contrary  at  least  five  days  before  the  specified
    hearing date before the First-tier Tribunal.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
