
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/52107/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 3rd July 2015                    |On: 13th July 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     CG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Timson, Counsel instructed by HSK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Trinidad and  Tobago  and  his  date  of
    birth is 30th August 1972. He appeals with  permission[1]  against  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Levin) to dismiss his appeal
    against a refusal to grant him leave to enter the United Kingdom.




    Case History

 2. Following the Error of Law hearing on the 12th March 2015  the  parties
    agreed that the history of this appeal is as follows.

 3. The Appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on the 22nd November  2012.
    He sought leave to enter as a visitor; as  a  national  of  Trinidad  &
    Tobago he did not require a  visa.   Following  an  interview  and  bag
    search the Immigration Officer at Gatwick was not satisfied that he was
    a genuine visitor who intended to leave the UK at the end of the period
    stated by him. The fact that the Appellant had, on an earlier occasion,
    overstayed by approximately ten days and the fact that he was coming to
    be with his pregnant girlfriend led the officer to conclude that he was
    in fact coming for the purpose of settling in the UK. The Appellant was
    therefore refused leave to enter but was granted temporary admission to
    enable him to pursue his appeal from within the UK.  Removal directions
    were subsequently made which were challenged by way of judicial  review
    and the matter was settled by consent with the Respondent  agreeing  to
    substantively consider the Appellant's human rights.  The  decision  to
    refuse leave to enter was served on the 19th October 2013  alongside  a
    reasoned refusal letter.

 4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the decision  under
    appeal was therefore a decision to refuse leave to enter.  The  grounds
    of  appeal  were  human  rights,  and  in  particular  the  Appellant's
    contention that refusal  to  grant  him  leave  to  enter  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his Article 8 family life  with  his
    British wife (he has now married his  girlfriend),  their  two  British
    children and his three British stepchildren.

    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. In a detailed determination the First-tier Tribunal accepted and  found
    as fact that the Appellant was in a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with his British wife and that he had a parental relationship with  his
    two biological children and three stepchildren[2].  All  five  children
    are British[3].   It was accepted that the Appellant's wife  is  HIV  +
    and that  she  is  under  the  care  of  a  multidisciplinary  team  at
    Manchester  General  Hospital[4].  It  was  expressly  found  that  the
    Appellant has "far stronger" ties to the UK than he  does  to  Trinidad
    and Tobago[5].  It  was  also  found  that  the  family  are  presently
    entirely reliant on benefits[6]. The Appellant's wife  is  in  receipt,
    inter alia,  of  DLA.   That  was  why,  the  Tribunal  concluded,  the
    Appellant had chosen to seek entry  as  a  visitor  rather  than  as  a
    spouse, when in fact his  intention  all  along  was  settlement.   The
    determination finds that the Immigration Officer was  correct  to  have
    refused entry as a visitor[7].

 6. The determination goes on to consider whether the  Appellant  can  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM[8]:

         "I find that the Appellant does not satisfy the immigration  status
         requirements of section E-LTRP.2.1 of  Appendix  FM  for  leave  to
         remain as a partner or those of section  E-LTRP.3.1  for  leave  to
         remain as a parent, both of which require that the  applicant  must
         not be in the UK as a visitor or with valid  leave  granted  for  a
         period of less than six months unless that leave was as a fianc� or
         proposed civil partner, neither of which applies to the  Appellant.
         It follows therefore that if the  Appellant  is  to  qualify  under
         Appendix FM he would have to meet the exceptions thereto set out in
         section EX of Appendix FM"

    The Tribunal proceeds to consider whether the Appellant  can  meet  the
    requirements set out in EX.1.  A finding is made that the children  are
    all British and that the Appellant does have a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with them. Various factors are  then  taken  into
    account to conclude that it would however  be  'reasonable'  to  expect
    them to relocate. This includes the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  wife
    would be able to get treatment for her  HIV  in  Trinidad;  that  there
    would also be treatment available for her eldest son who  suffers  from
    autism and epilepsy; that they knew the Appellant's immigration  status
    to be precarious; that the family are reliant on public funds; and that
    conversely in Trinidad the Appellant would be able to work and  support
    his family. The Tribunal did not accept the evidence of the Appellant's
    wife that she had no other support in this country.

 7. At paragraph 44 the determination cites the  "Zambrano  principle",  as
    set out in the case of Sanade and Ors (British Children  -  Zambrano  -
    Dereci) [2012] UKUT 00048 (IAC) in  the  context  of  Article  8.    At
    paragraph 56 it is found that the Appellant assists  his  wife  in  the
    care of the children but  "he  is  most  certainly  not  their  primary
    carer": afterall, she managed to look after the elder three on her  own
    without any assistance from him at all prior to his  arrival  in  March
    2013[9].  It is found that his removal would not result in the children
    being required to leave the UK because they are not dependent upon  him
    for exercise of their residence rights.  In the  alternative  it  would
    not be unreasonable for the whole family  to  relocate  to  Trinidad  &
    Tobago[10].  The Tribunal concludes  that  it  would  be  open  to  the
    Appellant to apply for entry clearance  under  Appendix  FM:  his  wife
    being in receipt of DLA he would be  exempt  from  the  minimum  income
    requirements.  Having considered all  of  these  factors  the  Tribunal
    concludes that the decision is not disproportionate and the  appeal  is
    dismissed.

    The Grounds of Appeal and Response

 8. The written grounds of appeal rely on the authority of  Chikwamba  (FC)
    (Appellant) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and Hayat [2011] UKUT 00444 (IAC) and
    submit that it was "clearly wrong in law" for the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to have dismissed the appeal on the ground  that  the  Appellant  could
    apply for entry clearance.  It is further submitted that  the  Tribunal
    has failed to take the best interests  of  the  British  children  into
    account and reliance is placed on ZH (Tanzania) (FC) v SSHD [2011] UKSC
    4.  It is submitted that the Tribunal has erred in finding it to  be  a
    reasonable option that these British children go to live in Trinidad.

 9. Permission to appeal was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  was
    granted upon renewed application by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey,  who
    granted permission on the Sanade point, specifically  noting  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had appeared to reach a conclusion contrary to  the
    position taken by the Respondent, and endorsed by the Tribunal, in that
    case.

10. The Respondent's Rule 24 response is dated the 9th  January  2015.   In
    summary it is submitted that the decision was open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the evidence before it.

11. At the hearing before me Mr Timson conceded that he was unable to  rely
    simply on the Chikwamba point raised in his grounds. It may well be the
    case that the Appellant did not have to meet the financial requirements
    but there had not been the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    enable it to make a finding that all of the remaining requirements were
    met: for instance he could not say with confidence that the  "specified
    evidence" had been produced.  He agreed that the Tribunal had expressly
    found, in respect of EX.1, that the requirements of the Rule  were  not
    met.  He instead adopted the point made by Judge Storey in  respect  of
    Sanade. Much of the reasoning in the determination was  taken  up  with
    finding that the family  could  reasonably  relocate  to  Trinidad.  Mr
    Timson relied on Judge Storey's grant of permission to submit that this
    finding went behind the Respondent's  concession  in  that  case.  With
    permission he further varied  his  grounds  to  submit  that  that  the
    determination had failed to address particular evidence which  went  to
    the issue of how much care the Appellant gave to his children. This was
    particularly important in the context of his  wife's  illness  and  the
    disabilities of their son.

12. At the Error of Law  hearing  the  Respondent  was  represented  by  Mr
    Harrison, Senior Presenting Officer.  He accepted that the Tribunal did
    appear to place a great deal of emphasis on its  conclusion  that  this
    family of five British children could  go  and  live  in  Trinidad.  He
    clarified that it was not the Respondent's case that  they  should.  It
    had simply been the Respondent's case that the interference that  would
    be caused by  the  Appellant's  removal  would  be  proportionate.   Mr
    Harrison conceded that  there  was  evidence,   in  particular  medical
    evidence, that had not received attention in the  Tribunal's  findings,
    but submitted that it was a matter for me whether I thought that was  a
    material error.

    Error of Law

13. This was a detailed and careful determination. Although I have found it
    to contain errors I have  considerable  sympathy  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: it would appear that neither party were at  all  clear  about
    the nature of decision under appeal, the relevant law nor even what the
    grounds of appeal were.   To that extent the Tribunal was not assisted.

14. Three points have been raised in this appeal, with varying  degrees  of
    emphasis placed on each.

    Chikwamba

15. It is agreed that the Appellant has not made a formal  application  for
    leave to remain under Appendix FM. It is further  agreed  that  he  was
    nevertheless entitled to rely  on  its  provisions  because  he  raised
    Article 8 on appeal: GEN 1.9(a)(iii)[11]. What is less clear is how far
    that gets the Appellant in this  appeal.  Paragraph  33  (cited  above)
    would appear to contain a mistake in that  the  Appellant  had  neither
    leave to remain as a visitor nor any other form of leave for less  than
    six months.  He did however have  temporary  admission  so  that  error
    would be entirely immaterial since the Tribunal was  quite  correct  to
    identify that the Appellant could not 'switch' without  satisfying  the
    requirements of  EX.1:  E-LTRP.2.2(a).    Since  the  Tribunal  plainly
    concluded that he could not  I  found  it  difficult  to  see  how  the
    Appellant can simply point to Chikwamba to say that the  appeal  should
    have been allowed on the facts as found. Before me Mr  Timson  conceded
    that in order to rely on Chikwamba  he  had  first  to  show  that  the
    Tribunal's approach to EX.1 involved the making of an error of law.

    EX.1, Proportionality and Sanade

16. The Respondent's 'concession' referred to by Judge Storey is set out at
    paragraphs 93-95 of Sanade:

         "93.     Finally, we note that a further question on which we asked
         for the respondent's assistance was in these terms:

             "Does the respondent agree that in a case where a non-national
             parent is being removed and claims it is a violation  of  that
             person's human rights to be separated from a child  with  whom
             he presently enjoys family life as an engaged parent,  that  a
             consequence of the CJEU's judgment is that it is not  open  to
             the respondent to submit that an interference can  be  avoided
             because it is reasonable to expect the child  (and  presumably
             any other parent/carer who is not facing  deportation/removal)
             to join the appellant in the country of origin?  If  not,  why
             not?"

         94.      To this Mr Devereux replied on 24 November 2011:

             "We do accept, however, that in a case where a  third  country
             national is unable to claim a right to reside on the basis set
             out above it will not logically be  possible,  when  assessing
             the compatibility of their removal  or  deportation  with  the
             ECHR to argue that any  interference  with  Article  8  rights
             could be avoided by the family unit moving to a country  which
             is outside of the EU".

         95.      We shall take this helpful submission into account when we
         consider the application of Article 8 to each appellant's case.  We
         agree with it.  This means that  where  the  child  or  indeed  the
         remaining spouse is a British citizen and therefore  a  citizen  of
         the European Union, it is not possible to require them to  relocate
         outside of the European  Union  or  to  submit  that  it  would  be
         reasonable for them to do so. The  case  serves  to  emphasise  the
         importance of nationality already identified in the decision of the
         Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania). If  interference  with  the  family
         life is to be justified, it can only  be  on  the  basis  that  the
         conduct of the person to be removed gives rise to considerations of
         such weight as to justify separation."

17. The Respondent has not in this case sought to resile from  the  'Sanade
    concession'; indeed it still appears as a statement of  policy  in  the
    Respondent's current guidance document "Appendix FM 1.0 Family Life (as
    a Partner or Parent) and Private Life: 10-Year Routes (April 2015)":

         'Where a decision to refuse the application would require a parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the EU, the case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be unreasonable
         to expect a British Citizen child to leave the EU with that parent
         or primary carer.

         In such cases it will usually be appropriate to grant leave to the
         parent or primary carer, to enable them to remain in the UK with
         the child, provided that there is satisfactory evidence of a
         genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

         It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave where the
         conduct of the parent or primary carer gives rise to considerations
         of such weight as to justify separation, if the child could
         otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary carer in
         the UK or in the EU.'

18. Before me Mr Harrison confirms that it is  not  the  Respondent's  case
    that the children, nor indeed the Appellant's wife,  should  leave  the
    UK; nor is it submitted that it would be reasonable for them to do so.

19. What appears to  have  happened  in  this  determination  is  that  the
    'Zambrano' principle, applied under the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006, has been conflated with  whether,  taken  in  the  round,  it  is
    proportionate to interfere with the Article  8  family  life  of  these
    children. If this were an appeal under  the  Regulations  the  question
    would be whether the parent facing removal can qualify for a  right  of
    residence on the basis that he is the sole carer for the children.   He
    would have to show himself the  sole  or  primary  carer  in  order  to
    establish that the child needed him there in order to exercise  his  or
    her own citizenship rights.  No doubt this was what Mr  Timson  had  in
    mind when he made the  concession  recorded  at  paragraph  56  of  the
    determination: "in his oral submissions at the hearing Mr  Timson,  the
    Appellant's counsel, conceded that if I were to find that the Appellant
    is not the primary carer for the children then that would be an end  to
    this argument".     With  respect  to  Mr  Timson  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, that was not in fact the end of the argument, which was  also
    put under Article  8.  Sanade  and  the  Respondent's  own  Immigration
    Directorates' Instructions[12]  establish  that  when  contemplating  a
    family split under Article 8 it will not generally be  'reasonable'  to
    expect British children, or indeed British spouses, to leave  the  EEA.
    If the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the Rules it may still
    be entirely proportionate to proceed with removal, but not,  generally,
    on the grounds that his family can go with  him.  This  determination's
    analysis of whether it would be "reasonable" for these children  to  go
    with the Appellant, under both EX.1 and freestanding Article  8,   does
    not reflect that concession.   The real focus of enquiry under  Article
    8 should have been whether it was disproportionate  to  interfere  with
    the family life as it existed in the UK.  That leads  me  to  the  last
    issue raised in this appeal.

    The Family and Private Life of the Appellant and his Family

20. I have set out above the conclusions of the Tribunal that the Appellant
    was not the primary carer for  his  children.  That  may  have  been  a
    finding that was open to the Tribunal on the  evidence  before  it  but
    that was not the only question that the Tribunal  had  to  decide.  The
    question was one of proportionality. In  order  to  evaluate  that  the
    Tribunal had to inter alia assess the impact of the Appellant's removal
    on his family.

21. Before me Mr Harrison conceded that the Appellant's bundle contained  a
    good deal of independent evidence which indicated  that  the  Appellant
    played a significant role in the lives of his children, and  that  none
    of this had been expressly addressed in  the  findings.  That  evidence
    included letters from the school confirming that he brings the children
    to and from school and a letter from the family's Liason Nurse  at  the
    North Manchester General Hospital confirming that he  has  brought  the
    children and his wife to appointments, is present  during  home  visits
    and to her knowledge takes the children to school. In  a  letter  dated
    17th September 2013 Katie Rowson, Specialist Paediatric Nurse wrote:

         "[CR] has attended essential hospital  appointments  with  his  son
         [J], and is clearly playing a very active and  supportive  role  in
         his care.

         It is crucial that family life is maintained and  the  support  and
         care continues. If this family are separated in any way this  could
         have significant effects on the emotional well being of all members
         of the family including Jacob"

    Nurse Rowson reiterates this view in a more recent letter,  dated  18th
    March 2014, wherein she describes the Appellant's role in  this  family
    as "crucial".

22. The bundle also contained a letter from Jill  Delaney,  HIV  Specialist
    Nurse, dated 10th March 2014. Nurse Delaney has been  involved  in  the
    care of the Appellant's  wife  since  2005,  when  she  first  met  the
    Appellant as he attended appointments with her. Nurse  Delaney  records
    her own impression of how much care the Appellant provides for his wife
    and their children, and notes the significance of the fact that  it  is
    difficult for those who are living with HIV to find life  partners  who
    are accepting of it, where they themselves do not have  the  condition.
    Having had an opportunity to observe the change in the family when  the
    Appellant had returned to Trinidad previously, Nurse Delaney writes:

         "From a psychological perspective [A's wife] is  much  more  stable
         emotionally when [C] is around; he is a very stabilizing influence.
         The episodes of previously experienced depression are much less and
         one of the stresses she suffers from is  the  worry  of  [C]  being
         deported and her being left with 5 children, three of whom will  be
         under 6 years...I would be extremely  concerned  for  [her]  mental
         health should [C] not be allowed to stay in the UK, she  does  have
         other family but they are not particularly supportive. When she and
         [C] have been apart [her] mood becomes very low  and  in  turn  she
         finds  it  very  difficult  to  cope  with  everyday  stresses  and
         struggles to take her medication every day. It is  vital  that  she
         takes this medication every day at the same time to  keep  the  HIV
         under control, if she doesn't  the  virus  can  damage  the  immune
         system leaving her susceptible to opportunistic infections.

         In summary without [C]'s support [his wife] would be  dependent  on
         supportive services and would struggle to care for her children."

23. This last point, also made by Nurse Rowson, is further supported by  Dr
    KMB Ajdukiewicz, the Consultant Physician in charge of  Amanda's  care,
    in his letter of 2nd April 2014.

24. I note that the Tribunal has recognised that the Appellant is a "loving
    and caring father" and that he provides support  to  his  wife[13].   I
    cannot see however, that this particular evidence,  offered  by  health
    care professionals, was addressed anywhere in  the  findings.   It  was
    plainly pertinent to the matter of the welfare of the children  and  to
    whether it was proportionate to refuse the Appellant entry.   I  cannot
    be satisfied that the decision  would  have  been  the  same  had  this
    evidence been considered.   Its omission was therefore a material error
    of law.

    The Re-Made Decision

25. At the hearing before me on the 3rd  July  2015  the  parties  were  in
    agreement that the case history set out above is correct. The Appellant
    was not in the UK as a visitor, he was here on temporary admission.  In
    those circumstances, Mr McVeety submitted, he was entitled to  rely  on
    the provisions of EX.1:

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

         (a)

             (i) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a child who-

                  (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was under the age of
                  18 years when the applicant was first granted leave on the
                  basis that this paragraph applied;

                  (bb) is in the UK;

                  (cc) is a British Citizen or has lived in the UK
                  continuously for at least the 7 years immediately
                  preceding the date of application; and

             (ii)      it would not be reasonable to expect the child to
             leave the UK; or

         (b)      the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship
         with a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled
         in the UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian
         protection, and there are insurmountable obstacles to family life
         with that partner continuing outside the UK.

         EX.2. For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) "insurmountable
         obstacles" means the very significant difficulties which would be
         faced by the applicant or their partner in continuing their family
         life together outside the UK and which could not be overcome or
         would entail very serious hardship for the applicant or their
         partner.

26. Although the  Appellant's  solicitors  have  gone  to  the  trouble  of
    providing evidence that his wife is entitled to DLA and  so  is  exempt
    from the minimum earnings requirement, the  parties  are  in  agreement
    that if EX.1 applies she does not even have to show  this:  E-LTRP.3.1.
    It being accepted that the children are all British  citizens  resident
    in the UK the matter in issue under EX.1(a) (ii) is: is  it  reasonable
    to expect the Appellant's British children to leave the UK?

27. For the reasons set out above it might be thought from the IDI,  Sanade
    and indeed the Respondent's concession in this case (see  paragraph  18
    above), that this was the end of the matter. For the avoidance of doubt
    I find, on all of  the  evidence  before  me,  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect any of these children to leave the UK. The reasons
    for that finding are that these children are all British and have lived
    all of their lives in the UK.  The older children are at school and are
    settled here. I find  any  disruption  to  that  arrangement  would  be
    contrary to their best interests. This is particularly so of the eldest
    child, J (now 14 years old) who suffers from epilepsy with  generalised
    developmental delay. He has special educational needs[14] for which  he
    receives  specialist  support,  for  instance  21  hours  per  week  of
    individual work with a teaching assistant. What is true of his siblings
    is particularly so for J. It would be very much contrary  to  his  best
    interests to  expect  him  to  leave  the  UK,  and  leave  behind  the
    relationships he has built up with fellow students,  his  teachers  and
    specialist staff who work with him on an intensive one-to-one basis.  I
    have also given some weight to the circumstances of  their  mother.  As
    their main carer her behaviour, demeanour and state of health is likely
    to  have  an  immediate  and  profound  impact  on  her  children.  The
    consistent evidence I  have,  in  numerous  letters  from  health  care
    professionals as well as from the witness herself, is  that  she  would
    find disruption to her present regime of medication  and  psychological
    support very difficult  to  deal  with.  Anti-retrovirals,  and  indeed
    counselling, may be available in Trinidad & Tobago but  any  disruption
    in medication/treatment would be to her detriment,  both  physical  and
    mental, and by extension to her that of her children.

    Decisions

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

29. I re-make the decision by allowing the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

30. In view of the young ages  of  the  children,  and  the  health  issues
    relating to the Appellant's wife,  I make a direction for anonymity  in
    the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings".



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               3rd July 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge JM Holmes on the
27th October 2014 but was granted upon renewed application by Upper
Tribunal Judge Storey on the 18th December 2014.
[2] Paragraph 16
[3] Paragraph 19
[4] Paragraph 17
[5] Paragraph 31
[6] Paragraph 20
[7] Paragraph 31
[8] Paragraph 33
[9] Paragraph 56
[10] Paragraph 58
[11] The reference to GEN 1.1 in the determination is a typographical
error.
[12] The extract set out above is dated April 2015 but is in identical
terms to that in force at the date of the First-tier Tribunal
determination.
[13] Paragraph 16
[14] A statement of special educational needs was prepared by Oldham
Council on the 21st June 2012

