
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52611/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2015                           | On 5 February 2015           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MISS CHANNEH JOBE
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mrs H Price, Counsel instructed by Addison & Khan
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I  will  refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Gambia born on 24th May 1986.  She  first
    came to the UK on 24th July 2000. She applied for leave to remain based
    on  Article  8  ECHR/  long  residence  on  22nd  November  2012.   Her
    application was refused on 26th November 2013.  She  appealed  on  22nd
    November 2013.  Her appeal was allowed under paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules  in  a  determination  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Griffith promulgated on 4th September 2014.

 3. On 20th October 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal PJM  Hollingworth
    found that there was an arguable error of law because it  was  arguable
    that the wrong definition of "ties" had been applied by Judge Griffith.



 4. The matter came before me to determine whether the First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law.

Submissions

 5. Mr Shilliday relied upon the grounds of appeal and in summary argued as
    follows. It was not open to the Tribunal to find the appellant  had  no
    ties with Gambia when she had spent her formative years (until the  age
    of 14 years) in Gambia. These years are very  important,  as  is  clear
    from the case law on  the  best  interests  of  children.  Further  the
    European Court of Human Rights had found that it was a tie if  a  young
    appellant had a familial tie in a country which could  be  pursued  and
    strengthened if he or she so chose, see Balogun v UK [2012]  ECHR  614.
    The assessment of the ties in the determination  was  very  limited  at
    paragraphs 22 -23, and looked only at family ties.

 6. The appellant's ties to the UK were  not  relevant.  The  question  was
    whether she had ties to Gambia. The fact the appellant had come to  the
    UK as a 14 year old created a presumption  that  she  would  have  such
    ties. This position was in line with the seven year length of residence
    applied in assessing the best interests of children.

 7. This error of law was material as in fact the appellant had  spent  all
    her youth in Gambia and so would be familiar with the  culture  of  the
    place and was an adult who could adapt to life in  that  country  using
    her qualifications and experience acquired in the UK.

 8. Mr Shilliday said he would not comment on the additional statement  and
    unreported case provided by Mrs Price as she had not submitted these in
    accordance with the relevant Procedure Rules.

 9.  Mrs  Price  submitted  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  simply  a
    disagreement with the findings of Judge Griffith. The respondent relied
    upon a very small extract from Balogun which was  a  case  involving  a
    criminal deportation. In the grounds of appeal  it  alleged  that  that
    appellant should not be seen as a credible  witness  as  she  had  used
    deception, but Judge Griffith had found her to be a credible witness at
    paragraph 23 of the determination and not agreed  with  the  allegation
    that she had  used  deception.  Judge  Griffith  was  fully  aware  the
    appellant was an adult. She had taken into  account  that  all  of  the
    appellant's ties were to the  UK  including  her  relationship  with  a
    boyfriend and her academic record. The case law on the  best  interests
    of child was clear that the ties that an older  child  forms  are  more
    significant to their private life, making their removal less likely  to
    be proportionate. This appellant had spent half  her  life  in  the  UK
    including four years as a child.



Conclusions - Error of Law

10. The challenge in this case is that it is said by the Secretary of State
    that Judge Griffith did not  correctly  apply  the  test  at  paragraph
    276ADE (vi) of the Immigration Rules and assess whether  the  appellant
    had no "ties (including social, cultural or  family)"with  Gambia,  the
    country to which she would have to go if removed.

11. The Secretary of State does not point to any  error  of  law  in  Judge
    Griffith's finding at  paragraph  23  of  the  determination  that  the
    appellant is a credible witness.

12. The meaning of the word "ties" is defined in Ogundimu (Articlce 8 - new
    Rules) Nigeria [2013] UKUT 00060 as meaning more than "merely remote or
    abstract links to the country of proposed deportation or  removal";  it
    is  to  involve  a  "rounded  assessment  of  all   of   the   relevant
    circumstances". Ties involved a "continued connection to life  in  that
    country": it was  not  sufficient  that  the  appellant  was  simply  a
    national of the country. The fact that another relative had ties  would
    not import these ties in the appellant.

13. Whilst Judge Griffith's did not cite Ogundimu I find that she  assessed
    ties  in  accordance  with  this  test,  looking  at  the   appellant's
    connection with life in Gambia and finding it  to  be  non-existent  at
    paragraph 22 to 23 of her determination. She finds she had  no  one  to
    turn to in that country and that is why she left in 2000. The  evidence
    of the appellant, which she finds credible, sets out that  all  of  her
    relatives are now in the UK and that she is very  close  to  them,  and
    that she would not be able to find employment in Gambia because of  her
    lack of family to assist her (see paragraph 14 of  the  determination).
    She had not returned to Gambia or communicated with anyone there  since
    the  year  2000  (see  paragraph  8  of  the  determination).  She  had
    integrated totally into UK society because of her  having  severed  all
    ties with Gambia (see paragraph 13).

14. I do not find the fact that the appellant lived in Gambia until the age
    of 14 years or for a period of more than seven years as a child creates
    a presumption of ties: the test with respect to "ties"  is  clearly  an
    individual  fact  sensitive  analysis  and  there  can   be   no   such
    presumption.

15. Judge Griffith's determination discloses no error of law.

Decision

   1. The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law.

   2. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  the  appeal  is
      upheld.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                              Date 3rd February 2015

Judge Lindsley
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
