
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/52529/2013
     IA/52522/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 12 November 2014                  |On 20 November 2014                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                     mrs miora capraru (first appellant)
                   mr yasir amin kokab (second appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ebrahim & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Armstrong, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the decision of  the
       First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the decision  by
       the respondent to refuse  to  issue  them  with  residence  cards  as
       confirmation of their right to reside in the United Kingdom under the
       2006 Regulations.  The First-tier Tribunal did not make an  anonymity
       direction, and I do not consider that such a  direction  is  required
       for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

    2. The first appellant, Mrs Capraru, is  a  national  of  Romania.   The
       second appellant, Mr Kokab, is a national of Pakistan.

    3. On 21 November 2013 the respondent gave her reasons for refusing  her
       application made on 12 October 2012 for a registration certificate as
       confirmation of her right of residence in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
       self-employed individual.  At the marriage interview  which  she  had
       attended with the  second  appellant  she  stated  that  she  stopped
       working, and she no longer intended to  continue  with  her  cleaning
       business.  Accordingly, she had not  provided  satisfactory  evidence
       that she was exercising treaty rights as a self-employed person.

    4. On 10 November the respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
       second  appellant's  application  made  on  12  October  2012  for  a
       residence card as confirmation of a right of residence in the  United
       Kingdom as the family member of a Romanian  who  was  exercising  her
       treaty right in the UK.  On the basis of the  evidence  submitted  by
       him in  support  of  his  application,  and  to  further  assess  the
       application, it was decided to invite him and his wife  to  attend  a
       marriage interview.  The purpose of the interview  was  to  establish
       further facts about the nature of his relationship with Mrs  Capraru,
       and the  validity  of  the  marriage.   In  view  of  the  fact  that
       inconsistent and conflicting information was provided by him and  his
       wife at the marriage interview in Liverpool on 20 September 2013, had
       been decided that he had not provided satisfactory evidence  to  show
       that his marriage was not one of convenience.

  The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

    5. The appellants appealed against the respective refusal decisions, and
       their appeals came before Judge Newberry sitting  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal at Taylor House on 24 February 2014.  Ms Atcha of Ebrahim  &
       Co Solicitors appeared on behalf of the  appellants,  and  Mr  Lowton
       appeared on behalf of the  respondent.   The  record  of  proceedings
       shows that Ms  Atcha  successfully  applied  for  the  appeal  to  be
       adjourned part-heard.  It was accepted by her that the statements  of
       the appellant and the sponsor  were  "in  error".   Evidence  of  the
       sponsor's employment was to be provided in writing  ten  days  before
       the resumed hearing date.

    6. The matter came back before Judge  Newberry  on  30  May  2014.   The
       parties had the same representation as before.  Although not recorded
       in the Record of Proceedings, which are blank, it  is  apparent  from
       the manuscript notes of the judge which are  in  the  file  that  the
       appellants relied on a letter dated 29  May  2014  signed  by  Jason,
       Restaurant Manager, at Pizza Express in Charlotte Street, London  W1.
       He certified that the first appellant  had  been  employed  by  Pizza
       Express, Charlotte Street since 28 May 2014 on a  permanent  contract
       as a cleaner/pot wash area team member.  It is also apparent from the
       judge's manuscript notes that Mr Lowton in  his  closing  submissions
       said that no reliance should be placed by the judge on this evidence,
       as it was not verified.  Mr Lowton also submitted the evidence showed
       that the marriage was one of convenience.

    7. In his subsequent determination, which was promulgated on  20  August
       2014, the judge found that at the date of the determination the first
       appellant was not exercising treaty rights as a self-employed person,
       and therefore  was  not  a  qualified  person  for  the  purposes  of
       paragraph 6 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
       2006.  Accordingly, her appeal was dismissed on that ground.

    8.  With  regard  to  the  second  appellant,  he  found  there  was  no
       requirement to "enhance the validity of a marriage".  A  marriage  is
       either valid at law or not.  In this case, the marriage  was  on  its
       face valid.  But as the respondent rightly concluded  that  his  wife
       had failed to show that she was exercising treaty rights as  a  self-
       employed person, the second appellant could not show that  he  was  a
       family member of a person who was exercising a treaty right as a self-
       employed person.  Accordingly, the second appellant's appeal fell  to
       be dismissed.

  The Grant of Permission to Appeal

    9. The  appellants  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal, and  on  1  October  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  TRP
       Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
       judge's  reasoning  was  insufficient  in  finding  that  the   first
       appellant was not  exercising  treaty  rights  and  that  the  second
       appellant's appeal should fail on similar grounds.

  The Rule 24 Response

   10. On 6 October 2014 Mr Tufan of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  a
       Rule 24 response on behalf of the appellant.  The  evidence  produced
       at the  hearing  relating  to  the  exercise  of  treaty  rights  was
       unsatisfactory.  The evidence was a  contract  of  employment  and  a
       letter from Pizza Express.  No evidence  of  any  pay  was  produced.
       Reliance was placed on AG (Germany) [2007] UKAIT 0075  at  paragraphs
       [86]  to  [90]  for  the  proposition  that  in  failing  to  provide
       verifiable documentary evidence, the burden of  proof  had  not  been
       discharged.  The contract of employment and letter alone would not be
       sufficient in other applications  where  an  applicant  had  to  show
       evidence of income.

   11. However, the judge had erred in failing  to  make  a  finding  as  to
       whether this was a marriage of convenience.  The Reasons for  Refusal
       Letter had gone into some detail, in  the  light  of  the  discrepant
       answers given at the interview.

  The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

   12. At the hearing in the Upper  Tribunal,  I  reviewed  the  documentary
       evidence which had been before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  judge's
       manuscript notes and the Record of Proceedings.  I  found  that  both
       parties had been  deprived  of  a  fair  hearing  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, and that the decision should therefore  be  set  aside  and
       remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing.   My
       reasons for so finding are set out below.

  Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

   13. There are two egregious errors of law.  The first error made  by  the
       judge was a failure to address the evidence tendered at the adjourned
       hearing of the first appellant now  exercising  treaty  rights  as  a
       worker.  For the reasons given in the Rule 24 response, the judge was
       not necessarily bound to accept the new evidence. But  he  needed  to
       address the new evidence in his determination, and  to  give  reasons
       for either rejecting or accepting the new evidence.  The judge wholly
       failed to engage with the appellants' case by way  of  appeal,  which
       was that the first appellant was now exercising treaty  rights  as  a
       worker.

   14. With regard to the appeal of the second appellant, the  judge  wholly
       failed to engage with the question of whether  the  marriage  between
       the parties was one of convenience.  The issue was  not  whether  the
       marriage was valid, in the sense that the necessary  formalities  had
       not been observed.  The issue  was  whether  the  marriage  had  been
       contracted for the sole or predominant purpose of securing the second
       appellant's status in the United Kingdom.  By failing  to  engage  at
       all with this issue, the judge deprived  the  respondent  of  a  fair
       hearing on a crucial issue.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained  an  error  of  law,  such
that it must be set aside and remade.

Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing  at
Taylor House before any judge apart from Judge Newberry.



Signed        Date 12 November 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

