
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52885/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th November 2014                           |On 5th December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               mr Kwame Ofori
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Al-Rashid, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana  born  on  13th  March  1974.   The
    Appellant had applied on 2nd April 2013  for  a  residence  card  as  a
    confirmation of  a  right  to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.   That
    application was refused by the Secretary of State on 13th March 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Symes sitting at Richmond on 11th June 2014.  In a  determination
    promulgated  on  23rd  June  2014  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 was dismissed.

 3. On 2nd July 2014 the Appellant through his instructed solicitors sought
    permission to  appeal.   On  26th  August  2014  Designated  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Zucker  refused  permission  to  appeal.   The  renewed
    grounds for permission to appeal pointed out that the Appellant  was  a
    national of Ghana who underwent a proxy marriage on 4th June 2012  with
    a national of Belgium.  The grounds noted that the refusal was  on  the
    ground that the marriage was not valid under English law  and  secondly
    in the alternative the couple were not in a durable relationship.  They
    argued that on appeal the Immigration Judge in the First-tier  Tribunal
    accepted that the marriage was valid under English  law.   However  the
    Immigration Judge then  relied  on  Kareem  [2014]  UKUT  24  (IAC)  to
    determine whether the marriage was valid  under  Belgian  law  and  the
    appeal was dismissed.  It was submitted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had refused permission on the Kareem points as argued in  the  grounds.
    However Ground 6 argued that the durable  relationship  point  remained
    undetermined by the Immigration Judge and that  the  determination  was
    therefore flawed.  Ground  6  had  specifically  argued  that  although
    durable relationship was a distinct point of refusal by the  Respondent
    and evidence was led in the course of the hearing to show the existence
    of a durable relationship that the Immigration Judge had failed to make
    any findings in this  respect  and  that  the  determination  therefore
    remained incomplete.

 4. On 14th October 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun granted  permission  to
    appeal.  In granting permission Judge  Eshun  noted  that  the  grounds
    relied on paragraph 6 of the earlier grounds which argued that although
    "durable  relationship"  was  a  distinct  point  of  refusal  by   the
    Respondent and evidence was led in the course of the  hearing  to  show
    the existence of a durable relationship the judge had  failed  to  make
    any findings in this respect.  Judge Eshun noted that the judge's typed
    Record of Proceedings did not indicate that evidence was  led  on  this
    issue at the hearing nevertheless as it was raised in the  Respondent's
    refusal letter it was arguable that the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in
    failing to deal with it.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law.  The Appellant appears
    by his instructed solicitor Mr Al-Rashid.   Mr  Al-Rashid  is  familiar
    with this letter having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and  is
    I believe also the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Kandola.

 6. I also note that on 7th  November  i.e.  only  a  week  prior  to  this
    hearing, the Secretary of State filed a  response  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  That Rule  24  response  acknowledges  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge appears to  have  failed  to  deal  with  the
    submission that the Appellant was in a durable relationship and goes on
    to state that if the Appellant did not seek to appeal  the  refusal  in
    respect of a durable relationship then the issue was not  live  at  the
    hearing.  Paragraph 2 of the Rule 24 submission relies on the fact that
    the Presenting Officer's note of the hearing did not  recite  that  the
    issue of her durable relationship was argued  before  the  judge.   The
    Rule 24 response contends that for the  purpose  of  the  marriage  the
    Appellant was reliant on documentation to establish  a  legal  marriage
    which was not one of  convenience  and  that  to  establish  a  durable
    relationship required different evidence going to the scope  and  depth
    of the relationship.  The Respondent had  taken  careful  note  of  the
    inconsistencies in the evidence of the parties in respect of the  dowry
    and under the circumstances the Respondent considered  that  there  was
    evidence that this was a marriage of convenience.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Al-Rashid points out that the Rule  24  response  concedes,  and  he
    endorses, that it is clear that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    deal with the issue of a durable relationship.  He points  out  however
    that the durable relationship question was  a  live  issue  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge and that you only have to look at the witness
    statements produced in evidence to show that that issue was live before
    the judge.  He also refers me to the Appellant's bundle  and  documents
    that  were  available  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  determination
    including the letter of support from the Church of Pentecost  and  bank
    statements showing a common address.  He points out that none of  these
    issues were addressed and that there is a material  error  of  law  and
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.

 8. Mr Kandola  starts  by  submitting  that  if  a  matter  has  not  been
    particularised by way of a Ground of Appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal
    and was not before the First-tier Tribunal then it is not before me but
    if I construe by virtue of the witness statements and evidence that was
    adduced that the issue is before me in any event it is not material  as
    there is no cogent evidence to show that the Appellant was in a durable
    relationship.  He points out that there is no evidence in the Secretary
    of State's view that the parties were cohabiting and that there are  no
    photographs regarding the relationship produced.

 9. Mr Al-Rashid in response points out that there was a live  issue  which
    needs to be determined and which has not been  addressed.   Mr  Kandola
    indicates that if I find there is a material error of law he would wish
    me to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal and Mr Al-Rashid
    agrees with this.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. There is clear  evidence  within  the  bundle  of  documents  that  was
    produced and before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  witness  statements
    from both the Appellant and the Appellant's partner  Grace  Owusu  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Paragraph 6 of the Appellant's witness
    statement and paragraph 3 of Ms Owusu's make specific reference to  the
    parties being in a durable relationship.  In addition documentation was
    produced to the Tribunal with regard to that  relationship  by  way  of
    documents forwarded to the parties address and by the letter  from  the
    Church of Pentecost - UK Harlesden District.

13. In an otherwise thorough determination it is clear and conceded by  the
    Secretary of State that the judge has failed to deal with the issue  of
    the durable relationship that is contended.  I agree with Mr  Al-Rashid
    that not only is this an error of law but in  failing  to  address  the
    issue of the durable  relationship  that  may  well  have  tainted  the
    findings  of  the  judge  and  consequently  is  material.    In   such
    circumstances having heard the  respective  submissions  of  the  legal
    representatives I agree that the correct  approach  is  to  remit  this
    matter back to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  before  any  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge at Richmond other than Immigration Judge Symes  and
    directions for the future conduct of this matter are  attached  in  the
    decision paragraph herein.

Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Richmond for hearing before  any
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Symes on the first available
    date 28 days hence with an estimated length of hearing  of  two  hours.
    No findings of fact are to stand.   If  it  is  the  intention  of  the
    Appellants to submit a further bundle of documents upon which they seek
    to rely then such documents must be filed at the Tribunal and served on
    the Secretary of State at least seven days prehearing.  No  interpreter
    is required.

15. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005.   No
    application is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


