
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52881/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision and Reasons           |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 1 December 2014                         |On 13 January 2015             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      MRS UDAYA CHANDRIKA RADA KRISHNAN
                       (Anonymity Direction not Made)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V P Lingajorthy, Legal Representative, Linga & Co


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Secretary of State  made the application for permission  to  appeal
    but for the purposes of this decision the parties shall be referred  to
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal, that is Miss  Krishnan  as
    the appellant and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 15 November  1984  and
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 18 June 2009 with leave as  a  student
    valid from 10 June 2009 until 31 August 2010.  On 31 October  2011  she
    married Mr R Sandiran, a Sri Lankan national born on 22 June 1980.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in November 2001 and  claimed  asylum.   The
    claim was refused and his appeal rights  became  exhausted  in  October
    2002. On further representations he was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK outside the Immigration Rules. On 5 March 2012 he  was
    naturalised as a British citizen.

 3. On 9 August 2010  the  appellant  applied  outside  the  Rules  for  an
    extension of stay to marry and this was refused on  20  September  2010
    with a limited right of appeal that was not exercised.

 4. An application on 21 December 2011 to remain in the UK as a spouse  was
    refused on 27 March 2012 under paragraph 286 of the Rules and Article 8
    of the European Convention as the  appellant  did  not  have  leave  to
    remain when she applied.  It  was  considered  reasonable  for  her  to
    return to Sri Lanka and apply from Sri Lanka  for  entry  to  join  her
    husband in the UK.   She did not have a right of appeal.

 5. In April and May 2012 further  representations  were  made  and  on  22
    November 2013 the respondent made a decision to refuse the  application
    under the provisions of the Rules by reference to  Appendix  FM  family
    life and 276ADE private life.  It was submitted  that  there  were  not
    insurmountable obstacles EX1 to prevent family life continuing  outside
    the UK either on a temporary or permanent basis.  In respect of private
    life the appellant did not meet the criteria. The appellant had shown a
    complete disregard for the Rules and the decision was proportionate  to
    the aims.

 6. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Roopnarine-Davies heard the appeal  on
    12 September 2014 and allowed the appeal on 17 September 2014 on  human
    rights grounds.

 7. She made a finding at paragraph 6 that it was  not  disputed  that  the
    appellant and sponsor had a genuine and subsisting marriage, now nearly
    three years old.

 8. The respondent applied for permission to  appeal  submitting  that  the
    Tribunal had erred in law in respect of an Article 8 assessment of  the
    case  and  that  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  confirmed  the
    Immigration Rules were a complete code that formed the  starting  point
    for the decision maker and any Article  8  assessment  should  be  made
    after consideration of those Rules.

 9. It was further submitted that it was made clear in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT
    00640 (IAC) an Article 8 assessment should only  be  carried  out  when
    there were compelling circumstances not recognised by the Rules and  in
    this  case  the  Tribunal  did  not  identify  that   such   compelling
    circumstances and its findings were therefore unsustainable.

10. It was also submitted that Gulshan made it clear that an appeal  should
    only be allowed where there were exceptional circumstances, namely ones
    where the refusal would lead to an unjustifiably harsh outcome.  It was
    submitted that the Tribunal had not followed this approach and  thereby
    had erred.

11. Mr Shilliday confirmed that he did not  rely  on  paragraph  3  of  the
    grounds except in that the complete code  referred  to  the  issues  in
    relation to deportation.  Nonetheless he argued that  Judge  Roopnarine
    had failed to identify the test outside the Rules.   This  was  a  case
    which was not similar to Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40 and could  not
    be decided on that reference.  In Chikwamba the sponsor was  a  refugee
    and there was nothing in  this  to  suggest  that  the  sponsor  was  a
    refugee.  There had been  misdirection in relation  to  Chikwamba.  The
    comments in R (MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985  were  strictly
    obiter and Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin)  was  the  only  authority
    relevant.  There needed to be compelling circumstances.

12. Mr Lingajorthy stated that there  was  a  scattergun  approach  by  the
    Secretary of State. The judge had the benefit of  hearing the appellant
    and the sponsor and  evidence  was  taken  in  camera  in  relation  to
    sensitive  information  on  them  taking  fertility   treatment.    The
    appellant had entered lawfully and  applied  as  a  spouse  during  the
    currency of her visa.  There were no flaws  in  the  approach  and  the
    judge had looked at all of the evidence.  She had  been  refused  under
    the Immigration Rules as she did not have prior entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse.  It was considered under EX1 as she had no leave.

13. Mr  Shilliday  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Rules  had  not  been
    fulfilled and Chikwamba did not apply as the sponsor had not shown that
    Appendix FM-SE had been  fulfilled.  The only thing shown  was  it  was
    unpleasant to have to undergo her  fertility  treatment.   This  was  a
    desperate attempt to relitigate the case.

14. I requested any further evidence be put forward in the event  I  should
    find an error of law.

15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies granted permission to  appeal  on
    the basis that the judge had not made any finding that the  appellant's
    circumstances were either compelling or exceptional and  had  given  no
    reasons based on the evidence why the appellant was entitled to have  a
    freestanding Article 8  claim  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  to  be
    considered.

16. I find that the judge was clear at paragraph 4 in her decision  to  the
    effect that she took into account the oral evidence  of  the  appellant
    and her husband as set  out  in  the  Record  of  Proceedings  and  the
    evidence in the file before her from the appellant and the  respondent.
    She  also  recorded  that  she  had  regard  to  the  public   interest
    requirements of Section 117B of the 2002 Act.

17. At paragraph 6 under her findings the judge specifically recorded that

         "It has been stated  that  the  assessment  of  whether  there  are
         exceptional circumstances under Appendix FM such that the appellant
         should be granted leave and proportionality  under  Article  8  the
         ECHR (assessed by reference to Razgar and Huang  is  the  same  and
         that the  Rules  were  no  more  than  the  starting  point  for  a
         consideration of Article 8".

    The judge at this point was merely recording submissions and went on to
    note that she must take into account all relevant factors together with
    Section 117a of the 2014 Act.

18. Quite  clearly  at  paragraph  10  the  judge  stated  that  under  the
    immigration rules she did not accept there would be unjustifiably harsh
    consequences or insurmountable obstacles as interpreted in Nagre if the
    couple  had  to  live  in  Sri  Lanka.   The  judge  found   that   the
    circumstances were not exceptional within EX1 and the appellant did not
    meet the rules.  The  judge  clearly  therefore  set  out  the  factors
    weighing against the appellant within the Immigration Rules.

19. However, as held in R (Ganesabalan) v SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  2712  (Admin)
    there is no prior threshold which  dictates  whether  the  exercise  of
    discretion should be  considered  and  the  authorities  of  Nagre  and
    Gulshan do not displace the need to consider all the relevant  evidence
    and consider anything not already taken  into  consideration.  This  is
    what the judge did.

20. The judge dealt  with  the  evidence  in  a  balanced  manner  and  she
    proceeded to record those factors which did not favour the appellant as
    well as those which did, not least that the appellant feared return  to
    Sri Lanka because her father was a prominent politician of the UNP  now
    in opposition, although the judge rejected  that  the  appellant  would
    have difficulties on return  to  Sri  Lanka  because  of  her  father's
    imputed political opinion.

21. The judge also rejected the claim that the  appellant's  husband  could
    not return to Sri Lanka and the Article 3 claim in  respect  of  health
    grounds and found that the husband was no longer receiving treatment in
    the UK and his final  injection  was  in  2010.   With  regard  to  the
    fertility treatment, the judge made findings  at  paragraph  9  to  the
    effect that the NHS treatment was sperm donation which the  couple  had
    refused and assistance from medical professionals in India.

22. However as stated above the case law  in  relation  to  Nagre,  MF  and
    Gulshan specifically do not exclude the consideration of Article  8  in
    relation to family life and  indeed  Section  117  of  the  Nationality
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 refers to the factors which  should  be
    taken into account when  deciding  on  proportionality.   MM  (Lebanon)
    confirms that there is not necessarily any artificial  threshold  which
    has to be crossed and that there is either an Article 8  assessment  to
    be made or there is not.

23. The judge correctly referred to Huang [2007] UKHL 11 in  an  assessment
    regarding Article 8 identifying the relevant factors.   The  judge  did
    consider the matter under the Immigration Rules and I find  nothing  to
    preclude her from proceeding to a further Article 8 assessment  bearing
    in mind she concluded  that  the  decision  under  proportionality  was
    similar to that finding exceptional circumstances.

24. Indeed, in the matter the judge ultimately found, bearing in  mind  the
    public interest considerations which were applicable in  this  case  as
    designated by statute, that the decision to remove  the  appellant  was
    not necessary and justified in considering  the  legitimate  aim.   The
    judge specifically made reference to  the  immigration  rules  and  the
    State's legitimate aim and the public interest 'in  having  a  coherent
    and consistent system  of  effective  immigration  control,  preventing
    families being a burden on the taxpayer, the economic wellbeing of  the
    UK and to the public  interest  requirements  in  S117B  the  2014  Act
    (ability  to  speak  English,  to  integrate  into  society,  financial
    independent and lawful presence). She found that the appellant was  not
    a burden on the State.  She found she was able to speak and  understand
    English.  Specifically the judge factored in  that  the  appellant  had
    been an overstayer since  August  2010  but  had  kept  the  respondent
    apprised of her movements  and  attempted  to  regularise  her  status.
    Indeed she had previously failed to exercise a  right  of  appeal.  The
    judge took into account that the appellant had made an application as a
    spouse over 3 years ago in December 2011 (which would have  been  prior
    to the new rules) and found that the marriage was genuine.

25. This is a matter for the judge to find and I conclude that there is  no
    error of law.  I note that the judge referred to  Chikwamba  and  heard
    the submissions of the Home Office Presenting Officer and noted them as
    follows;

         "Miss Dwomoh speculated that an application from outside the UK may
         succeed.  If so, then like Chikwamba, to expect the appellant to go
         to Sri Lanka and make entry is to  'elevate  principle  to  dogma'.
         ... Either way I cannot see the public interest in requiring her to
         go to Sri Lanka to apply to join her husband in the UK."

26. The judge was quite clear that it  was  not  determinative  that  their
    separation and attendant stress was likely to have a negative impact on
    their efforts to try and conceive natural and  on  married  life.   The
    critical finding of the judge is that

         "The appellant's husband is settled law abiding British citizen who
         has lived here for thirteen years.  I do not consider it reasonable
         in all the circumstances to expect him - EB (Kosovo) [2008] UKHL 41
         to relocate to Sri Lanka or for her to apply in the country to join
         him. There is no question here of the public interest in  effective
         immigration control being compromised by the grant of leave."

27. The judge then went on to find at paragraph 13:

         "Taking all the evidence into account I find the  decision  is  not
         necessary and justified and is thus disproportionate to the aim  to
         be achieved by the State".

28. I find that the judge has considered the immigration  rules  and  taken
    into account the factors directed by statue which should be  considered
    and in all the circumstances  find  in  the  appellant's  favour.   The
    respondent has in effect disagreed with the judge's findings.

29. I therefore find no error of law which would make a material difference
    and the determination shall stand.





Signed                                  Date 9th January 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

