
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52529/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23rd December 2015                    |On 14th April 2016                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MR. YASIR AMIN KOKAB
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell,  Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Chohan, Instructed by Immigration Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS



    1.  This is an appeal against a  decision  and  reasons  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Cooper promulgated on  28th  May  2015  in  which  he
       allowed an appeal against a decision made by the Secretary of  State
       on 20th November 2013, to refuse  to  issue  the  appellant  with  a
       residence card as the family ember of  an  EEA  national  exercising
       treaty rights in the UK.

    2. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and
       the respondent to this appeal, is Mr. Yasir Amin Kokab.  However for
       ease of reference, in the course of this determination I shall adopt
       the parties' status as it was before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
       shall in this determination, refer to Mr. Kokab  as  the  appellant,
       and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 BACKGROUND

    3. The appellant is a Pakistani national who  entered  the  UK  on  9th
       September 2010 with a Tier 4 Student visa valid until  15th  October
       2012.  On 10th October 2012 he married Mioara  Capraru,  a  Romanian
       national at the Wandsworth Register Officer.  Ms Capraru had arrived
       in the UK in February 2012.

    4. On  12th  October  2012,  Ms  Capraru  made  an  application  for  a
       registration certificate as confirmation of a right of residence  in
       the UK as a self employed individual under the Immigration (European
       Economic Areas) Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 EEA Regulations").   The
       appellant was included on that application as a family member  of  a
       Romanian national exercising a treaty right  in  the  UK.   On  21st
       November 2013, the respondent refused the  application  made  by  Ms
       Capraru.  The application was refused on the basis that she had said
       in a marriage interview that had  been  conducted  on  20  September
       2013, that she  had  stopped  working  and  no  longer  intended  to
       continue with her cleaning business.  Ms Capraru  appealed,  and  in
       his decision of 28th May  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cooper
       found that as at the date of the hearing, Ms Capraru was working  as
       a self employed cleaner and consequently, was  a  qualified  person.
       The Judge found that was  she  is  entitled  to  the  issue  of  the
       Registration Card that she had applied for, and allowed her  appeal.
       The respondent does not challenge that decision.

    5. The respondent issued a separate decision dated 20th  November  2013
       refusing the application made by Mr Korab for a  residence  card  as
       confirmation of a right of residence in the United  Kingdom  as  the
       family member of  Ms  Capraru.   In  her  decision,  the  respondent
       stated:

             "....On the basis of the evidence submitted by you in  support
             of your application, and to further assess your application it
             was decided to invite you and  your  wife  Mioara  Capraru  to
             attend a Marriage Interview. The purpose of this interview was
             to  establish  further  facts  about  the   nature   of   your
             relationship with Mioara Capraru  and  the  validity  of  your
             marriage.

             ...."

    6. The respondent set out in her decision letter  the  questions  asked
       during the interview that took place on 20th September 2013 and  the
       answers provided by the appellant and Ms  Capraru.   The  respondent
       considered the answers provided and concluded:

             "In  view  of  the  fact  that  inconsistent  and  conflicting
             information was provided by you  and  your  Wife  at  Marriage
             Interview in Liverpool  on  20  September  2013  it  has  been
             decided that you have not provided  satisfactory  evidence  to
             show that your marriage is not one of convenience.

             Therefore  you  do  not  satisfy  the  requirements  for  this
             category and it has been decided to  refuse  your  application
             for a residence card with, reference to  Regulation  2(1)  and
             Regulation 17 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations 2006."

    7. In reaching her decision, the respondent also referred to  the  fact
       that she was not satisfied that the appellant's wife was  exercising
       a treaty right in the UK as a Self employed  person,  and  the  fact
       that  the  appellant's  wife's  application   for   a   Registration
       Certificate, had consequently been refused.

 The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper

    8. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cooper heard the appeals of  the  appellant
       and Ms Capraru together.  At paragraphs [17] and [18] of his decision
       he refers briefly to the respondent's decision and  the  reasons  for
       it.  At paragraphs [27] and [28] he notes that both appellant's  gave
       evidence and the evidence and submissions are noted in his record  of
       proceedings.  The Judge's findings and conclusions upon the appeal by
       the appellant, are  set  out  at  paragraphs  [35]  to  [38]  of  the
       decision;

             "35. Marriage of  convenience:  The  Respondent  analysed  the
             answers given by the parties during the Marriage Interview  at
             considerable length in the decision letter for Mr  Kokab,  and
             it has to be said that some of the discrepancies between  each
             of their answers were surprising for a  couple  who  had  said
             that they were  in  a  genuine  subsisting  relationship;  for
             example the fact that Ms Capraru appeared to be  unaware  that
             Mr Korab had engaged the services of a  solicitor  to  prepare
             the application.

              36. In  their  statements  the  parties  only  explained  the
             discrepancies by stating that Ms Capraru was  still  not  very
             well after the operation she had  undergone  in  Romania,  and
             was very tired.  At  the  hearing  both  parties  were  cross-
             examined at considerable length by Ms Butt. Whilst not all the
             discrepancies identified in the decision letter were resolved,
             I am satisfied that several the apparent discrepancies did  in
             fact arise from misunderstandings. For example Ms Capraru said
             that they had gone to the wedding ceremony by  train,  whereas
             Mr Kokab had said it was by taxi;  in  his  oral  evidence  Mr
             Kokab made clear that what actually  happened  was  that  that
             they had set off by taxi, but because of the traffic they  had
             abandoned it and taken the train.

             37.  The Respondent believed that Mr Kokab  would  have  known
             more about the details of his wife's operation in Romania  had
             the couple been in a genuine relationship, but I was satisfied
             on the basis of their evidence that, even  though  Ms  Capraru
             may have explained the contents of the medical records to  her
             husband, he simply had  not  fully  taken  in  the  details  -
             perhaps a common "male trait".

             38.  Reading the Marriage Interview as  a  whole,  and  taking
             that together with  the  written  and  oral  evidence  of  the
             parties, I am satisfied that the parties demonstrated  genuine
             and  substantial  knowledge  about  each   other   and   their
             respective  families,  even  though  there  remained   certain
             discrepancies  in  their   accounts.   On   the   balance   of
             probabilities I am satisfied that this is indeed a genuine and
             subsisting relationship, and consequently not  a  marriage  of
             convenience. In reaching the decision I also take  account  of
             the fact that the parties have continued to pursue this claim,
             despite previous setbacks, and in so doing have attended court
             a number of times, the last hearing before me  being  some  2�
             years after the date of the original applications."



The Grounds of Appeal

    9. The respondent appeals on three grounds.  First, the Judge failed to
       take into account  the  numerous  inconsistencies  in  the  marriage
       interview  that  indicate  the  appellant's  marriage  is   one   of
       convenience.  It is said that the Judge  failed  to  deal  with  the
       numerous important inconsistencies highlighted in  the  Reasons  for
       Refusal letter  and  to  explain  why  the  inconsistencies  do  not
       undermine the appellant's credibility.  The respondent accepts  that
       the Judge does not have to deal with every inconstancy  highlighted,
       but submits that the Judge is required to highlight and resolve  the
       key issues in the case, and  resolve  them  with  adequate  reasons;
       Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC)

   10. Second the respondent claims that the Judge's  reasons  for  finding
       the appellant's marriage to be genuine are not adequately  reasoned.
       The Judge noted at paragraph [36] that ".... Several of the apparent
       discrepancies did in fact arise from  misunderstandings.",  but  the
       Judge fails to provide  reasons  for  his  view  that  the  apparent
       discrepancies arose from misunderstandings, rather than being simple
       inconsistencies that affect the credibility of the appellant.

   11. Finally, the respondent claims that the  Judge's  reference  to  the
       appellant's lack of knowledge of  his  wife's  medical  problems  as
       being a "male trait" has no evidential foundation, but is based upon
       a stereotype of male behaviour.  The  respondent  submits  that  the
       finding is irrational  and  perverse,  and  was  one  that  was  not
       properly open to the Judge.

   12. Permission to appeal was granted on 7th August  2015  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Lever.   The  matter  comes  before  me  to  consider
       whether or not the decision of the Tribunal involved the making of a
       material error of law, and if the decision is set aside, to  re-make
       the decision if appropriate.

   13. At the hearing before me, Mr Whitwell adopted the grounds of appeal.
        He submits that the appellant  and  his  partner  married  on  10th
       October 2012, five days  before  the  appellant's  leave  to  remain
       expired.   He submits that there can be no dispute that there are  a
       number of material inconsistencies between  what  was  said  by  the
       appellant and Ms Capraru  during  the  marriage  interview  on  20th
       September  2013.   The  material   inconsistencies   are   carefully
       considered  and  highlighted  in  the  respondent's  decision.    He
       submits that there is no proper or adequate consideration  of  those
       discrepancies by the  Judge,  and  on  any  proper  reading  of  the
       decision one is non-the wiser in knowing why the Judge  has  allowed
       the appeal.  He submits that the Judge has come to findings that are
       irrational, unreasonable and perverse.   In  particular  he  submits
       that the finding at paragraph [37] that the appellant had simply not
       taken in the details of Ms Capraru's operation in Romania,  and  the
       contents of the medical records, because that is  perhaps  a  common
       "male trait", is perverse and has no evidential foundation.

   14. In reply, Mr Chohan accepts that the decision of the  Judge  is  not
       perhaps as detailed as one might expect,  but he reminds me that the
       case is one with a long history.  He submits that at paragraph [35],
       the Judge demonstrates that he was aware that there were a number of
       discrepancies,  and that it was open to the Judge, who had heard the
       evidence, to find that he  was  "..satisfied  that  several  of  the
       apparent discrepancies did in fact arise  from  misunderstandings.".
       Mr Chohan submits that at paragraph [38], the Judge  refers  to  the
       marriage interview and it was open to the Judge to conclude that  he
       was  satisfied  that  the  parties  have  demonstrated  genuine  and
       substantial  knowledge  about  each  other  and   their   respective
       families, notwithstanding the discrepancies in their accounts.

 Discussion

   15. The respondent's decision of the 20th November 2013 is  detailed  and
       spans to some 14 pages.  As I have said, it sets  out  the  questions
       that the appellant and Ms Capraru  were  asked  during  the  marriage
       interview, and the answers that each  of  them  gave.   The  decision
       letter refers to a number of material discrepancies that  had  caused
       the respondent to question the credibility of  the  relationship  and
       reach  the  ultimate  conclusion  that  the  marriage  was   one   of
       convenience.   I  do  not  recite  in  this  decision  all   of   the
       discrepancies referred to by the respondent, but suffice  it  to  say
       that there are many, identified at pages 3 to 13 of the decision.

   16. In R (Iran) & Ors -v- SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982, the Court  of  Appeal
       drew together the threads of the approach  to  be  adopted  in  cases
       where it is claimed that there is an error of law in  the  Tribunal's
       approach to the evidence.  Lord Justice Brooke stated:

          90.      It may now  be  convenient  to  draw  together  the  main
             threads of this long judgment in this way. During  the  period
             before its demise when the IAT's  powers  were  restricted  to
             appeals on points of law:

                       1. Before the IAT could set aside a  decision  of  an
                  adjudicator on the grounds of error of law, it had  to  be
                  satisfied that the correction of the error would have made
                  a material difference to the outcome, or to  the  fairness
                  of the proceedings.  This  principle  applied  equally  to
                  decisions of adjudicators on proportionality in connection
                  with human rights issues;

                       2. A finding might only be set aside for error of law
                  on the grounds of  perversity  if  it  was  irrational  or
                  unreasonable in the Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that  was
                  wholly unsupported by the evidence.

                       3. A decision should not be set aside for  inadequacy
                  of reasons unless the adjudicator failed to  identify  and
                  record the matters that were critical to his  decision  on
                  material issues, in such a way that the IAT was unable  to
                  understand why he reached that decision.

                       4. A failure without good reason to apply a  relevant
                  country guidance decision might  constitute  an  error  of
                  law.

                       5. At the  hearing  of  an  appeal  the  IAT  had  to
                  identify an error of law in relation to one or more of the
                  issues raised on the notice  of  appeal  before  it  could
                  lawfully exercise any of its powers set out in s102(1)  of
                  the 2002  Act  (other  than  affirming  the  adjudicator's
                  decision).

                       6. Once it had identified an error of law, such  that
                  the adjudicator's decision could not stand, the IAT might,
                  if it saw fit, exercise  its  power  to  admit  up-to-date
                  evidence or it might remit the appeal to  the  adjudicator
                  with such directions as it thought fit.

                  7. If the IAT failed  to  consider  an  obvious  point  of
                  Convention  jurisprudence  which  would  have  availed  an
                  applicant, the Court of  Appeal  might  intervene  to  set
                  aside the IAT's decision on the grounds of  error  of  law
                  even though the point was not raised  in  the  grounds  of
                  appeal to the IAT.

   17. I have carefully read through the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Cooper.  The Judge deals with the  discrepancies  in  the  four
       short paragraphs at [35] to [38] of his decision.   In  my  judgment,
       the Judge has given inadequate reasons for  reaching  his  conclusion
       that the several apparent discrepancies arose from misunderstandings.
        That is particularly so in light of the Judge's comment at paragraph
       [35] that "...it has to  be  said  that  some  of  the  discrepancies
       between each of their answers were surprising for a  couple  who  had
       said that they were in a genuine subsisting  relationship;".   I  set
       out below the head note in Budhathoki (reasons for decisions)  [2014]
       UKUT 00341 (IAC);

           "It  is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier
           Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a
           case.  This leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused
           and is not a proportionate approach to deciding cases.   It  is,
           however, necessary  for  judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
           conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms
           their reasons, so that the parties can understand why  they  won
           or lost."

   18. In reaching her  conclusion  that  this  was  a  sham  marriage,  the
       respondent had  referred  to  substantial  discrepancies  within  the
       interview record.  The judge  did  not  adequately  engage  with  the
       reasons  given  by  the  respondent  for  refusing  the   appellant's
       application, and did not adequately analyse the evidence, taking into
       account that the  respondent  had  specifically  concluded  that  the
       marriage was one of convenience because of a number of  discrepancies
       upon material matters.

   19. This amounts to an error  of  law.   The  judge  has  not  adequately
       explained his reasons, so that the respondent can understand  why  no
       weight has been given to the points raised in the refusal letter.

   20. In my judgement, the Judge's conclusion at paragraph [37]  that  even
       though Ms Capraru may have explained  the  contents  of  the  medical
       records to her husband, he simply had not fully taken in the  details
       - perhaps a common "male trait", is a finding that is irrational  and
       was wholly unsupported by the  evidence.   Ms  Capraru's  account  of
       events was that she had gone on an ordinary visit to see her  parents
       and family when she became ill and was  taken  to  A&E  requiring  an
       emergency intervention.  She had undergone an operation to  remove  a
       tumour from her ovaries.  She claimed that she had explained that  to
       the appellant over the telephone, whist she was in Romania and  again
       once she had returned  to  the  UK.   She  had  also  shown  him  the
       discharge documents.  Beyond claiming  that  his  wife  had  a  urine
       infection and had undergone an operation, the appellant did not  know
       much about Ms Capraru's medical condition or treatment.   There  were
       also discrepancies as to the date and time of the  surgery,  and  the
       length of her stay in hospital.  These were all  matters  that  could
       not simply be dismissed on the basis that the  appellant  simply  had
       not fully taken in the details - perhaps a common "male trait".

   21. In those circumstances in my view there is a material  error  of  law
       and the decision is set aside with no findings preserved.

   22. The decision needs to be re-made  and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having taken into account paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012 which states;

          '7.2     The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that;

              (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

              (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.'

   23. In my view the requirements of paragraph 7.2(b) apply,  in  that  the
       nature and extent of any judicial  fact-finding  necessary,  will  be
       extensive. The parties will be advised of the date of the  First-tier
       Tribunal hearing in due course.

Notice of Decision

   24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved  the  making  of  an
       error of law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the
       extent that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

   25. No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.   No  fee  award
is made by the Upper Tribunal.  This is to be considered by  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
