
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/52411/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 31 October 2014                   |On 28 May 2015                       |
|and 16 February 2015                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                             MR VRY PIERRE KOUSI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms C Record of counsel
For the respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

      1. The appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast born on 14 July 1975.
          He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the
         respondent dated 29 November 2013 to refuse to  issue  him  with  a
         residence card as  an  ex-spouse  of  an  EEA  National  under  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  (the  '2006
         Regulations').

      2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Rothwell  dismissed  that  appeal.  In  a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Reid  granted  the  appellant
         permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  stating  that  it  was
         arguable that the Judge's failure  to  consider  Article  8  was  a
         material error with reference to section  86  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

      3. The main issues in the proceedings before the  First-tier  Tribunal
         were whether the appellant's ex-spouse was a qualified  person  and
         residing in accordance with the 2006 Regulations at  the  point  of
         his divorce. It  was  noted  from  a  previous  refusal  dated,  25
         September 2012 that the appellant's EEA  national  spouse  had  not
         been exercising her treaty rights since July 2008 and therefore the
         appellant was refused under regulation 10 (5) and (6) of  the  2006
         Regulations.

      4. The Judge took into account Mr Clarke submissions who  relied  upon
         the refusal letter dated 29 November 2013  and  retained  right  of
         residence under regulation 10 (5). Mr  Clarke  submitted  that  the
         appellant cannot succeed as his  witness  statement  at  section  8
         states that his sponsor left the United Kingdom  in  December  2011
         and the decree absolute was granted in June 2013. He submitted that
         regulation 10 (5)  (b)  required  the  appellant's  sponsor  to  be
         exercising her treaty rights at the termination of the marriage. He
         stated that there was no  evidence  that  his  wife  is  exercising
         treaty rights on that date. The judge stated that as there  was  no
         Article 8 appeal, as removal directions had not been made he  asked
         that the appeal be dismissed.

      5. The Judge recorded that it was submitted to him at the  hearing  by
         Miss Record the appellant has family life in the United Kingdom  as
         he has two brothers and the appellant had a genuine marriage  which
         ended. "The story is sad any meets the spirit of the Rules".

      6. The Judge recorded that on the balance he does not  find  that  the
         appellant  has  proved  this  case  in  accordance  with  the  2006
         Regulations.  He  said  that  he  takes  note  of   Miss   Record's
         submissions that this is a sad story that falls within  the  spirit
         of the Regulations. The 2006 Regulations are  very  clear  and  the
         position of the EEA spouse at the date of the  termination  of  the
         marriage has to be exercising treaty  rights  which  has  not  been
         proved in this case.

      7. The Judge also stated that the appellant has referred to Article  8
         but as there is no removal direction issued by the  respondent  and
         stated "I agree with Mr Clarke that I have no jurisdiction to  hear
         an appeal relation to Article 8".

      8. The appellant's grounds of appeal raise only one ground  of  appeal
         which is that the Judge materially erred in law by not  considering
         the appellant's appeal  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
         Convention on Human Rights.

      9. The grounds of appeal state the following which  I  summarise.  The
         appellant is from C�te d'Ivoire and has lived in the United Kingdom
         for about 10 years and during that  time  was  married  to  an  EEA
         national, a French citizen. The couple separated in 2011  and  were
         divorced in 2013. His wife had returned back to France as  she  had
         cancer. The appellant applied to remain in the  United  Kingdom  on
         the  basis  he  had  retained  the  right  of  residence,  but  his
         application  was  refused  that  he  could  not   meet   the   2006
         Regulations. It is not submitted that the couple have lived in  the
         United Kingdom for at least one year  and  that  the  marriage  had
         lasted  for  at  least  three  years,  although  there  were   some
         difficulties in the marriage. The Judge found that the requirements
         of the rules is strict and this is not challenged.

     10. The grounds of appeal continue that however the appellant does have
         an arguable Article 8 point which is the breakdown of his  marriage
         due to ill-health which was a factor out of his control. The  Judge
         has not considered Article 8  on  the  basis  that  there  were  no
         removal directions in place.

     11. At the hearing Miss Record said that Article 8 grounds were  raised
         in the grounds of appeal and the judge should have considered them.

     12. Mr Melvin in his submissions said that the EEA Rules  are  said  to
         trump the legislation of the United Kingdom.

    Decision as to whether there is an error of law in the determination

     13. The only ground of appeal for me to consider in this appeal is that
         the Judge did not consider  Article  8  when  were  raised  in  the
         grounds of appeal. The Judge in his determination stated  that  the
         appellant has referred to Article 8 but  as  there  is  no  removal
         direction issued by the respondent and stated  therefore  "I  agree
         with Mr Clarke that I  have  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  an  appeal
         relation to Article 8.

     14. The Judge by this finding fell into material error. The appellant's
         appeal pursuant to Article 8 in respect of his family  and  private
         life in this country was lawfully  before  the  Judge  and  he  had
         jurisdiction  to  consider  it.  His  failure   to   consider   the
         appellant's rights under Article 8 and that of his  family  members
         in this country is a material error of law  such  as  the  decision
         cannot stand.

     15. I was asked in the event that I find that there is an error of  law
         in the determination of the first-tier Tribunal, I should send  the
         appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal so that findings of fact can
         be made in respect of the appellant's Article 8 claim.

     16.  There  is  no  dispute  that  the  appellant  does  not  meet  the
         requirements of the 2006 Regulations. There is however an error  of
         law in the  Judge's  failure  to  engage  with  Article  8  in  his
         determination.

     17. As such my decision is whether to send the appeal back to the First-
         tier Tribunal as requested by Ms Record or  whether  it  should  be
         retained in the Upper Tribunal for it to be heard on this Article 8
         issue alone.

     18. The appellant claims that he has two brothers in this country  with
         whom he enjoys a family life sufficient to engage Article  8.  This
         will be the only issue at the renewed hearing. The  respondent  has
         not taken issue that the appellant has two  brothers  who  live  in
         this country. The only  issue  which  remains  to  be  answered  in
         respect of Article 8 is whether family life  between  the  brothers
         engages Article 8 for both  the  appellant  and  his  brothers  and
         whether the  appellant's  exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  is
         proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  a  fair  and  transparent
         immigration control.

    The rehearing on 16 February 2015

     19. At the hearing I heard evidence from the appellant who adopted  his
         written statement dated 16 February 2015 in which  he  adopted  his
         previous statement and documents. He gave  the  following  evidence
         which I summarise.

     20. He last worked with  Crossrail  a  year  ago.  He  has  made  eight
         separate applications since  his  EEA  residence  expired  in  2009
         through different solicitors. His last leave to remain was in  2009
         but he was given six months leave on two occasions to work. He  has
         two brothers in the United Kingdom one is a citizen  of  the  Ivory
         Coast and the other, Roger is a French citizen. His brother who  is
         a citizen of the Ivory Coast is the supported by his brother  Roger
         as part of his household. He went back to Ivory Coast in  2006  and
         2007. His parents still live in Ivory Coast. He has no brothers and
         sisters who live there. He cannot work in Ivory  Coast  because  of
         political reasons. His claim for asylum was dismissed in  2003  and
         he has not made any other asylum claim  in  this  country.  He  was
         asked how he then makes the claim that he cannot  return  to  Ivory
         Coast and yet he went back 2006 and 2007. He said it was not during
         the election period and it was a quiet moment. "There is a  lot  of
         killing in my area and life is uncomfortable in the Ivory Coast."

     21. In re-examination it was put to him if he had not  made  only  five
         applications and Mr Melvin read out the 8 applications he had made.
         He said that a lot of the applications were refused after which  he
         would make another application. He said not every refusal  was  the
         subject of an appeal.

     22. In questions from me he said  that  he  is  capable  of  supporting
         himself if he is allowed to work. He is not dependent on anyone  in
         this country and this is equally true anywhere in the world  if  he
         is allowed to work.

     23. I heard submissions from Mr Melvin and  Miss  Record  in  the  full
         notes of the hearing are in my Record of Proceedings.

     24. Mr Melvin submitted that the appellant cannot meet the requirements
         of the 2006 EEA Regulations and has made eight applications and has
         cogged up the system. In respect of his family life he claims  that
         Roger,  the  appellant's  brother  had  two   children   with   the
         appellant's wife. This is because she  was  first  the  partner  of
         Roger and thereafter married the appellant. There  is  no  evidence
         that the brothers live together or that  there  is  any  dependency
         between the brothers. In respect of his private life, he  has  been
         here since 2003 and his asylum claim was dismissed. He has  had  no
         leave to remain since 2009 which shows that his immigration history
         has always  been  precarious.  Apart  from  the  longevity  of  the
         appellant's residence in this country,  this  does  not  in  itself
         engage Article 1. His removal  is  proportionate  response  to  the
         public interest. The appellant's argument is a  near  miss  and  it
         should not be entertained by the Upper Tribunal. The case of  Sing,
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gill at paragraph 23 stated  that  it  is  not
         always necessary to engage the five step process in Razgar when  it
         is obvious that the appellant does not have  a  family  life  or  a
         private life in the United Kingdom.

     25.  Miss  record  submitted  the  following  which  I  summarise.  The
         appellant's evidence in his witness statement is that he lives with
         his brothers and this was not been challenged in cross-examination.
         If the appellant made an application up to the year 2011 as  stated
         in Judge Ross, this determines that his French national spouse  was
         exercising treaty rights up to that  date,  his  application  would
         have succeeded. The appellant is living with his brothers and  this
         is an exceptional case. The respondent did not take any action  for
         six  years  to  remove  the  appellant  to  the  Ivory  Coast.  The
         appellant's marriage broke down due  to  tragic  circumstances  and
         this should also be taken into account.

     26. Mr Melvin said that the appellant made eight applications and a lot
         of them had been refused and not every  refusal  was  appealed.  He
         said that the appellant should have left when his applications were
         refused and his immigration status is always been precarious and he
         cannot benefit from the  fact  that  he  was  not  removed  by  the
         respondent.

    Findings of fact

     27. In looking at Article 8 I have considered the decision of the House
         of Lords in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11.  The House of  Lords  gave
         guidance that in assessing proportionality there was no legal  test
         of truly exceptional circumstances, reaffirmed  the  analysis  they
         had given in Razgar, R (on the Application of) v SSHD  [2004]  UKHL
         27 and also reaffirmed the importance  of  continuing  reliance  on
         established Strasbourg jurisprudence relating to Article  8.   Lord
         Bingham's step by step approach in Razgar continues to apply in all
         expulsion cases.  Firstly, it is  necessary  to  establish  whether
         there is  a  private  or  family  life  with  which  removal  would
         interfere and then Lord Bingham's five questions, the step by  step
         approach, should thereafter serve as a framework for deciding  such
         cases.

     28. I remind myself that the mere existence of a family relationship or
         a private life is not sufficient for the applicability  of  Article
         8(2).  Much more is needed.  At  paragraph  20  of  Lord  Bingham's
         judgment in the case of Huang he said this:

             "In an Article 8 case where  this  question  is  reached,  the
             ultimate question for the appellate immigration  authority  is
             whether  the  refusal  of  leave  to  enter  or   remain,   in
             circumstances where the life of the family  cannot  reasonably
             be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere, taking  full  account  of
             all  considerations  weighing  in  favour  of   the   refusal,
             prejudices the family  life  of  the  applicant  in  a  manner
             sufficiently serious to amount to a breach of the  fundamental
             right protected by Article 8.  If the answer to this  question
             is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the authority must
             so decide.  It is not necessary that the appellate immigration
             authority, directing itself along the lines indicated in  this
             opinion, need ask in addition whether the case meets a test of
             exceptionality."

     29. The appellant does not meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules and the EEA Regulations. I therefore consider  whether  there
         are any arguably good grounds for granting the appellant  leave  to
         remain outside them and to consider whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

     30. The appellant claims that he has family life with his two  brothers
         which will be infringed if he  is  removed  from  this  country.  I
         therefore have to consider the appellant's and his brother's rights
         under Article 8.

     31. In Kugathas v SSHD [2003] EWCA Civ 31, a case  which  concerned  an
         adult's relationship with his mother and adult siblings, the  Court
         of Appeal thought that the following passage in S v United  Kingdom
         [1984] 40 DR 196 was still relevant:

             "... generally, the protection of family life under Article  8
             involves cohabiting dependants,  such  as  parents  and  their
             dependent  minor  children.   Whether  it  extends  to   other
             relationships depends on the circumstances of  the  particular
             case.  Relationships between adults ... would not  necessarily
             acquire the protection of Article 8 of the Convention  without
             evidence of further elements  of  dependency,  involving  more
             than the normal emotional ties."

     32. However, the Court of Appeal considered that the further element of
         dependency did not have to be economic.  Accordingly, in  the  case
         of the "other relationships" referred to, it will be  necessary  to
         show that ties of support, either emotional  or  economic,  are  in
         existence and go beyond the ordinary and natural ties of  affection
         that would accompany a relationship of that kind.

     33. The appellant said at the hearing that he can live independently of
         his brothers if he is  allowed  to  work.  Asked  whether  this  is
         equally true  of  living  anywhere  in  the  world,  the  appellant
         answered in the affirmative.  This  demonstrates  to  me  that  the
         appellant is an adult independent man who can  look  after  himself
         and his reliance on  his  brother  is  because  he  does  not  have
         permission to work. The appellant worked at Crossrail when  he  was
         given permission to work by the respondent and at that time did not
         rely on his brothers.

     34. The appellant claims that his relationship  with  his  brothers  is
         very close and that he wants to continue to live with them. I  find
         there is no credible evidence  before  me  that  the  relationships
         between the brothers is such that it amounts to  ties  of  support,
         either emotional or economic, which  go  beyond  the  ordinary  and
         natural ties of  affection  that  would  accompany  a  relationship
         between brothers. I find that the respondent's  decision  will  not
         interfere with the appellant and his brothers Article 8 rights.

     35. I take into account that the appellant has  been  in  this  country
         since 2003 which would make it nearly 10 years. The appellant  does
         not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  which  requires
         residence of 20  years.  The  appellant  also  does  not  meet  the
         requirements of the 2006 EEA Regulations.

     36. It is suggested by Miss Record that the special circumstances which
         are not covered by the Immigration Rules is  that  the  appellant's
         marriage broke  down  because  his  wife  had  breast  cancer.  She
         submitted that the wife has had her breasts removed. She also  said
         that if the appellant had made an application  when  his  wife  was
         exercising treaty rights in the United  Kingdom  which  was  up  to
         2011, he would have succeeded. I frankly have  some  difficulty  in
         understanding this argument. The appellant made eight  applications
         for leave to remain in this country which have all been refused  by
         the respondent.

     37. I find there are no compelling  or  special  circumstances  in  the
         appellant's case that he should succeed pursuant to Article 8  when
         he cannot succeed pursuant to the Immigration Rules  and  the  2006
         Regulations.

     38. I take into account the respondent's statutory interest in  a  fair
         and transparent immigration control. The appellant has continued to
         live in this country even  when  all  his  applications  have  been
         refused and his immigration status has always  been  precarious.  I
         find that the appellant refuses to comply with any  decision  which
         is adverse to him and  after  so  many  adverse  decisions  he  has
         refused to leave the country.

     39. Miss Record's submission that the respondent  did  not  remove  the
         appellant for six years and this somehow benefits  the  appellant's
         application, is disingenuous. The burden is  on  the  appellant  to
         leave the country when his applications have been refused and after
         his appeals have been refused. The appellant  did  not  accept  any
         adverse decisions and continued to  live  in  this  country  making
         applications for leave to remain.

     40. I find in this case that the respondent's interests must trump this
         persistent appellant's interests.






      Dated this 25th day of May 2015
    Signed by


    .............................................
    Mrs S Chana
    A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal Chana


