
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52489/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th November 2014                            |On 1st December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                LEWIN MCCLUNE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Oke of Counsel instructed by Cleveland & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion, I shall continue to refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. On 1st October 2014 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Lambert  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal  against  the  determination  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Majid in which he allowed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse leave to remain as  an
    unmarried partner  applying  the  provisions  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. In granting permission Judge Lambert stated that, even  before  he  had
    considered the grounds, he found the determination of Judge Majid to be
    "unreasoned and less than comprehensible".  He thought it arguable that
    the expression "woefully inadequate" used to describe the determination
    in the grounds of application was fully justified.

 4. The grounds of application themselves contend  that  the  determination
    showed that the judge had no regard to the  relevant  Sections  of  the
    Immigration Rules or whether there were any  exceptional  circumstances
    in line with the case law guidance set out in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640
    (IAC) to allow the judge to consider the claims outside those Rules.

 5. At the hearing in the Upper Tribunal before me to establish whether  or
    not the decision of the First-tier Judge did actually contain an  error
    on a point of law, Mr Tufan confirmed that the respondent  relied  upon
    the grounds.  Mr Oke suggested that the determination could  be  upheld
    as the judge had engaged with the issues.  The judge  had  referred  to
    the Immigration Rules before proceeding to  deal  with  the  Article  8
    claim.  Whilst Mr Oke conceded that the decision was not a "model", the
    judge had heard all the evidence and was impressed by the  relationship
    between the appellant and his  claimed  British  citizen  partner.   He
    asked me to conclude that the errors  in  the  determination  were  not
    material as the judge reached a decision open to him.

 6. After I had considered the matter for a few moments I announced that  I
    was satisfied that the determination showed errors  on  points  of  law
    such that it should be re-made afresh by remitting the  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 7. I reached that conclusion because the determination does not show  that
    the judge gave any consideration to the Immigration Rules  even  though
    paragraph 3 of the decision suggests to the contrary.  Although the two
    stage process recommended in Gulshan now appears to be inappropriate in
    the light of the decision of the Court of Appeal in MM [2014] EWCA  Civ
    985, it is  not  at  all  clear  what  evidence  the  judge  took  into
    consideration to support the confusing conclusion  that  the  appellant
    "merits the benefit of the Immigration Rules and the protection of  the
    ECHR".  The judge does not specify which Immigration Rule might benefit
    the Appellant or the factors in the evidence he  summarises  which  can
    lead to that favourable conclusion.  In particular the  judge  did  not
    consider the significant issue raised in the refusal about the  absence
    of obstacles to family life between the parties continuing  outside  UK
    particularly when there were no  minor  children  associated  with  the
    relationship.   The  determination  is  inadequate   in   content   and
    reasoning.  Thus, it contains errors on points  of  law  such  that  it
    should be re-made.

 8. As the appeal will have to be heard again on all issues the  provisions
    of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statements of the Senior  President
    of 25th September 2012 enable me to remit the case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested at the hearing before the Upper Tribunal nor  do
I consider it to be appropriate.

DIRECTIONS

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Taylor
    House where it will be heard on 10th April 2015.

 2. There is no requirement for an interpreter.

 3. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

 4. The appeal should not be heard by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Majid.







Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
