
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52527/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th May 2015                             |On 27th May 2015              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper tribunal JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                      mr Arlete Francisco Mavila Deacon
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nixon, promulgated on 30th July  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 18th July 2014.  In the determination, the judge  allowed
    the appeal of Arlete Francisco Mavila Deacon.  The Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Mozambique who  was  born  on  1st
    June 1980.   She  appealed  against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 28th November 2013, refusing  her  application
    to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds as the wife of her husband, Mr
    Herbert Deacon, who is a British citizen present and settled in the UK,
    for whom she cares because he had a brain tumour removed in the  UK  in
    August 2012, having initially fallen ill in Mozambique, where  the  two
    of them lived together, such that he now needs  constant  care  by  his
    wife.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge considered the Appellant's case that,  although  her  husband
    has four children in the UK, he has contact with  only  two,  who  live
    close by, but that "they were unable to  provide  full-time  care"  and
    that:

         "The Appellant helped him with day-to-day living, as  he  struggled
         with his mobility, hearing loss and imbalance and memory  problems.
         He had been recently diagnosed with diabetes ..... he continued  to
         attend regular medical appointments ...." (paragraph 5).

 4. The judge's findings were that,

         "I accept, as did Judge Malloy, that when the Appellant came to the
         UK, her intention was to care for him after his  operation  and  to
         return to Mozambique at the end of her stay.  It  was  clearly  the
         hope of the couple that Mr Deacon's health would improve after  his
         brain tumour was removed and they could return  to  their  life  in
         Mozambique where they have lived as  a  married  couple  throughout
         their relationship ..." (paragraph 10(4)).

 5. The judge considered then the evidence of the parties before her.   She
    found Mr Deacon himself "to be a credible witness and I am  content  to
    accept his evidence as to his current medical situation and his needs".
     She also referred to the letter of  his  GP  of  11th  November  2013,
    "which confirms what I have been told, namely, that  the  Appellant  is
    caring for her husband on a daily basis ..."  (paragraph  10(5)).   The
    judge was satisfied that the Appellant's husband "was  not  overplaying
    his symptoms, but that he was perhaps not emphasising  as  much  as  he
    could his need for assistance.  He did make it very clear that  he  was
    not coping well without his wife.  I accepted as credible the  evidence
    of both ...." (paragraph 10(5)).

 6. The judge's conclusions were that although Mr Deacon would be  entitled
    to some support from Social Services, it is unlikely that this would be
    24 hour care and naturally such support would not be with the necessary
    emotional support.

         "I find it perfectly understandable that Mr and Mrs Deacon want  to
         deal with his problems themselves,  as  any  other  married  couple
         would so wish and it would be a cruel option  to  keep  the  couple
         apart any longer ... I do not see the  option  of  his  young  sons
         caring for him to be a realistic option, as  they  have  their  own
         lives ..." (paragraph 10(6)).

    Thereafter, the judge had regard to the established legal principles in
    Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 and Hyatt [2011] UKUT 00444, and observed that
    although there were no obstacles to  an  application  being  made  from
    abroad, in this case, the  only  public  interest  factor  weighing  in
    favour  of  the  Secretary  of  State  was  the  necessity  for  proper
    immigration control (see paragraph 10(7)).  The judge was not satisfied
    that this was a sufficiently weighty factor given the  other  interests
    on behalf of the Appellant herself.

 7. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the  judge  overlooked  the  fact
    that the starting point for Article 8 cases  is  that  the  Immigration
    Rules are a complete code (see MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ  1192)  and
    it was made clear in Gulshan [2013] UKUT  00640,  that  the  Article  8
    assessment  shall  only  be  carried  out  when  there  are  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Rules.  The  judge  had  failed  to
    draw attention to the compelling and exceptional circumstances in  this
    case.

 9. On 17th September 2014, the application for permission  to  appeal  was
    rejected by Judge PJG White , on grounds that the judge had  identified
    compelling grounds as to why the Appellant should not be  removed  (see
    paragraph  10(2)).   Moreover,  the  judge  set  out  the  nature   and
    consequences of the Appellant's serious illness and  the  physical  and
    emotional care required from the Appellant (see  paragraphs  5,  10(5),
    and 10(6)).  Furthermore, the judge's conclusions were that  compelling
    circumstances did exist.

10. Upon renewal, permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Kekic
    on 6th January 2015 on grounds that the judge had not provided adequate
    reasons for why the Appellant's circumstances were exceptional.

Submissions

11. At the hearing before me on 15th  May  2015,  Mr  Smart,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State began  by  submitting  that
    the judge had taken the wrong decision in Hyatt  into  account  because
    she had referred to the Tribunal decision  in  Hyatt,  which  had  been
    successfully appealed in the Court of Appeal in Hyatt [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1054.  This decision was important because it emphasised  in  paragraph
    30(d) that in considering Article 8 all the material  factors  must  be
    taken into account.

12. One essential material factor not taken into account by Judge Nixon was
    the fact that the visa processing  times  in  Pretoria,  South  Africa,
    showed that most applications are processed within 30 days.  If this is
    all the length of time  that  the  Appellant  would  have  to  wait  in
    Pretoria before she could make an application to re-enter in  order  to
    join her husband, it  could  not  be  said  to  be  a  disproportionate
    infringement of her Article 8 rights.  The failure by the judge to take
    this into account was a clear error of law.

13. These considerations were important because  at  paragraph  50  of  the
    Court of Appeal decision in Hyatt, it is made clear that a  person  who
    had entered on a temporary basis did not have a legitimate  expectation
    of a right to remain, that family life could continue  in  the  country
    overseas, and any period of separation would be short.   These  factors
    were clearly germane to the instant appeal.  The failure of  the  judge
    to consider them was an error of law.

14. For his part, Mr Mohzam referred to his skeleton argument and submitted
    that the point in relation to the visa processing times in Pretoria was
    a new point, not previously  raised  in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal,  and
    certainly raised before the judge below.  It was not suggested  to  the
    judge in the Tribunal below that the processing times in Pretoria  were
    under a month.  It was wrong to raise it now.  Furthermore, the judge's
    findings were clear and comprehensive, and she pointed to the fact that
    the Appellant's husband's "emotional support" was also  being  provided
    by the Appellant's presence and care for her husband  in  the  UK  (see
    paragraph 10(6)).  The judge had given  proper  reasons  and  this  was
    tantamount to simply a disagreement with the findings of the judge.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law under Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007
    such that I should set aside the decision.  The decision of  the  judge
    below is clear and comprehensive and deals  adequately  with  both  the
    facts and the case law, which is fully explicated in the  body  of  the
    determination.

16. First, the judge finds  both  the  Appellant  and  her  husband  to  be
    credible witnesses in respect of the relationship and the care that the
    Appellant provides for her husband.

17. Second, the judge finds that the  provision  of  care  is  genuine  and
    necessary  and  that,  if  anything,  the   Appellant's   husband   was
    underplaying the extent of his need for the care of his wife.

18. Third, the judge does  consider  the  possibility  of  Social  Services
    support for the Appellant's husband, but  it  is  clear  that,  "it  is
    unlikely that there should be 24 hour care and naturally  such  support
    would not deal with the necessary emotional support".   Nothing  before
    me suggests that this conclusion was not one  that  could  properly  be
    drawn from the facts before the judge.

19. Finally, the suggestion in the Grounds of Appeal, that the  Appellant's
    husband's young sons had at one  point  looked  after  the  Appellant's
    husband is completely without foundation and accordingly, the judge  is
    correct to say that the option of his young sons caring for him is  not
    a realistic option.

20. In short, I conclude that this is not a proper case for the finding  of
    an error of law by the judge.  The judge  did  not  misdirect  herself.
    Her conclusions are not irrational.  They are properly  reasoned.   Any
    suggestion with respect to the "visa processing  times"  is  ill-placed
    given that it was not raised before the judge and has not  been  raised
    in the Grounds of Appeal, and does not in any event, disturb the proper
    findings of the judge below.

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.




Signed                                  Date




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss             20th May 2015

