
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/52582/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 December 2014                   |On 23 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                                Betim Zullufi
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Ashworth of Counsel instructed by Shah Law
Chambers.
For the Respondent:    Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Colvin promulgated on 19 March 2014 dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the Respondent dated 2 December 2013 to refuse to
    vary leave to remain and to remove him from the UK pursuant to  section
    47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.



Background

 2. The Appellant is a national of Kosovo born  on  20  February  1987.  He
    entered the UK on 12 August 2012 with leave to enter as a visitor. On 4
    January 2013 he applied for leave to remain as the partner of his  wife
    Ms Arlinda Krasniqi (a British citizen born in Kosovo).  The  Appellant
    and his wife were married on 17 December 2012 in London;  their's  was,
    however, a pre-existing relationship, and they had become engaged at  a
    ceremony in August 2012 in Kosovo.  His  application  was  refused  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'  letter  dated  2  December
    2013; a Notice of Immigration Decision was served consequently.

 3. The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

 4. It was conceded before the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant could
    not satisfy the requirements of the Immigration Rules; the  appeal  was
    argued on Article 8 Grounds. The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  dismissed
    the appeal for reasons set out in his decision. In particular the Judge
    did not accept that the Appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with Ms Krasniqi.

 5. The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal  which  was  initially
    refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lloyd  on  24  April  2014,  but
    subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane on 21 May 2014.

 6. The Respondent has filed a Rule 24 response dated 9 June 2014 resisting
    the challenge to the decisions of the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The matter initially came before me on 9 July 2014  and  was  adjourned
    with Directions: (see Notice of Adjournment &  Directions  sent  on  10
    July 2014). Without deciding the issue of error of law I indicated that
    "I was troubled in respect of the First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that
    "the Appellant has not shown to a balance of probabilities that [he was
    in] a genuine and subsisting relationship"", my  concern  relating  "in
    part to the fact that  the  Respondent  appeared  to  accept  that  the
    relationship was genuine and subsisting in  the  'reasons  for  refusal
    letter' of 2 December 2013, yet the Judge appeared  in  part  to  place
    adverse  weight  on  the  Appellant's  failure  to  produce  particular
    evidence to demonstrate the relationship was  genuine  and  subsisting:
    e.g. see determination at paragraph 31 and  32"  (paragraph  3  of  the
    Notice of Adjournment & Directions). I indicated "The main  -  but  not
    exclusive - focus of the resumed hearing will likely be whether or not,
    taking the Appellant's  case  at  its  highest  as  to  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marital relationship, there are compelling circumstances not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules that warrant the grant of leave
    to remain outside the Rules on human rights grounds" (paragraph 2). The
    case was adjourned to permit the filing of further evidence in order to
    establish the extent to which the Judge's error may have been  material
    - and in particular whether there  were  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules.

 8. Further evidence has now been filed by the Appellant - although most of
    this  goes  to  the  question  of  the  genuineness  of   the   marital
    relationship that was put in issue by the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, rather than specifically adding to the issue  of  'compelling
    circumstances'.  I  also  heard  oral  evidence  at  length  from   the
    Appellant, and Ms Krasniqi, and Ms Krasniqi's mother  Arjeta  Krasniqi,
    details of which are set out in my record of proceedings  which  is  on
    file.

Consideration

 9.  Aspects  of  the  Appellant's  and  Ms  Krasniqi's  account  of  their
    developing relationship and courtship are summarised  at  paragraphs  7
    and 9-10 of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Amongst  those
    matters I note in particular the following: although in  mid-2012  they
    had discussed becoming engaged, the initial  plan  was  then  to  marry
    after 2 to 3 years; the couple became engaged a few days prior  to  the
    Appellant travelling to the UK - he had obtained his visit  visa  prior
    to the engagement party; when the Appellant came to the UK he had  just
    completed his first year at university in Kosovo; "he planned  just  to
    visit the UK" (paragraph 7); similarly "It was not their  intention  to
    marry when the appellant came on a visit visa" (paragraph 11).

10. I pause to note that in his oral evidence the Appellant stated that  he
    failed his first year university exams and would not have been admitted
    to the second year until he had passed such  exams.  Any  intention  to
    continue with his studies was abandoned after he had spent some time in
    the UK with Ms Krasniqi. The Appellant added that in  addition  to  his
    studies he "was also working in my father's business"  in  Kosovo.  His
    father sent money for him to the UK "as  and  when  I  need  it".  (The
    Appellant also stated that he had employment prospects in the UK: if he
    were permitted to work there was a job available to him in his  uncle's
    car wash business; in the meantime "if I really need money"  his  uncle
    could help him financially, although this had not arisen.)

11. The Appellant  also  stated  in  answer  to  my  questions  by  way  of
    clarification that he had been planning on staying in  the  UK  at  the
    most for a month, and had intended to return and carry on his life,  by
    which he meant continuing to work in his father's business and  "maybe"
    getting back to his university studies. As  regards  Ms  Krasniqi,  the
    plan was to get married when she had completed her studies and to  stay
    in touch in the meantime by her visiting Kosovo as often as  she  could
    and otherwise to be in touch through Facebook and by telephone.

12. The Appellant was asked if  prior  to  their  marriage  he  and/or  his
    partner had sought any advice as to the immigration position consequent
    upon marriage. He was initially  confused  in  his  answers  and  I  am
    satisfied that he mixed up the advice that he sought after the marriage
    with the concept of seeking  advice  prior  to  the  marriage.  He  was
    nonetheless vague as to whether he had ascertained the  position  prior
    to the wedding, although declared himself to have been "very  positive"
    and thought that he would be granted a stay in this country.

13. In contrast under cross-examination Ms Krasniqi  stated  that  she  was
    aware at all times that there were requirements that would need  to  be
    met including financial requirements: she had known this even prior  to
    the engagement. She also stated  that  she  had  discussed  immigration
    issues with the Appellant before the marriage. In light of her  answers
    I am driven to the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  deliberately
    evasive in his answers as to his knowledge of the immigration  position
    prior to marriage. I find that this couple knew full well when they got
    married that the fact  of  their  marriage  would  not  avail  them  in
    immigration terms under the Rules.

14. In the covering letter to the Appellant's application, dated 4  January
    2013, his representatives explain that Ms Krasniqi, a British  citizen,
    was studying  and  working  part-time  at  a  dispensing  chemist;  the
    relationship was described as "very happy, strong and  loving"  and  it
    was asserted that the Appellant wished to remain in the UK  because  he
    "cannot  be  apart  from  her".  Discretionary  leave  was  sought   on
    "compassionate, compelling and exceptional grounds and Article 8":  the
    Appellant was said to be of good character, and could be  supported  by
    his family and wife in the UK without recourse  to  public  funds;  his
    wife relied on  him  for  emotional  support,  they  loved  each  other
    "immensely", and the Appellant "would not be able  to  survive  without
    her".

15. I pause to note that all that was really being said of substance in the
    application was that the Appellant and his  wife  had  a  good  marital
    relationship. I  struggle  to  see  that  this  could  possibly  be  an
    exceptional circumstance: it would be  a  rare  couple  who  would  not
    characterise their marital relationship as strong and loving some three
    weeks after the date of their marriage ceremony.

16. In the Notice of Adjournment & Directions, in respect of the  contended
    'compelling circumstances' of the  Appellant's  case  I  identified  as
    potentially relevant the contents of paragraph 5 of  the  Determination
    (relating the Appellant's case as advanced), and paragraph  15  of  the
    Appellant's Skeleton  Argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    relevant passages are in these terms:

   (i)      "[The Appellant) and his wife enjoy a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship and cannot live without each  other.  The  exceptional
         circumstances are that his wife would not be able to meet the Entry
         Clearance financial requirements because she is still studying.  It
         would also be unreasonable to expect her to relocate to  Kosovo  as
         her immediate family are in the UK and she  is  presently  studying
         and working. He is presently being supported by his  wife  and  his
         parents in Kosovo." (Determination at paragraph 5); and

   (ii)     "The Appellant is married to a British citizen,  and,  further,
         that there are in  this  case  insurmountable  obstacles  to  their
         family life continuing in Kosovo...  [T]he  Appellant's  impeccable
         immigration history, his level of integration in  the  UK  and  his
         close ties  and  connections  with  his  family,  friends  and  his
         community." (Appellant's Skeleton Argument at paragraph 15).

17. Again it seems to me that the mere fact of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship cannot amount to an  exceptional  circumstance.  Something
    extraordinary by way of interdependence would need to  be  demonstrated
    to turn a genuine marital relationship into an exceptional circumstance
    - perhaps, by way of example, where one partner was severely disabled.

18. Nor do I hesitate to observe that in my judgement  the  fact  that  the
    Entry  Clearance  requirements  cannot  be  met  cannot  constitute  an
    exceptional circumstance - a matter  that  was  also  asserted  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement of 6 February 2014 (paragraph 9). If  the
    inability to satisfy the financial  requirements  were  an  exceptional
    circumstance it would effectively nullify that  aspect  of  immigration
    control.

19. Further, a 'good' immigration history is only a neutral factor,  not  a
    positive factor, in any consideration of proportionality: whilst a poor
    immigration history may be  an  adverse  factor,  an  applicant  cannot
    expect favourable treatment by reason of simply  having  respected  the
    Rules and the law. Similarly in respect of the absence  of  a  criminal
    record.

20. Nothing particularly  different  was  advanced  before  me  by  way  of
    documentary and oral evidence.

21. Whilst I do not doubt the genuineness of the marital  relationship,  it
    seems to me plain that the application and appeal contain assertions of
    considerable hyperbole: I do not for a moment accept, for example, that
    the Appellant could not "survive" without cohabiting with  his  partner
    in the UK.

22. Furthermore, references to the strength of the Appellant's private life
    in the UK in an application made some 5 months  after  his  entry,  and
    based only on general assertions, are without merit. So far as  private
    life built up during the period of the processing  of  the  application
    and appeal, I remind myself of provisions of  section  117B(5)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 - "Little weight should be
    given to private life established by person at a time when the person's
    immigration status is precarious" - and duly accord little  weight.  In
    my judgement nothing has been shown in any of the evidence  before  the
    Tribunal that would suggest any different approach should be  taken  to
    private life on the facts of this particular case.

23. Moreover, the effect of the Respondent's decision is no more than  that
    this couple must revert to their original plan of the Appellant joining
    his wife in the UK at some point after the completion  of  her  studies
    when she is in a position to sponsor him in accordance with  the  Rules
    on the basis of full-time employment. I do not see  it  as  a  hardship
    that should sound significantly in  any  proportionality  balance  that
    this couple must now go through the  steps  that  they  had  originally
    planned to take even at the time  of  the  Appellant's  departure  from
    Kosovo for what it is said  was  intended  to  be  only  a  visit.  The
    Appellant has extensive family in Kosovo: for example at  section  6.17
    of his FLR(O) application form signed on 3 January  2013  he  indicated
    that his parents, 4 brothers and other relatives were in  Kosovo.  (See
    also covering letter dated 4 January 2013.) In so far as he may need  a
    support network - and there is no obvious reason why the Appellant as a
    young able-bodied man should need support from other persons -  I  find
    that it is more likely than not that one is available to him. I bear in
    mind that work is available to him through his father,  and  also  that
    his father has financially supported him whilst he is in the UK.

24. I have considered whether, in the alternative, rather than pursuing the
    original plan, Ms Krasniqi could now join her husband in Kosovo.

25. In this context - and indeed generally throughout my deliberations -  I
    recognise and take into  account  Ms  Krasniqi's  studies  in  the  UK.
    Clearly, if she were to relocate to Kosovo to reside with  her  husband
    then this would disrupt her studies. However, it seems to me that  this
    is an un-likely scenario: the reality is in the event of a refusal, and
    if the couple wish to make a home in the UK, Ms Krasniqi will remain in
    the UK to be in a position to  sponsor  her  husband  -  relocating  to
    Kosovo would likely put her in a position where he would be  unable  to
    meet the financial requirements of entry clearance. Indeed  when  asked
    under cross-examination what would be the obstacle to setting  up  home
    in Kosovo, the Appellant responded that his wife could not  live  there
    because she is planning to find a job in the UK and that her family was
    in  the  UK.  Neither  of  these  matters  are  actual   obstacles   to
    establishing  a  marital  home  in  Kosovo,  but  are  expressions  of,
    understandable, preference.

26. Ms Krasniqi, for her part, stated in her  evidence  that  she  was  not
    prepared to move as the UK was  "all  she  had  known",  and  that  her
    husband knew that: it was obvious to her that the marital home would be
    in the UK because she had always lived there. Again this is essentially
    an expression  of  preference  rather  than  an  identification  of  an
    insurmountable obstacle to establishing a marital home  in  Kosovo.  In
    this context, whilst I place only minimum weight upon  it,  it  is  not
    irrelevant to note that the Ms  Krasniqi  is  originally  from  Kosovo,
    speaks the language, visits annually for a two week  holiday,  and  has
    extended family members including grandparents and an  aunt  living  in
    Kosovo. It is not a country  with  which  she  is  entirely  unfamiliar
    although I accept that she does not, as she said, "feel at home there".

27. In this regard the case  is  essentially  put  on  the  basis  that  Ms
    Krasniqi has lived in the UK  for  most  of  her  life,  is  a  British
    citizen, has family members in the UK to whom  she  is  close,  and  is
    currently studying.

28.  I  do  not  consider  that  these  matters,  either  individually   or
    cumulatively, amount to exceptional circumstances not recognised  under
    the Rules. As regards length of residence and citizenship it is  to  be
    note that the Rules at paragraph EX.1 have as one of its premises  that
    the applicant's partner may be  a  British  Citizen:  it  follows  that
    nationality in itself cannot be  determinative  of  Article  8  rights.
    Moreover, moving away from the country of a person's nationality  is  a
    far from unusual circumstance in the modern world. Whilst the  type  of
    society that one moves into, and including such matters as its relative
    affluence, cultural freedoms, healthcare facilities,  may  be  relevant
    considerations in evaluating the practicalities of relocation, there is
    no evidential basis on the facts of this particular case to demonstrate
    that the Appellant and his wife would face any  practical  difficulties
    in establishing a  home  together,  or  would  face  any  circumstances
    amounting to a barrier or that would involve  any  undue  hardship.  As
    regards the relinquishing of the life  established  in  the  UK  by  Ms
    Krasniqi, it is again to be recalled that inherent in  the  wording  of
    EX.1, is that an applicant's partner will be  settled  in  the  UK.  It
    follows that the relinquishing of a settled life in the UK  is  not  in
    itself inevitably to be equated with an insurmountable obstacle  or  an
    exceptional circumstance: something more is required. In this context I
    do not find that there  is  anything  particular,  or  significant,  or
    remarkable, in the fact that the Appellant's partner is studying.

29. It was asserted during  the  course  of  the  oral  evidence  that  the
    Appellant provided emotional support to his  wife  in  respect  of  her
    studies, and it was suggested by him that  if  he  were  to  return  to
    Kosovo "she may lag behind in her studies and suffer  from  stress".  I
    accept that separation may  cause  upset,  and  that  in  making  their
    original plans  they  may  have  underestimated  the  extent  of  their
    emotional attachment - which perhaps only manifested once they began to
    see each other freely in the UK. However, I am not prepared  to  accept
    without more that such upset would prevent Ms Krasniqi from  completing
    her studies if she so wished to do.

30. Whether or not Ms Krasniqi would now abandon her  studies  to  take  up
    full-time employment the sooner to support  an  application  for  entry
    clearance, or continue with her studies with a view  to  improving  her
    employment prospects at the end  of  such  studies,  is  essentially  a
    choice for her in consultation with her husband  and  bearing  in  mind
    potential earning capacity under  the  alterative  scenarios.  In  this
    context I remind myself that the attempt to secure leave to  remain  in
    the UK in itself represented a change of choice  on  the  part  of  the
    couple - the original plan having been for the Appellant to  return  to
    Kosovo after the visit to the UK. The choices that the Appellant and Ms
    Krasniqi make are subject to the  strictures  of  immigration  control,
    they do not have, as of right, a completely free choice in such matters
    and they cannot circumvent immigration control by  asserting  any  such
    right of free choice.

31. Accepting - as I do - that this is a genuine relationship,  and  taking
    the Appellant's case at its highest - i.e. that  there  was  a  genuine
    post-entry change of plan as opposed to a manipulation  of  immigration
    control to secure entry as a visitor when it was all  along  intend  to
    seek to remain as a partner - the reality of  this  case  is  that  the
    Appellant and his wife quite simply find themselves in a position where
    they do not meet the requirements of immigration control.  Whilst  they
    have attempted  to  suggest  exceptional  compassionate  circumstances,
    their case is not obviously distinguishable  from  that  of  any  other
    married couple (or cohabitees or civil partners), who do not  meet  the
    requirements of the Rules. The premise of the case is  really  no  more
    than that the fact that they are genuinely  married  and  committed  to
    each other should be enough to secure leave to remain. That is  unsound
    in principle  and  essentially  nullifies  the  system  of  immigration
    control put in place by the state to protect the wider public interest.
    This is a case that, on the evidence before me,  cannot  succeed  under
    Article 8.

32. For the avoidance of any doubt I  accept  that  the  first  two  Razgar
    questions are to be answered in the Appellant's  favour.  There  is  no
    issue between the parties in respect of the  third  and  fourth  Razgar
    questions. The fifth Razgar question  -  proportionality  -  is  to  be
    answered in the Respondent's favour. In this latter regard I  have  had
    consideration to the public interest requirements pursuant  to  section
    117B of the 2002 Act,  and  in  this  regard  in  particular  note  the
    requirements of financial independence and that little weight should be
    recorded accorded to private life established when  immigration  status
    is precarious.

33. On the particular facts of this case, I find that the Immigration Rules
    provide a complete answer to the Appellant's case under Article 8. I am
    not persuaded that there are exceptional  circumstances  in  this  case
    which would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences if the Appellant
    were removed from the UK. I find  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    remove the Appellant from the UK does not breach his, or anybody else's
    human rights.

34. I recognise that the impact of the Respondent's decision -  and  indeed
    my decision on appeal - is likely to be perceived by some, including Ms
    Krasniqi, as an infringement on the liberties  of  a  British  citizen.
    Whilst it is the case that a British citizen is  at  liberty  to  marry
    whomsoever he or she wishes (subject to  widely  accepted  restrictions
    with regard to age, co-sanguinity, and polygamy), it is indeed the case
    that the scheme of immigration control that operates in the UK does not
    give a British citizen an absolute right to live with a  chosen  spouse
    in the UK. The Immigration Rules provide quite  specific  restrictions.
    The most particular restrictions are financial: this is no surprise  to
    Ms Krasniqi who was aware  of  such  restrictions  even  prior  to  the
    marriage. Nor is it the case that Article 8  of  the  ECHR  provides  a
    ready route to circumvent the requirements of the Rules.

35. Nonetheless I accept that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  approach  to
    the question of the genuineness of  the  marital  relationship  was  in
    error of law in that  he  relied  upon  the  absence  of  materials  in
    circumstances where the basis of  the  Respondent's  decision  did  not
    indicate that it would be necessary for the Appellant  to  produce  any
    further materials in respect of the genuineness  of  his  relationship.
    Having had the benefit of hearing the evidence of the Appellant and his
    wife I have little hesitation in concluding that that  was  a  material
    error in that it is  clear  to  me  that  this  is  a  genuine  marital
    relationship.

36. In all the circumstances I consider it appropriate  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and to remake the decision  in  the
    appeal. However, for the reasons already given  the  appeal,  which  is
    only pursued on human rights grounds, does not succeed under Article  8
    and accordingly is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

37. The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  and
    is set aside. I remake the decision in the appeal.

38. The appeal is dismissed.


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     18 September 2015
