
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52874/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2014                           |On 30 October 2014            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before


                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE DAVIS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Miss P H W N
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Rene, Counsel instructed by Just & Brown
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   On 4 August of 2014 the respondent to this appeal (in respect  of  whom
    an anonymity direction has been made) succeeded in her  appeal  against
    removal directions  issued  in  November  of  2013.   Those  directions
    followed an application by the respondent to this  appeal  for  further
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom within the Immigration Rules.

2.   The respondent is a citizen of Kenya.  She  was  born  on  11  July  of
    1981.  She came to the United Kingdom when she was 19.  She is  now  in
    her early 30s.  The basis upon which she sought to bring herself within
    the Immigration Rules was Rule 276ADE(vi), that is that she  sought  to
    indicate that she no longer had any ties to her home country, Kenya.

3.   The complaint of the Secretary of State, the appellant  in  this  case,
    is that the First-tier Tribunal when considering the facts of the  case
    had failed adequately to explain why it was that the respondent as  she
    now is had no ties within the meaning of the relevant Immigration Rule.

4.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  undoubtedly  considered   the   appropriate
    authority, in particular Ogundimu [2013] UKUT 60 (IAC).   The  Tribunal
    Judge quoted from paragraphs 123 and 124 of that decision.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge noted that ties meant more  than  something  merely
    remote and abstract.  Consideration of whether a person has no ties had
    to involve a rounded assessment of all the relevant circumstances,  not
    just limited to social, cultural and family circumstances.

5.   The evidence recorded by the First-tier Tribunal Judge in  relation  to
    issues concerning the respondent's connection with Kenya really came to
    this.  The respondent had said that she had nowhere to  reside  in  her
    own home country and that her  family  had  disowned  her  due  to  her
    medical condition but she also said that she had not returned to  Kenya
    because she had no examination certificates which would enable  her  to
    obtain employment and she had no money.  The money  that  she  had  had
    gone to pay medical bills of her father  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge recorded this:

         "The appellant (the respondent in this appeal) said she would  have
         gone home if she was able to go home but had no money and  had  not
         graduated and saw no life for her in Kenya."

6.   On the face of it that  evidence  was  something  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  should  have  addressed  in  considering  the  rounded
    assessment of all the relevant circumstances.  It goes  without  saying
    that if somebody says that they would have gone home had they had money
    and qualifications that suggests that they do have ties to the relevant
    country but the First-tier Tribunal Judge in coming to  her  conclusion
    that the respondent satisfied the relevant paragraph of the Immigration
    Rules simply said this:

         "I have had  the  benefit  of  seeing  her  give  evidence  and  of
         considering her lengthy witness statement and the  documents  which
         she had provided in support of her claim.  I  found  her  to  be  a
         credible and honest witness.  She readily accepted she  was  unable
         to provide supporting documentary  evidence  in  relation  to  some
         aspects of  her  appeal  ...   Although  there  is  no  documentary
         evidence ... I do accept what she says in that regard."

7.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department was entitled to know  if
    the respondent was to be successful in her appeal why it was  that  she
    was found to satisfy the conditions within the relevant paragraph.   In
    our judgment the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  do  that  in  the
    determination.

8.   It may be that a fresh determination  before  a  different  judge  will
    reach the same conclusion in terms of paragraph 276ADE but we cannot be
    satisfied that they would and therefore the appropriate  course  is  to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.  The case will have to  be  listed
    before a judge other than Judge Snape.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date: 28 October 2014


Mr Justice Davis
