
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52385/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 7 January 2015                            |On 28 January 2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                                 Mr Daqi Luo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Appiah
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a national of China who was born on 30 March 1985.  He
    appeals against the respondent's  decisions  of  15  November  2013  to
    refuse to vary leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to remove  him
    by way of directions under Section 47 of the  Immigration,  Asylum  and
    Nationality Act 2006.

 2. The history of this appeal is that in a determination promulgated on 13
    August 2014, following a  hearing  on  18  July  2014,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge allowed the appellant's appeal.  The  respondent  sought
    and was granted leave to appeal that determination.   This  led  to  an
    error of law hearing in the Upper Tribunal before Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Robertson on 4 November 2014.  The  determination  that  followed
    the hearing found material errors of law in the original decision which
    decision was then set aside.   The  matter  was  then  relisted  for  a
    resumed hearing before me.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  judge  made  no
    findings on whether there was  a  gap  in  the  appellant's  continuous
    lawful residence in 2004/2005 when an application for further leave  to
    remain was  made,  although  the  judge  referred  to  dates  when  the
    application was said to have been submitted; the judge stated that  the
    decision was unfair and unreasonable, and therefore  concluded  that  a
    discretion was available and should have been exercised.  However,  her
    conclusion  did  not  follow  from  a   finding   of   unfairness   and
    unreasonableness.  The only reference by the judge was  to  Immigration
    Rule 276B, which does not contain a  discretionary  provision  and  the
    judge did not identify what discretion was available; the judge  stated
    that she did not consider  the  appellant's  private  and  family  life
    rights within the context of the Immigration Rules or outside the Rules
    yet it was clear from the grounds of  appeal  that  the  appellant  was
    relying on his Article 8 rights; and further it was  unclear  from  the
    determination whether the judge was allowing the appeal to the  limited
    extent that it was not in accordance with  the  law  or  outright;  the
    former would have been possible if there was something in law that  the
    respondent needed to consider and the latter would have  been  possible
    if the  judge  had  identified  what  discretion  she  was  exercising.
    However the determination was silent.

 4. As set out in  the  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge's  determination  in
    essence the appellant applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    on the basis that he was able to establish that he  had  at  least  ten
    years' continuous lawful residence pursuant to  paragraph  276B  of  HC
    395, as amended.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the decision
    of the respondent  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  because  a
    discretion available to her should have been exercised and was not.  In
    view of this the judge stated that she would not go on to consider  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights within or outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. The respondent was granted permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    judge did not identify the nature and source of the discretion referred
    to and thus failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  her  decision;  the
    residual discretion of the respondent is not a matter  for  the  courts
    (Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148),  and  although  the  judge  stated  that  the
    decision of the respondent was unfair and unreasonable the  common  law
    duty of fairness only appertains to procedural fairness.  There was  no
    obligation on the respondent to make decisions which were substantively
    fair (see Marghia (Procedural fairness) [2014] UKUT 366 (IAC)).

 6. No Rule 24 response on behalf of the appellant was filed.

 7. Appellant's Counsel at the error of law  hearing  accepted  that  there
    were difficulties with the determination and that there was no  finding
    as to whether there was a gap  in  the  appellant's  continuous  lawful
    residence  between  2004  and  2005.   Even  on   the   most   generous
    interpretation there was a gap  of  more  than  28  days.   Furthermore
    Immigration Rule 276B did not refer to the exercise of discretion where
    ten years' continuous lawful residence had  not  been  established  and
    Counsel was unable to identify an Immigration  Directorate  Instruction
    relating to the exercise of discretion for those who  had  remained  in
    the UK and had a gap in excess of 28  days.   There  was  therefore  no
    apparent discretion which could be exercised.

 8. Before me Ms Everett on behalf of the respondent had no file.  She  was
    provided with a copy of the core bundle and other  documents  submitted
    on behalf of the appellant for the resumed  hearing.   Apart  from  the
    original bundle that was provided for use in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    the appellant under cover of letters dated 28 November and 12  December
    2014 respectively  provided  a  statement  from  Siyuan  Liu  and  some
    photographs; a bundle of documents numbered  1  -  39  and  a  skeleton
    argument.  It was apparent that despite  what  had  been  said  on  the
    appellant's behalf at the error of law hearing  his  representative  at
    the  hearing  before  me  had  identified  an  Immigration  Directorate
    Instruction which did indeed refer to the exercise of discretion  where
    there had been breaks in lawful  residence.   I  will  return  to  that
    aspect shortly.

Oral Evidence

 9. I heard evidence from the appellant in English.   He  confirmed  to  be
    true the contents of his two statements dated  23  April  2014  and  23
    November 2014 respectively.  Ms Everett  cross-examined  the  appellant
    and I heard submissions from both representatives.  I have taken a full
    note of the evidence and submissions.

Findings of Fact

10. I found the appellant to be a credible witness  who  did  his  best  to
    provide full and  truthful  evidence.   There  is  indeed  very  little
    dispute as to the facts.  The only issue is as to what occurred between
    October 2004 and February 2005.

11. As there is so little in dispute and I have found the appellant to be a
    credible witness the main facts are set out  hereafter  and  are  taken
    from the appellant's first statement.  He first arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom in  August  2002  aged  17  and  attended  Taunton  College  in
    Southampton where he took his A levels from September 2002 to June 2004
    in mechanical mathematics, chemistry, physics and computing.   He  then
    obtained a place at Warwick University where he studied from  September
    2004  to  June  2007.   He  obtained  a  BEng  degree   in   Electronic
    Engineering.  He then obtained an internship at Citigroup in  2008  and
    thereafter graduated with a MSc degree in Computer Sciences from Oxford
    University where he studied from September 2009 to  October  2010.   He
    then continued his employment with Citigroup from September 2010  under
    the Tier 2 Skilled Migrant scheme and has the position of  Applications
    Development Manager in the Institutional Client Group up to date.

12. It is not in dispute that the appellant's  initial  leave  was  granted
    from 20 August 2002 until 31 October  2004.   The  difficulty  for  him
    comes in relation to what happened around that time.  Contained in  the
    appellant's bundle  of  documents  are  emails  exchanged  between  the
    appellant  and  the  welfare  advisor  at  the  University  of  Warwick
    Students' Union which exchange mainly took  place  in  April  2014  but
    commenced with an enquiry from the appellant in an  attempt  to  obtain
    supporting evidence surrounding his application  in  2004  for  further
    leave to remain to undertake studies at the university.  In  the  first
    email of 3 December 2013 the appellant refers to  using  a  "fantastic"
    batch service provided by Warwick International Office  to  submit  his
    student visa application to the Home Office.   He  refers  to  guidance
    provided on  what  and  when  documents  were  required  for  the  visa
    application and that he had an  immigration  advisor  to  validate  his
    application before it was sent off to the Home Office on his behalf.

13. The response from the welfare advisor is that  the  records  were  only
    kept for seven years as required under the law but there was a  logbook
    kept but it did not have a record of the  appellant's  name.   What  is
    interesting in the email from  the  welfare  advisor,  Meena  Devlukia,
    timed at 12.18pm on 24 April 2014, is where it is stated  that  it  was
    the Students' Union who operated the batch scheme and they  would  have
    sent off the appellant's application.  At this point I adopt  what  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found in relation to what happened  next.   I
    adopt this because I have found the appellant to be  credible  and  the
    documentation reveals  to  me  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  the
    following:-

         25.  The appellant has obtained a copy of his application from Home
             Office records.  It can be seen that he applied  on  the  form
             FLR(S).  The form has various date stamps  upon  it  including
             one showing it to have been received on 24 December  2004  and
             another showing it  to  have  been  stamped  by  the  Charging
             Support Team as a valid application on 10 January  2005.   The
             appellant signed and dated the form on 10 December 2004.   The
             letters submitted in support of his  application  include  one
             from Taunton College dated 6 September 2004 and  another  from
             the  University  of  Warwick  dated  29  October  2004.    The
             appellant has provided an  undated  Home  Office  letter  that
             relates to his application informing  him  that  he  has  been
             granted an extension of stay.

14.  The  appellant  accepted  in  cross-examination  that  he   knew   the
    application was submitted late but he had no control over the  process.
    When signing the form he asked what would happen now it was out of date
    and he was informed that it should all be okay.  To the extent that  he
    obtained the leave that he was  seeking  for  further  studies  it  was
    indeed  okay  although  it  is  unlikely  to  have  been  in   anyone's
    contemplation that the delay would potentially  affect  an  application
    under the long residence rules many years later.

15. The above events lead me to the finding that the appellant had no leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom from 1 November 2004 until he  obtained
    further leave which, from  another  document  obtained  from  the  Home
    Office, was granted on 3 February 2005.  Although the Home Office  says
    that the application was not made until the 20 January 2005 application
    of that date - that same document has  on  it  a  receipt  date  of  24
    December 2004.  On balance therefore the application was overdue from 1
    November 2004 until its receipt by the Home Office on 24 December 2004.

16. The Reasons for Refusal Letter at  the  bottom  of  page  2  states  as
    follows:-

         Although it is noted that you made an attempt to vary your leave on
         19 January 2005, this application was submitted out  of  time.   It
         should be explained that any time spent following the submission of
         an out of  time  application  awaiting  for  consideration  of  the
         application is not considered lawful even if  that  application  is
         subsequently granted.   Therefore  you  were  without  valid  leave
         between  31  October  2004  and  3  February  2005,  a  period   of
         approximately three months.  As  such  your  period  of  continuous
         lawful residence is considered to have been broken at this point.

    As I have found in paragraph 15 above the break  was   in  fact  for  a
    shorter period than set out in the refusal letter.

17. I note that no reference is made at all in the refusal  letter  to  any
    IDIs or any use of discretion.  The Reasons for Refusal Letter is dated
    15 November 2013 and the IDIs quoted in the skeleton argument  for  the
    appellant  are  dated  April  2009  and  November  2013.   These  state
    respectively as follows, according to the skeleton argument  on  behalf
    of the appellant, which I have no good reason to suppose are incorrect:-



         IDIs April 2009

         Breaks in lawful residence and the use of discretion

         Caseworkers should  be  satisfied  that  the  applicant  has  acted
         lawfully throughout the entire period and has made every attempt to
         comply with the Immigration Rules.  If an applicant  has  a  single
         short gap in lawful residence through making  one  single  previous
         application out of time by a few days (not usually  more  than  ten
         calendar days  out  of  time)  caseworkers  should  use  discretion
         granting ILR, so long  as  the  application  meets  all  the  other
         requirements.

         It would not usually be appropriate to exercise discretion when  an
         applicant has more than one gap in their lawful  residence  due  to
         submitting more than one of  their  previous  applications  out  of
         time, as they would not have  shown  the  necessary  commitment  to
         ensuring they have maintained lawful leave throughout their time in
         the UK.

         It may be appropriate to  use  your  judgment  in  cases  where  an
         applicant has submitted a single application more than ten days out
         of time if there are extenuating  reasons  for  this  (e.g.  postal
         strike, hospitalisation, administrative error  on  our  part  etc).
         This must be discussed with a senior caseworker.

         IDIs November 2013

         Discretion for breaks in lawful residence

         You must always  discuss  the  use  of  discretion  with  a  senior
         caseworker.  You must be satisfied the applicant has acted lawfully
         throughout the whole ten year period and has made every  effort  to
         obey the Immigration Rules.  The decision  to  exercise  discretion
         must not be taken without consent from a senior  executive  officer
         (SEO) or equivalent.

         Gap(s) in Lawful Residence

         You may grant the application if an applicant:

         has  short  gaps  in  lawful  residence  through  making   previous
         applications out of time by no more than 28 calendar days, and

         meets all the other requirements for lawful residence.

         You can use your judgment and use discretion in cases  where  there
         may be exceptional reasons why a single application was  made  more
         than 28 days out of time.

18. I am not able to find that there was any  error  on  the  part  of  the
    university in relation to  what  transpired  to  be  the  out  of  time
    application made by the appellant.  The evidence is simply  not  there.
    I understand that the appellant was aware and made use of the  facility
    whereby the Students' Union  helped  students  make  applications.   By
    providing such help it is logical to  suppose  that  many  applications
    would not be rejected because there were found to be documents  missing
    or other  evidence  not  provided.   International  students  may  well
    struggle to understand all that was required of them.  It appears  that
    the Student Union's experience was that  in  circumstances  similar  to
    those in which the appellant found himself the Home Office would  grant
    further leave.  That is not the same as to say, however,  that  primary
    responsibility for ensuring that the application was made in  time  did
    not remain with the  appellant  and  that  the  responsibility  somehow
    shifted to the university.

19. I add that I am satisfied on the evidence before me that the  appellant
    has acted lawfully throughout the entire period that he has been in the
    United Kingdom and has otherwise complied with the Immigration Rules.

20. The concern that I have is that on the face of the documentation before
    me and in particular the Reasons for Refusal Letter the respondent  has
    not referred to the IDIs either directly or  indirectly.  The  relevant
    IDIs refer to the use of discretion and a discussion in relation to the
    use of  discretion  with  a  senior  caseworker.   There  could  be  no
    expectation or certainty that even if the IDIs had been considered  and
    discretion used that the appellant would succeed but at the very  least
    he was entitled to have his application considered as set  out  in  the
    IDIs and to be given an explanation as to why in  his  particular  case
    discretion would not be used.

21. For these reasons I find  that  the  decision  has  not  been  made  in
    accordance with the law and the appeal is allowed to the extent that on
    the findings of fact  that  I  have  made  the  application  is  to  be
    reconsidered in accordance with  the  law.   This  is  by  no  means  a
    guarantee  for  the  appellant  that  he  will  succeed  upon   further
    consideration but at least the application will have  been  dealt  with
    properly.

22. There is an Article 8 private life claim made by the appellant.  I have
    decided that in light of the fact that I have allowed  this  appeal  to
    the extent that the respondent is  required  to  consider  further  the
    application as part of that  consideration  the  respondent  will  also
    consider the Article 8 position.  Should a  further  decision  be  made
    that is not one that is in the  appellant's  favour  he  would  have  a
    further right of appeal at that time and if such right of  appeal  were
    exercised  his  Article  8  appeal  would  be  considered  also.    The
    appellant's primary objective is to be granted an extension of stay  on
    the ground of long residence in the United Kingdom and not  an  allowed
    appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

23. For the reasons set out above the appeal  is  allowed  to  the  limited
    extent that the appellant awaits a lawful decision from the respondent.

24. I was not addressed on the matter of anonymity but the circumstances do
    not appear to require  that  an  anonymity  direction  be  made  and  I
    therefore do not make one.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton














