
IAC-FH-AR/V1

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52919/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th March 2015                   |On 23rd March 2015                   |
|Prepared on 17th March 2015          |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              MR MUHAMMAD WAQAS
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Skyner, Counsel, instructed by Arshed & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  1st  March  1983.   He
    appeals with leave against the decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal R G Walters sitting at Taylor House on 4th  November  2014  in
    which the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against  the  decision
    of the Respondent dated 6th December 2013.  That decision was to refuse
    the Appellant's admission to the United Kingdom pursuant to  Regulation
    11 of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the
    2006 Regulations"). The Appellant's case was that  he  was  the  family
    member of Dora Patricia Pereira Mendes, a Portuguese  national  and  he
    held a residence permit issued by the Respondent on 14th  October  2009
    (since revoked).

Immigration Law and Rules relevant to the Appellant

2.   Regulation 11 of the 2006 Regulations provides  that  an  EEA  national
    must be admitted to the United Kingdom if  he  produces  on  arrival  a
    valid national identity card or passport  issued  by  an  EEA  national
    state.  A person who is not an EEA national must be admitted if he is a
    family member of an EEA national and produces a valid document provided
    that the conditions in Regulation 19(2)(a) are met.  These are that the
    non-EEA national must be accompanying the EEA national or  joining  the
    EEA national in the United Kingdom and the EEA  national  must  have  a
    right to reside in the  United  Kingdom  under  the  2006  Regulations.
    Regulation 11(2)(b) applies where the family member of the EEA national
    has retained the right of residence or meets the criteria in Regulation
    11(5) or has a permanent right of residence under Regulation  15.   The
    burden  of  proof  of  establishing  that  the  requirements   of   the
    Regulations are met rests on the Appellant and the standard of proof is
    the usual civil standard of the balance of probabilities.

Explanation for Refusal

3.   The Respondent was not satisfied that  the  Appellant  was  seeking  to
    join an EEA national in the United Kingdom who had a  right  to  reside
    here under the 2006 Regulations and  therefore  refused  the  Appellant
    admission under Regulation 11.  The Respondent wrote:

         "You have stated your wife left the United Kingdom six months  ago.
         You have stated she left her job  in  the  UK  approximately  three
         years ago.  You are unable to account for how your wife  spent  her
         time since then. You claim to have been living  with  her  until  6
         months ago. However you have no current contact number for her  and
         she has, according to you, returned to Portugal because  she  wants
         to live in Portugal and is not exercising her treaty rights. You do
         not know basic details about your wife such as her  parents'  names
         or whether she is uses the social media, indicating  that  you  may
         not have lived with her for a significant  time.   You  claimed  on
         arrival that you spoke to your wife yesterday but you now admit you
         have not spoken to her in any form for at least six months and that
         she is not in the UK."

4.   The Respondent then went on to revoke the residence  permit  issued  to
    the Appellant and refused  the  Appellant  admission.  Directions  were
    given for the Appellant's removal on 23 December to  Pakistan  but  the
    Appellant appealed against the Respondent's decision arguing  that  the
    Respondent had not given proper consideration to  the  evidence  before
    her and the decision would breach Article 8.    The  Appellant  had  no
    criminal record and neither he nor his partner were in receipt  of  any
    kind of public funds.

The Proceedings at First Instance

5.   The appeal came before Judge Walters on  4th  November  2014  when  the
    Appellant was represented by Counsel but no one attended on  behalf  of
    the Respondent.   The Judge noted that no record of interview had  been
    produced and thus the immigration decision rested on assertions by  the
    Immigration Officer as to  what  the  Appellant  had  said  by  way  of
    admissions.   At  paragraph  12  the  Judge  recorded  the  Appellant's
    evidence that his wife, Ms Mendes, was in the United  Kingdom  and  was
    currently working.  She had not attended the  hearing  became  she  was
    unable to get time off from work, otherwise she would  have  done.  The
    Judge noted that the case had been adjourned once already (on 22nd July
    2014) and that the Appellant  had  had  three  months'  notice  of  the
    hearing and yet it appeared no application had been made for  the  wife
    to have time off work until some two weeks prior to the hearing

6.   The Judge was unimpressed by the documentary evidence produced  by  the
    Appellant to show that his wife had been working.  The  Judge  did  not
    accept the P60s for the tax  years  2012  to  2014  as  being  reliable
    documents nor the three payslips said to cover the months April to June
    2014.  The Appellant's brother also gave evidence and he too  confirmed
    that the Appellant's wife was  presently  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    working.  At paragraph 24 the Judge wrote:

         "I did not find that either the Appellant or his brother had  given
         credible evidence on this point.  The fundamental  reason  for  the
         Appellant being refused admission was the Immigration  Officer  not
         accepting that [the Appellant's] wife  was  in  the  UK  exercising
         treaty rights.  I simply do not accept that the Appellant's wife if
         told about the importance of this case for her husband  would  have
         failed to attend.  I find that the reason that she did is that  she
         is not presently in the United Kingdom."

    He dismissed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

The Onward Appeal

7.   The Appellant appealed against that decision  arguing  that  the  issue
    under Regulation 11 should have been whether the Appellant was a family
    member of an EEA national.  The Appellant should  therefore  have  been
    admitted to the United Kingdom if he produced the  relevant  documents:
    his passport endorsed with a residence card.  If there was evidence  to
    suggest that Ms Mendes, the EEA  national,  was  no  longer  exercising
    treaty rights then the  Respondent  should  have  used  her  powers  of
    refusal under Regulation 20 of the 2006 Regulations (which deals with a
    refusal to issue or renew a revocation of residence documentation).  It
    was not clear on the face of the determination whether in fact this was
    done and the Respondent's decision if made under  Regulation  11  alone
    was arguably not in accordance with the law.

8.   The proper issue to be determined was an issue under  Regulation  20(2)
    of the Regulations which provides that  the  Respondent  may  revoke  a
    residence card if the holder of the card has ceased to  have  or  never
    had a right to reside under  the  2006  Regulations.  Alternatively  an
    adequate explanation for the Appellant's wife's absence had been  given
    by the Appellant and his brother. In rejecting the P60s the  Judge  had
    entered the arena as an expert and had given inadequate reasons for his
    rejection  of  the  documentary  evidence   which  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant's spouse was working.

9.   The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers on 21st January 2015.   In  granting
    permission to appeal Judge Cruthers  first  noted  that  there  was  no
    onward appeal against the dismissal of the Article 8 appeal.  He  found
    it arguable that the Judge had failed to give adequate reasons for  his
    findings pursuant to R (Iran) [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982.  However,  having
    granted permission the Judge added the following rider:

         "The Appellant should not take this  grant  of  permission  as  any
         indication that the appeal will ultimately be successful.  When one
         looks at the history of this matter (as summarised in the  decision
         under consideration) it seems unlikely that the Appellant  has  any
         proper base for remaining in this country.  That is because:

         .    The probability appears to be that the Appellant's  Portuguese
             wife is no longer in this country and in any event is unlikely
             to be exercising treaty rights in this country, and

         .    Even if the Appellant's wife is still in the  United  Kingdom,
             from the history of this matter it would appear that she  does
             not support the Appellant's efforts to remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom.

         .    The Appellant should take the above points into  account  when
             deciding whether or not to persist with  this  appeal  in  the
             Upper Tribunal."

10.  The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  27th
    January 2015 indicating her  opposition  to  the  onward  appeal.   The
    Respondent wrote:

         "The First-tier Tribunal Judge outlined his concerns as to the  EEA
         national's spouse non attendance at the hearing.  ... The Judge was
         entitled to find adversely against the Appellant at  paragraphs  20
         and 21 where he did not accept  the  reliability  of  the  evidence
         submitted in the form of the P60s and wage slips.   The  Judge  was
         entitled to find on the basis of the paucity of evidence  that  the
         EEA national was not exercising treaty rights in the UK.  Therefore
         as the Appellant had failed to show his  wife  was  in  the  United
         Kingdom and exercising treaty rights the Judge was entitled to find
         that the refusal was correct in respect of Regulation 11."

The Hearing before Me

11.  In consequence of the grant of permission the matter came before me  to
    decide in the first instance whether there was an  error  of  law  such
    that the determination fell to be set aside and  the  decision  remade.
    If there was not, then the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  would
    stand.  In oral submissions Counsel  indicated  he  could  not  go  any
    further than the grounds drafted by different Counsel but could confirm
    that  the  Appellant's  wife  was  out  of  the  country  and   divorce
    proceedings between  the  couple  were  ongoing.   For  the  Respondent
    reliance was placed on the Rule 24 response to the grant of permission.
     The First-tier had determined the matter correctly.

Findings

12.  The first thing the Appellant had to show in this case was that he  had
    a mandatory right to admission under the 2006 Regulations by reason  of
    being a family member of an EEA national and could thereafter meet  the
    necessary requirements. The difficulty for the Appellant  was  that  he
    could not get over that initial hurdle.  He was not the  family  member
    of Ms Mendes.  Their relationship had clearly broken  down  because  at
    the date of the revocation of his residence permit  she  had  left  the
    country and he had little if any information as to  her  work  history.
    Ms Mendes remains outside the United Kingdom  and  divorce  proceedings
    are now under way.  The Appellant was unable to clear the first  hurdle
    to show that he was a family member of an EEA national.

13.   In  his  determination  Judge  Walters  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant could  show that his wife had been exercising  treaty  rights
    and  rejected  the  documentation  said  to  prove   employment.    The
    Appellant's argument on that point is in my view  a  mere  disagreement
    with the adverse findings.  I do not agree with the decision  to  grant
    permission to appeal which found it arguable that the Judge  had  given
    inadequate reasons for his decision.  The Judge gave  adequate  reasons
    why he rejected the Appellant's claim that the Appellant's wife was  in
    the United Kingdom but had been unable to come to  court  that  day  to
    give evidence.  With the benefit of hindsight it can be seen  that  the
    Judge was clearly right to come to the  view  that  he  did  since  the
    Appellant's wife is indeed outside the United Kingdom.   The  Appellant
    did not give truthful evidence to the first instance  Judge  about  the
    whereabouts of his wife.  That inevitably undermined the credibility of
    the application as a whole.

14.  The Appellant's witness did not assist the Appellant  because,  perhaps
    out a sense of mistaken family loyalty, he too (wrongly)  claimed  that
    the Appellant's wife was in the United Kingdom.  The Judge  had  before
    him a clear divergence between  what  the  Appellant  was  recorded  as
    having told the Immigration Officers and what  the  Appellant  was  now
    saying in his oral evidence to the Tribunal. It is clear that what  the
    Appellant told the Immigration Officers was correct and that  what  the
    Appellant told the Judge was not.  It was a matter  for  the  Judge  to
    place such weight as he saw fit on the documentation put before him  to
    show that the Appellant's wife had been working.  He did not accept the
    documentation and gave a reason which, whilst brief,  was  nevertheless
    adequate.   The Judge found that the Appellant's wife was  not  present
    in the United Kingdom and  exercising  treaty  rights.   That  was  the
    conclusion which was open to him on the evidence.  Having reached  that
    conclusion there was no alternative but to dismiss the appeal under the
    2006 Regulations. The argument made in the  grounds  of  onward  appeal
    that the Respondent should have considered an alternative Regulation to
    base the revocation upon is without foundation. The case did not  reach
    that far because the Appellant was not a family member of  a  qualified
    person. It follows that there was no error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier and I dismiss the Appellant's onward appeal against  the
    First-tier decision.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss  the
Appellant's appeal.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.



Signed this 23rd day of March 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.



Signed this 23rd day of March 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

