
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52172/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22nd July 2014                               |On 11th Aug 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                mr kwaku adu
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Neil Garrod (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Symes promulgated on 28th April  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross on 4th  April  2014.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Kwaku Adu.  The  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Ghana, who was born in 1987.   He
    appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  Secretary  of  State
    dated 26th November 2013 to refuse to issue him with a  residence  card
    confirming his right to reside in the UK as a  third  country  national
    spouse of an EEA national exercising treaty rights in the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is the spouse of a  Belgian  national,
    Faustina Manu, with whom he underwent a customary proxy marriage  under
    the laws of Ghana, given that both of them are of Ghanaian descent, and
    that his marriage is genuine, and not one of convenience, such that  he
    and his EEA national wife should be allowed to  remain  in  the  UK  as
    husband and wife.  Therefore, he  is  entitled  to  extended  right  of
    residence under Regulation 14(2) of the Immigration (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge was faced with two challenges to  the  Appellant's  marriage.
    The first was that this was a marriage of  convenience,  and  this  was
    forcibly expressed by the representative appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent Secretary of State.   The  second  challenge  was  that  his
    marriage was not in compliance with the latest Tribunal  jurisprudence,
    as expressed in the case of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU  law)  Nigeria
    [2014] UKUT 24 because the marriage, of an EEA national with a  citizen
    of Ghana, was not in accordance  with  the  laws  of  an  EEA  national
    country, namely, in this case Belgium, for which there  was  no  expert
    evidence to attest to the validity of such a marriage.

 5. The judge had little difficulty in disposing with the challenge to  the
    genuineness  of  the  marriage.   The  allegation  of  a  "marriage  of
    convenience", was raised only at the hearing, and not  in  the  refusal
    letter, and amounted to a "fishing expedition" (see paragraph 33) which
    was to no avail because the couple were living together  in  a  genuine
    marriage, and there had  even  been  a  child  of  the  marriage.   The
    challenge to the form of  marriage,  namely,  a  customary  traditional
    marriage by way of a proxy arrangement, as recognised in Ghana,  was  a
    more creditable challenge.

 6. However, the judge dealt with  this  on  the  basis  that  this  was  a
    marriage which was conducted in accordance with  the  relevant  customs
    and traditions, with participation of duly authorised  family  members,
    and with  the  registration  that  followed  with  a  local  registrar,
    together with a letter from the Ghanaian diplomatic  legation  in  this
    country, which expressly confirmed the marriage as  a  valid  one  (see
    paragraph 22).

 7. In addition, the judge drew attention to  the  oft  forgotten  case  of
    McCabe v McCabe, which did not require both parties to a marriage to be
    Ghanaian citizens, for a  marriage  to  be  valid  if  performed  as  a
    customary marriage (see paragraph 8).  The  judge  had  regard  to  the
    factual issues before the Tribunal which were  not  insignificant.   He
    pointed out that both parties believed the marriage  was  valid,  there
    was a certificate of authentication from the Ghana High  Commission  in
    London, the wife's parents were both  Ghanaian  nationals  resident  in
    Ghana, she herself was born in Accra as shown in her Belgian  passport,
    and there had been no intention to represent themselves as  present  at
    their proxy marriage by signing  the  marriage  certificate  (paragraph
    11).

 8. They had not married in the United  Kingdom  because  they  had  wanted
    their families to be able to participate in the ceremony.   They  could
    not afford to travel to Ghana because she  was  the  sole  breadwinner.
    They had deliberately opted out for a  proxy  marriage  (see  paragraph
    12).

 9. Most interestingly, the judge also observed that Home Office policy was
    not to seek confirmation of a marriage  by  formal  registration.   The
    case of NA (Ghana) recognised the possibility that customary  marriages
    would be valid for the purposes of English law (see paragraphs  21  and
    24 of the determination).

10. In the circumstances the  burden  of  proof  lay  upon  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State if there was an attempt by her to limit the exercise
    of treaty rights of the wife of the Appellant (see paragraph 19).

11. Finally, as far as the latest Tribunal jurisprudence  in  the  case  of
    Kareem [2014] UKUT 24 was concerned, this did not pose a problem.   The
    reason was that the headnote at paragraphs A to C, made it quite  clear
    that the spouse of an EEA national could provide proof of  the  marital
    relationship from a competent authority and where there was a  marriage
    certificate this was good evidence if it was  issued  by  an  authority
    with legal power.

12. Where there was no marriage certificate then the  marital  relationship
    could be proved by other evidence.

13.  This  was  directly  the  outcome  of  the  jurisprudence  in  Kareem.
    Moreover, the Home Office Immigration  Directorate  Instruction,  which
    the judge referred to at paragraph 24, directly addressed the  position
    under the Customary Marriage and Divorce (Registration) Law 1985, in  a
    way that suggested  that  authentication  could  be  requested  of  the
    Ghanaian High Commission in cases of doubt, and such authentication had
    been provided in this case, so as to lead to the  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant had discharged the burden of proof on him (see paragraph 24).
     The judge allowed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

14. The grounds of application state that this was a case that  raised  the
    question of the validity of a Ghanaian proxy marriage  and  this  being
    so, the Tribunal determination in Kareem [2014] UKUT 00024 had not been
    followed.  On 4th June 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

15. At the hearing before me on 22nd July  2014,  Mr  Avery,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that the case of
    Kareem had not been followed.  The rights to free movement of  the  EEA
    national arose only by way of her status as an EEA national, and if she
    had married by way of her proxy marriage, then Kareem required there to
    be expert evidence which would confirm her ability in law to  so  marry
    by way of a proxy marriage, which expert evidence was  not  forthcoming
    before the judge, so the only conclusion should have been for the judge
    to dismiss the appeal.  The Appellant could not bring himself under EEA
    law.

16. For his part, Mr Garrod submitted that the decision of Judge Symes  was
    well-reasoned and comprehensive in  its  analysis.   Consideration  had
    been given to the case of Kareem and to the case  of  Papajorgi  [2012]
    UKUT 00038, and the judge was entitled to come to the decision that  he
    did.  Since the  case  of  Kareem,  there  had  been  another  Tribunal
    determination in the case of TA (Kareem explained)  Ghana  [2014]  UKUT
    00316, but this only served to confuse matters even more because it was
    difficult to see what the  jurisprudential  principles  were  following
    this determination.  Kareem itself was based upon  the  European  Court
    judgment in Micheletti (Case C-369/90), which Mr Garrod very  helpfully
    placed before me to consider.

17. Yet, in his submission, Micheletti was a very different proposition  to
    what was being suggested in Kareem.  The fact was  that  member  states
    cannot retreat from a person's EEA rights.  It is possible to determine
    national rights by reference to EEA  rights.   It  is  not  necessarily
    possible to determine EEA rights by reference to national rights.   The
    Appellant's wife had EEA rights and this included her right  to  marry.
    Paragraph  15  of  Kareem  had  dealt  with  these   issues   but   had
    misrepresented them in Kareem.

18. In the instant case, as Judge Symes had explained, the marriage of  the
    Appellant with his Ghanaian wife, who was now a  Belgian  citizen,  was
    one that would be recognised under English  law,  because  it  followed
    Ghanaian tradition, as made clear in the well-known case  of  McCabe  v
    McCabe, which was all to often apt to be overlooked.  If that  marriage
    was a genuine one  and  it  was  legally  recognised  in  UK  law  then
    consideration of the position under Belgian law was superfluous.

19. Micheletti, which was referred to in Kareem, did not suggest otherwise.
     In any event, paragraph 68 of Kareem allowed for the  very  exceptions
    which the judge  referred  to  in  his  determination,  and  which  the
    Appellant could point to by way of evidence that he had  produced  from
    the authorities of Ghana, to throw light on his  marriage.   The  judge
    was entirely right to allow the appeal.

Error of Law

20. I am satisfied that the decision of the judge involved the making of an
    error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA 2007)  such  that  I
    should set aside that decision and remake the decision.  There is  only
    one reason why I come to this decision.  It is not on  account  of  the
    failure of the judge to reason the determination  for  the  conclusions
    reached.  The determination is on any view a  clear  and  comprehensive
    determination that deals with all the outstanding issues.  It is not on
    account of the representation made on behalf of  the  Appellant  by  Mr
    Garrod, who  argued  his  case  persuasively  and  in  a  measured  and
    thoughtful way.  The only reason is that the Tribunal cases of  Kareem,
    and now also of TA (Ghana) [2014] suggest that expert evidence from the
    member state is necessary.

21. The case of TA (Ghana) [2014] does indeed expressly set out to  explain
    the decision in Kareem.  In so doing, it makes it clear in its headnote
    that, "The determination of whether there is a marital relationship for
    the purposes of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 must  always  be
    examined in accordance with the laws of the member state from which the
    union citizen obtains nationality."  It is significant that  the  words
    "must always" are underlined expressly in that determination.

22. These  determinations,  including  that  of  Kareem,  are  of  relevant
    authority for this Tribunal and are expected  to  be  followed  in  the
    interests of uniform jurisprudence,  until  such  time  that  they  are
    successfully appealed or altered in any way.

23. That being so, whilst I accept that the claimant has plainly  here  not
    entered a marriage of convenience and whose marriage is in every  other
    respect a genuine one, I must make a finding of an  error  of  law  and
    remake the decision to the contrary.

Remaking the Decision

24. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before the original judge, and the submissions that
    I have heard today.  I am dismissing this appeal for the reasons that I
    have given above, namely, that the decision of the judge below  is  not
    in compliance with Kareem and with the latest Tribunal determination of
    TA (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316.

Decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  This appeal is dismissed.

26. No anonymity order is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 11th August 2014


