
IAC-HW-AM-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52295/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 April 2015                     |On 21 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               EMMANUEL MBAYO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Amunwa, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is strictly an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  have,
    for the sake of consistency, continued to refer to the parties as  they
    were in the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State thus continues
    to be called "the respondent".

2.   The Secretary of State  has  appealed,  with  permission,  against  the
    decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Napthine  promulgated  on  31
    December 2014 in which he allowed the appellant's  appeal  against  the
    respondent's refusal to grant him an EEA residence card as an  extended
    family member under Regulation 8 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
    2006.  The appellant's claim  had  been  that  he  was  entitled  to  a
    residence card under Regulation 15(1)(b) and that he  had  a  permanent
    right of residence as a family member who had resided in the UK  for  a
    continuous period of five years.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted on 11 February  2015.   The  essential
    reason for granting permission was said to be as follows:

         "The judge  appears  to  have  ignored  the  fact  that  a  durable
         partnership is not a marriage; it was not appropriate to apply  the
         ratio in Samsam, relating as it does  to  family  members,  to  the
         circumstances in this appeal  which  involves  an  extended  family
         member.  No evidence has been produced by  the  appellant  to  show
         that his ex-partner was exercising treaty rights at the  time  that
         their relationship broke down - and given that he  is  an  extended
         family member only, it is not for the respondent  to  provide  that
         evidence."

4.   At the commencement of the hearing before me both representatives  told
    me that they agreed that there had been a clear error  of  law  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge for the very reasons set  out  above  in  the
    grant of permission.  The judge had applied the law as if the appellant
    had been married to his ex-partner and it was clear that they had never
    been married.  A further error of  law  was  that  the  judge  had  not
    considered at all the appellant's human rights under  Article  8  which
    may have particular relevance bearing in mind that  the  appellant  and
    his ex-partner have two children together.

5.   It was agreed that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be  set
    aside in its entirety with no part of the decision preserved.   It  was
    also agreed that the appeal must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a full rehearing both on the substantive issues and in relation  to
    any application under Article 8.

Notice of Decision

It having been agreed by both parties that the decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal contained an error of  law,  I  set  aside  that  decision  in  its
entirety.  The appeal is to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
Hatton Cross for rehearing before any judge (other than Judge Napthine).



Designated David Taylor
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
20 April 2015
