
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52170/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31 July 2014                                 |On 11 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                        Hilda Chidiebere Onyemegbulem

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed, A1 Immigration Services


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Hilda Chidiebere Onyemegbulem, was  born  on  21  March
    1976 and is a female citizen of Nigeria.  I shall  hereafter  refer  to
    the respondent as the appellant and to the appellant as the  respondent
    (as they  were  respectively  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal).   The
    appellant had applied for a derivative residence card  as  confirmation
    of her right to reside as a third-country national upon whom a  British
    citizen is dependent  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Her  application  was
    considered under Regulation 15A (derivative right of residence) of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006:
    15A. Derivative right of residence

    (1) A person ("P") who is not entitled to reside in the United Kingdom
    as a result of any other provision of these Regulations and who
    satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5) of this
    regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the United
    Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the relevant criteria.

    (2) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

    (a) P is the primary carer of an EEA national ("the relevant EEA
national"); and

    (b) the relevant EEA national-

    (i) is under the age of 18;

    (ii) is residing in the United Kingdom as a self-sufficient person; and


    (iii) would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom if P were
required to leave.

    (3) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

    (a) P is the child of an EEA national ("the EEA national parent");

    (b) P resided in the United Kingdom at a time when the EEA national
    parent was residing in the United Kingdom as a worker; and

    (c) P is in education in the United Kingdom and was in education there
    at a time when the EEA national parent was in the United Kingdom.

    (4) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

    (a) P is the primary carer of a person meeting the criteria in
    paragraph (3) ("the relevant person"); and

    (b) the relevant person would be unable to continue to be educated in
    the United Kingdom if P were required to leave.

    (5) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

    (a) P is under the age of 18;

    (b) P's primary carer is entitled to a derivative right to reside in
    the United Kingdom by virtue of paragraph (2) or (4);

    (c) P does not have leave to enter, or remain in, the United Kingdom;
and

    (d) requiring P to leave the United Kingdom would prevent P's primary
    carer from residing in the United Kingdom.

    (6) For the purpose of this regulation-

    (a)"education" excludes nursery education; and

    (b)"worker" does not include a jobseeker or a person who falls to be
    regarded as a worker by virtue of regulation 6(2).

    (7) P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if

    (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person; and

    (b) P-

    (i) is the person who has primary responsibility for that person's
care; or

    (ii) shares equally the responsibility for that person's care with one
    other person who is not entitled to reside in the United Kingdom as a
    result of any other provision of these Regulations and who does not
    have leave to enter or remain.

    (8) P will not be regarded as having responsibility for a person's care
    for the purpose of paragraph (7) on the sole basis of a financial
    contribution towards that person's care.

    (9) A person who otherwise satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2),
    (3), (4) or (5) will not be entitled to a derivative right to reside in
    the United Kingdom where the Secretary of State has made a decision
    under regulation 19(3)(b), 20(1) or 20A(1)





 2. The appellant's application was refused by a decision of the respondent
    made on 25 January 2013.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Henderson) which, in a determination which is dated  16
    April 2014, allowed the  appeal.   The  respondent  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appeal turns on a single issue.   The  respondent  asserts  in  the
    grounds of appeal that the judge had "failed properly to  consider  the
    requirements of Regulation 15A.  An unwillingness by a  child's  father
    to  assume  responsibility  is  not,  by  itself,   sufficient".    The
    respondent asserts that the appellant had  not  demonstrated  that  the
    child (a British citizen) would be  unable  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom with her father if the appellant was required to leave.

 4. I find that the appeal  should  be  dismissed.   I  have  reached  that
    conclusion for the following reasons.  Judge  Henderson  has  carefully
    considered the evidence which was before her.  I reject the  submission
    of the respondent that she found only that the father of the child  was
    unable to look after the child should the appellant  leave  because  he
    had expressed an unwillingness to do so.   The  judge's  findings  went
    beyond that, in particular at [27]:

         I accept on the evidence  before  me  that  the  appellant  is  the
         primary carer of a British citizen.  She has a young child  who  is
         totally dependent on her mother for all her immediate needs.  I  do
         not accept that the child's father is in a position to assume  care
         and responsibility for the child.  I would also be deeply concerned
         about the child being forced into the care of a  parent  with  whom
         she has not lived.  I note that the  child's  father  does  have  a
         separate married life in this country.   He  is  also  working.   I
         accept that he is not in a position to provide daily care  for  his
         child and that in any event it is not in her best  interests  given
         her age to be deprived of the daily care of her mother.  I conclude
         that the child lives with her mother and  spends  the  majority  of
         time with  her  mother  and  makes  all  the  day-to-day  decisions
         regarding her health and care.  I know that she is also financially
         responsible for the child although I can  see  no  reason  why  the
         child's father should not contribute in providing for  her  in  the
         future.

 5. The child in question was born on 12 November 2012.  The father of  the
    child is married to a British citizen and has very limited contact with
    the child (two hours on a Sunday morning).  I find that Judge Henderson
    was fully aware of the provisions of Regulation 15A.  The  judge  noted
    that the child's parents share parental responsibility [26], but as  Mr
    Diwnycz for the  respondent  acknowledged  at  the  hearing,  the  very
    limited contact which the father has with the child does not come close
    to providing for a sharing of primary responsibility  for  the  child's
    care.  This was clearly a case in which, in addition to being unwilling
    to assume any care responsibility for the child, the  judge  considered
    that leaving the child in the  care  of  the  father  would  be  wholly
    impractical and contrary to the child's best interests.  The Regulation
    (applying the ECJ judgment in Zambrano (C-34/09)) does not exclude  the
    circumstances of the appellant as found by the judge in this  instance.
    It was certainly open to the judge to find that, should  the  appellant
    be required to leave the  United  Kingdom,  the  child  would  for  all
    practical reasons even if not in law, be compelled to go with her.  The
    determination is legally sound and cogently reasoned.

 6. In the circumstances, I dismiss the appeal.

DECISION

 7. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 8 August 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

