
IAC-AH-DN-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/52999/2013
                                                               IA/53023/2013
                                                               IA/53015/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5 May 2015                                 |On 19 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

             Mrs sibi plavunilkunnathil samuel - first appellant
                     Mr samson samuel - second appellant
                    Miss streeva samson - third appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms F Allen Counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tarlow, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals on  the  ground  that  the
    Tribunal had no jurisdiction to hear  the  appeals,  as  there  was  no
    relevant immigration decision for them to appeal against.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not
    consider that the appellants should be  accorded  anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are all nationals of India.  The first appellant is  the
    wife of the second appellant, and the third appellant  is  their  child
    born on 12 July 2006.  As the first appellant is the lead appellant,  I
    shall hereafter refer to her simply as the  appellant  save  where  the
    context otherwise requires.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 29 September  2009  with
    valid entry clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.  The  visa
    was valid until 31 July 2011.  Her husband and daughter joined  her  in
    the United Kingdom as  student  dependants  on  11  July  2010.   On  6
    September 2013 the appellant gave birth in the UK to a son.

 4. The appellant came to study a level 3 course in health and social care.
     After successfully completing this course, she enrolled  at  the  same
    institute to follow a level 7 course in leadership and management.  She
    had leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant till 30 September 2013 to study
    at Park Royal College Ltd.  The licence for this college was revoked by
    the Secretary of State on 5 June 2013, and  the  appellant's  leave  to
    remain was curtailed so as to expire on 26 August 2013.  The  appellant
    managed to complete her level 7 course,  and  to  secure  admission  to
    follow a BSc (Hons) nursing studies course of pre-sessional English  at
    the University of Bedfordshire.

 5. This institution issued her with a CAS, upon which the appellant relied
    in her application for further leave to remain as a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant.  As far as she and her representatives were concerned,
    she applied for further leave to remain before her visa expired.   This
    was by making an online application through her representatives  on  23
    August 2013.

 6. However, the Home Office treated the  appellant  has  having  made  her
    application out of time.  On 25 November 2013 the respondent  gave  her
    reasons for refusing the application.  The Secretary of State  was  not
    satisfied that she  had  a  valid  CAS  because  the  reference  number
    submitted with her application had been withdrawn by the sponsor.   The
    CAS checking service was checked on 25 November 2013, and it  confirmed
    that the CAS had been withdrawn.  She had made her  application  on  29
    August 2013, but her leave to remain had expired  on  26  August  2013.
    She therefore did  not  have  leave  to  remain  at  the  time  of  her
    application, and so there was no right of appeal against the decision.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Henderson  sitting  at  Hatton
    Cross in the First-tier Tribunal on 30 September  2014.   Both  parties
    were legally represented.  In her subsequent decision, Judge  Henderson
    found that the respondent had attempted to move the  goal  posts.   The
    Home Office had previously contended the application was made after the
    expiry of the visa, but by letter dated 22 January 2014 they  were  now
    asserting that the application procedure which had been followed  prior
    to that date was not valid.

 8. The judge found at paragraph [27] that the appellant had made  a  valid
    application using the correct online  procedures  on  23  August  2013.
    Indeed, all three appellants had made a  valid  application  for  leave
    based on the production of the online application forms which  she  had
    seen.

 9. The judge went on to consider an argument advanced  by  the  Presenting
    Officer that she had no jurisdiction to consider the appeals  as  there
    was no immigration decision.

10. The judge noted that although there were  letters  giving  reasons  for
    refusing the applications in respect of all three appeals, none of  the
    three files contained a "notice of immigration  decision".   The  judge
    was unclear whether this was a result of an error by the respondent  on
    making the decision or whether the notices were simply not sent out.

11. The judge went on to refer to Singh v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 438. She said that in that case the Court of
    Appeal said it was important that Immigration Judges ensured that there
    was an immigration decision in existence when considering an appeal  or
    an application for permission to appeal.  The refusal  letter  was  not
    the notice of immigration decision and it did not generate a  right  of
    appeal.  The notice of immigration decision  had  to  comply  with  the
    provisions of the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003.  The Court of
    Appeal held:

         If there is no immigration decision the appeal is usually been able
         to be disposed of immediately by a decision that the  Tribunal  has
         no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

12. Ms Allen, who did not appear below, settled the appellant's application
    for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  She stated that  Judge
    Henderson  had  misapplied  Ved  and  Another  (appealable   decisions;
    permission application; Basnet) [2014] UKUT 00150 (IAC)  to  which  she
    had referred at paragraph [32].

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

13. On  19  February  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Nicholson  granted
    permission to appeal.  If the judge was correct,  then  the  appellants
    were still awaiting service of a lawful decision on their  application.
    No doubt the expedient way forward, given the judge's findings, was the
    respondent to have issued a formal notice  of  decision,  so  that  the
    appeal could proceed from there by way of agreement.

14. The passage quoted by the judge did not in fact come from the  case  of
    Singh v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  438.   Although,  in  broad  terms,  the
    passage was correct and a refusal letter, which did not comply with the
    notices and Regulations, is not necessarily an immigration decision, it
    was arguable that a letter which complied with those Regulations  could
    constitute an immigration decision and that strict  compliance  can  in
    any event be waived by  the  appellants:  see  DJ  [2004]  UKIAT  00194
    (Ouseley J and Ockleton).

The Rule 24 Response

15. On 24 March 2015 a member of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a Rule
    24 response on  behalf  of  the  respondent.   Having  found  that  the
    appellant  had  made  an  in  time  application,  the  refusal  of  her
    application constituted an immigration decision under Section  82(2)(d)
    of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  in  substance
    rather than form.  On this basis, the judge erred in  concluding  there
    was no jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

16. At the hearing before me, Mr Tarlow initially adhered to  the  position
    taken in the Rule 24 response.  This was  that  the  appeal  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing on the merits.

17. I explored with Ms Allen the appellant's case on the merits.  She  drew
    my attention to paragraph [10] of  the  appellant's  witness  statement
    dated 25 September 2014 in which she said as follows:

         Once you receive the refusal letter we have contacted  the  sponsor
         and they have informed us that since they came to know that we have
         applied for the further leave to remain after the completion of our
         valid stay.  They  expected  a  refusal  for  the  application  and
         therefore they withdraw the CAS.

18. In the same statement at paragraph [15], she asked that the  appeal  be
    allowed and that they be given 60 days'  time  to  produce  a  new  CAS
    letter and the required maintenance.

19. Ms Allen also drew my attention to an email from John Driver sent on  1
    April 2014 to the appellant in response to an email enquiry  from  her.
    John Driver is a representative of the University of  Bedfordshire,  as
    is apparent from his email address [ - ].  He said as follows:

         My belief  is  that  the  university  withdrew  your  CAS  as  your
         application for a visa under our sponsorship  was  submitted  after
         your previous leave to remain had expired.  As this was  the  case,
         the university would not have been permitted to register you  until
         after you had successfully obtained  your  visa.   Visa  processing
         times were such that your visa would have been  obtained  too  late
         for you to register.  It would therefore  have  been  inappropriate
         for the university to continue  with  assigning  the  CAS  to  you,
         knowing that the university would not be able to register  you  for
         the course stated on the CAS.

20. Ms Allen submitted that  the  decision  appealed  against  was  not  in
    accordance with the law in the light of the above  evidence,  and  also
    because there were deficiencies in the refusal letters addressed to the
    second and third appellant. These deficiencies were discussed by  Judge
    Henderson in paragraph [27] of her decision.

21. Mr Tarlow agreed that in the circumstances the fair outcome was for the
    matter to be remitted to the Secretary of State for a  lawful  decision
    to be made on all three applications, and that a decision should not be
    made on the applications before 60 days had elapsed, so as to give  the
    appellant the opportunity to obtain a new CAS.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

22. The judge erred in law for the reason succinctly stated in the Rule  24
    response.  Although the refusal letter directed to  the  appellant  was
    not intended to be an appealable immigration decision, it was  in  fact
    an appealable immigration decision as, contrary to what was asserted in
    the refusal letter, the appellant had made  her  application  when  she
    still had valid leave to remain.  So she had continuing  leave  at  the
    date of refusal pursuant to Section 3C.  Thus the effect of the refusal
    letter was to refuse to vary her leave to remain, with the result  that
    she no longer had leave to enter or remain.  This  was  an  immigration
    decision carrying  a  right  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    pursuant to Section 82(2)(d) of the 2002 Act.

The Re-making of the Decision

23. By the date of decision, the Sponsor had withdrawn the CAS, and so  the
    application was rightly refused under the Rules.  But the evidence that
    was before the First-tier Tribunal,  which  is  not  challenged  by  Mr
    Tarlow, establishes on the balance of probabilities that the  appellant
    has been a victim of common law unfairness.

24. Although it is not specifically alleged by Mr Driver, I infer that  the
    sponsor withdrew the CAS on the  prompting  of  the  Home  Office.   My
    reasoning is that the  sponsor  would  not  have  understood  from  the
    appellant that she  had  made  an  application  out  of  time,  as  the
    appellant's understanding was always that her application had been made
    in time.  So only the Home Office could have prompted  the  sponsor  to
    believe incorrectly that she had made her application  after  her  visa
    had expired.  The result is palpably unfair to the appellant.  Were  it
    not for the false assertion by the Home Office that she  had  made  her
    application out of time, the CAS would not have been withdrawn  by  the
    sponsor  without  her  knowledge.  As  it  was  withdrawn  without  her
    knowledge, she did not  know  and  had  no  reason  to  know  that  her
    application was doomed to fail and she was deprived of the  opportunity
    to make representations to the Home Office before a decision  was  made
    on her application.

25. The deficiencies in the refusal letters  directed  to  the  second  and
    third appellants highlight the fact that the respondent  did  not  give
    proper consideration to their applications.

Conclusion

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the following decision is substituted: the  appellants'  appeals
are allowed on the ground that the decisions appealed  against  are  not  in
accordance with the  law,  and  a  lawful  decision  on  their  applications
remains outstanding.

Their applications  are  remitted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for  fresh
consideration,  provided  that  no  decision  shall  be   taken   on   their
applications until 60 days have elapsed from the date  of  the  promulgation
of this decision so as to enable the first appellant to obtain a new CAS.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

