
                                                                   [pic]

Upper Tribunal    Appeal Number: IA/52453/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 15 September 2014                         |On: 16 September 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Pervaiz Iqbal
                                                                  Respondent
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By way of a letter to the Upper Tribunal  dated  9  September  2014  the
    Respondent's representatives indicated that their client did not wish to
    proceed with his appeal and wished to withdraw it.  The  Upper  Tribunal
    has made a decision dated 29 July 2014 that the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of  law  and  set  aside  that
    decision. It was directed that the re-making would  take  place  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.



 2. Consent of the Upper Tribunal is required for a party  to  withdraw  its
    case. Having carefully considered the facts of this appeal as a whole  I
    give consent to  the  Respondent  to  withdraw  his  case.   Accordingly
    pursuant to rule 17(5) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, the Respondent's case is withdrawn.



 3. S. 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 provides that if
    the Upper Tribunal sets aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal it
    must either remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  or  re-make  the
    decision. In this appeal the Upper Tribunal has decided to  re-make  the
    decision. As the Respondent's case has been withdrawn the appeal by  the
    Secretary of State against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    allowed. I  re-make  the  decision  by  dismissing  the  appeal  by  the
    Respondent against the decisions dated 28 November 2013 refusing to vary
    his leave to remain and to remove him.



 Signed:
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson
      Date: 15 September  2014











































