
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52250/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2015                            |On 9 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           mr Fethi Said Boucetta
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Bhachu of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Algeria.   He  appears  to  have  arrived
    unlawfully in the UK in 2001 and applied unsuccessfully for asylum.  He
    began a relationship with an EEA national (Lidia Pietrzak) in  February
    2006 and they have a child together  (Alexandra)  who  was  born  on  8
    December 2006.  On 8 September 2008 the appellant was given a residence
    card  by  virtue  of  his  relationship  with  Miss   Pietrzak.    That
    relationship subsequently came to an  end  although,  fortunately,  the
    appellant has maintained a good relationship with  Alexandra  and  with
    his former partner.  She lives with Alexandra  in  Manchester  and  the
    appellant regularly has contact including staying contact.

2.   It appears that on  23  August  2013  the  appellant  sought  permanent
    residence in the UK but that application was refused by the  respondent
    on 22 November 2013.  The respondent  issued  a  notice  informing  the
    appellant of the refusal of the right to grant permanent  residence  in
    the UK.  The appellant subsequently appealed that decision to the First-
    tier Tribunal where he was successful in  persuading  the  Tribunal  to
    allow his appeal on "human rights grounds".

3.   The appeal to the Upper Tribunal was by  the  respondent  whom  I  will
    continue to refer to thus, despite the fact that she is  the  appellant
    before this Tribunal.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Simpson  found
    that there were at least two arguable errors of law in the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal:

    (1)  the Judge failed to adopt the correct approach to Article 8 having
         regard to the changes to the Immigration Rules and to  recent  case
         law; and


    (2)  the circumstances the appellant  found  himself  in  were  neither
         compelling nor exceptional.

4.   In her grounds  of  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal the respondent complains that no adequate reasons  were  given
    for the decision and that the relationship between  the  appellant  and
    his daughter could continue "over a distance" and that his family could
    support him there.  It was thought that the  appellant  could  maintain
    contact.  The appellant's  circumstances  were  not  exceptional.   The
    appellant  was  part  of  an  ordinary  family  unit  which  should  be
    considered first and foremost under the Rules.

The Hearing

5.   Mr Mills explained that he had only recently had sight of the  Rule  24
    response submitted by the appellant.  This stated that  the  Judge  had
    rightly focused on the best interests of the child and as such had been
    entitled to conclude that the appeal should be allowed on human  rights
    grounds.  Having considered the Rule 24 response Mr Mills  pointed  out
    that Article 8 had not been raised in the original application  and  no
    removal  directions  had  been  made.   However,  it  seems  that   his
    predecessor before the First-tier Tribunal had conceded that Article  8
    may be considered and therefore could not be argued that the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was wrong to do  so.   The  Immigration  Judge  gave  no
    consideration to the Immigration Rules and the failure of the appellant
    to meet the financial requirements thereof.  However, the question  was
    whether the appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
    qualifying child. If he did then by virtue of Section 117B(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014 there is  no  presumption  in  favour  of  removal
    provided it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave  the
    UK.  Essentially, it was conceded by Mr Mills that  the  appellant  had
    such a qualifying relationship and it was unrealistic of the respondent
    to argue that the appellant could go back to Algeria with a  child  who
    had lived all his life in the  UK.   In  the  circumstances,  Mr  Mills
    conceded that there was no material error of law  although  there  were
    errors in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   Ms Bhachu of Counsel confirmed the present contact arrangements.

Conclusion

7.   I indicated  to  the  parties  at  the  hearing  that  I  accepted  the
    respondent's concession. Accordingly, I will declare that the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain any material error of  law.



Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law.  Accordingly, that decision stands.

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal made no fee award and that decision stands.




Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




