
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52627/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 July 2014                                 |On 8 August 2014           |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and



                                AHMED UL BARI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant was the respondent before the First-tier Tribunal and for
    convenience I refer to the parties as they were  known  at  the  First-
    tier.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Hanley promulgated on 2nd May 2014  in  which  the  judge
    allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  his  Tier  4
    (General) Student application.  The refusal was  made  on  the  grounds
    that the Appellant had failed to abide by a condition attached  to  his
    leave, namely that he only had permission to study  with  a  particular
    Sponsor, and that in the event that  he  changed  Sponsor  he  required
    prior permission.

 3. The Respondent found that the Appellant had changed his Sponsor without
    prior permission and,  deciding  not  to  exercise  discretion  in  the
    Appellant's favour, refused his application under the  general  grounds
    out at paragraph 322(3) of HC 395 as amended, otherwise the Immigration
    Rules.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on the ground that the judge had  made
    a  material  misdirection  of  law  when  he  found  that  it  was  not
    established that the grant  of  entry  clearance  imposed  a  condition
    restricting the Appellant to study at a particular institution.

 5. I referred the parties to the persuasive judgement in the case of Astle
    R (on the application of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2014] EWHC 2215 (Admin) in which a Deputy Judge of the High Court,  Mr
    Robin  Purchase  QC,  considered  the  issue  and  concluded  that  the
    Immigration Rules themselves imposed such a condition and further  that
    the condition required no further administrative action to operate.  In
    that case  the  judge  found  that  the  Respondent  had  attached  the
    conditions to leave by virtue to the reference in the vignette, both to
    the Immigration Rules under which the grant had  been  given  i.e.  the
    Tier 4 (General)  Student  heading,  but  also  the  inclusion  of  the
    Sponsor's reference number as provided by the Sponsor to the  Appellant
    on the CAS, and  then  by  the  Appellant  to  the  Respondent  in  his
    application form, when he gave details of his Sponsor. The  judge  also
    found that in any event the rules operated to impose the condition as a
    matter of law. This case is s on all fours with the facts of that case,
    not only because of the operation of  law,  but  also  because  of  the
    factual position revealed by the vignette. I am satisfied for the  same
    reasons that the condition asserted by the Respondent operated in  this
    case, and that the judge was in material error in finding that  it  had
    not been established that it did.

 6. The   position under the rules  is  that  even  if  the  condition  was
    breached there was discretion to exercise and so  I  have  gone  on  to
    consider  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  made  in   the
    alternative, reveals any  error.   Mr  Tufan  before  me  has  properly
    accepted that if the decision in the alternative is correct,  then  any
    error in respect of the issue of the imposition of the condition is not
    material.  The judge correctly identifies that paragraph  322(3)  is  a
    discretionary ground  of  refusal  and  correctly  self  directs.   The
    grounds assert that the Respondent, having  exercised  discretion,  the
    judge's  contrary  decision  has  been  inadequately   reasoned.    The
    reasoning follows the consideration of the factual matrix of this  case
    and is set out at paragraph 19.

 7. I note that there was no issue as to the facts, the Appellant  did  not
    give  evidence,  it  having  been   indicated   by   the   Respondent's
    representative on the day that there was no cross-examination required.
    The judge, it is  clear  from  a  complete  reading  of  his  decision,
    accepted the Appellant's unchallenged evidence that  he  did  not  know
    that there was a condition requiring him to make an application, or  to
    notify, a change of Sponsor.  It is right therefore that  this  was  an
    Appellant who was treated as being a genuine student, who made  a  bona
    fide application and who has acted, albeit mistakenly  in  good  faith.
    The judge notes that the Appellant meets all the  requirements  of  the
    rules for leave to remain as a student apart from the failure to follow
    the condition, and of course he would not be considering  the  exercise
    of discretion if that was not the pre-existing factual basis. The judge
    noted the financial investment made by the Appellant in his studies and
    took account of the stage that he had reached in connection with  those
    studies.  He also took account of the time that had  passed  since  the
    breach of condition, which he notes was some two years prior.

 8. The judge was also concerned about  the  difficulties  as  they  seemed
    apparent to him, in how an  Appellant  or  a  student  might  obtain  a
    permission to switch Sponsor.  In that regard I find  that  that  is  a
    matter  which  could  not  carry  any  significant  weight  as  in  the
    particular context of this case the Appellant has never  asserted  that
    he had difficulties in knowing how to switch Sponsors.   His  case  has
    always been that he made no such attempt because he did not  understand
    that it was required.

 9. However, looking at the reasons in the round, I am satisfied  that  the
    judge has given ample explanation and given sustainable reasons  as  to
    why he found the exercise of discretion should fall in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.

10.  Mr  Tufan  briefly  submitted  that  the  judge's  finding  that   the
    Appellant's failure had occurred two years prior and that the  question
    of the absence of clarity was not sufficient to  find  that  discretion
    ought to be exercised in favour of the Appellant.  However it  will  be
    clear from my consideration of the judge's decision that I am satisfied
    that the judge took far more than that into account and that when  read
    in the round the reasoning is adequate to explain to the Respondent  as
    to why it was that the judge took a different view in  respect  of  the
    exercise of discretion and that  the reasons that he has  provided  are
    sufficiently cogent to justify the decision that he has made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


