
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/52866/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Determination Promulgated            |
|On: 13 February 2015                 |On: 10 March 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                               MR Iqbal Faizal
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Kennedy, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the India born on 12 September 1979.  The
    appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was against the  decision
    of the respondent to refuse his application for leave to remain in  the
    United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) pursuant to paragraph  245  XZ  of
    the Immigration Rules  and  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights in respect of his private life.

 2.  A  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  C.  Greasely  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal pursuant to the Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen in a  decision  dated  22  July  2014
    granted the respondent permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  it
    being found arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  materially
    erred by not considering the appellant's evidence in  the  respondent's
    bundle of 30 October 2013 that is application was made in time and  the
    respondent had refused his application on an erroneous bases.

 3. Thus the appeal came before me.

 4. The appellant did not appear at the  hearing  of  his  appeal  and  his
    appeal was heard on the papers. His nonappearance was an issue  at  the
    First-tier Judge who stated at paragraph 15 that he cannot be satisfied
    that the appellant continues to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    appellant indicated in his grounds of  appeal  that  he  would  provide
    further appeal grounds and documents and none were forthcoming.

 5. Mr Kennedy stated that he had  advised  the  appellant  to  attend  the
    hearing but he failed to do so. Mr Tufan  said  that  despite  concerns
    raised that the appellant is not in  the  country,  he  has  failed  to
    appear at the hearing and his appeal should be considered abandoned. Mr
    Kennedy said that he did advise the appellant that he should attend the
    hearing due to the concerns raised by the First-tier Tribunal Judge and
    the respondent. He said that he last saw the  appellant  in  July  2014
    when he came to his office  but  he  spoke  to  him  on  the  telephone
    yesterday where he again reiterated his advice that he must attend  the
    appeal hearing.

 6. The appellant did not attend  the  appeal  hearing.  I  find  that  the
    appellant was put on notice that he must demonstrate that he  is  still
    in the country. The appellant was also advised  by  his  solicitors  to
    attend the hearing and failed to do so.

 7. I therefore find that  there  is  no  valid  appeal  before  me  to  be
    determined. The appeal has been abandoned by the appellant  because  he
    has not demonstrated that he is still in  the  United  Kingdom.  If  an
    applicant leaves the United Kingdom, his appeal  is  considered  to  be
    abandoned.


Decision

Appeal dismissed.



Signed by

A Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana
                                                       The 9th of March 2015
