
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52592/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd November 2014                         |On 11th December 2014         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                        Mrs Havabibi Yusufbhai Patel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S A Walker, Counsel instructed by Time Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born on 29th August  1977  and  she
    appeals against the decision of the respondent dated 22nd November 2013
    refusing her application for leave to remain on human  rights  grounds.
    The appellant lodged an FLR(O) on 5th October 2011 on the basis of  her
    private life in the UK.

 2. The appellant first entered the UK on 12th May 2005 from India on a two
    year spouse visa valid until 29th April 2007.  It was recorded  by  the
    Home Office that her previous relationship broken down on 7th  February
    2006 and an application for leave to remain had  been  refused  on  5th
    December 2007.

 3. On 11th August 2008  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pacey  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal to remain in the UK as a victim of domestic violence
    on the papers.  The appellant finally became appeal rights exhausted on
    30th September 2008.

 4. Her human rights Article 8 application was submitted  on  21st  October
    2011 and this was refused on 30th January 2012 with no right of appeal.
     Further consideration was requested by letter dated  22nd  March  2012
    from Time  Solicitors.   The  Secretary  of  State  responded  on  22nd
    November 2013 and the appellant's application was refused with a  right
    of appeal.  Judge of the First-tier Tribunal A W Khan heard the  appeal
    at Birmingham on 7th July 2014 and dismissed the appeal  on  15th  July
    2014.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal.  It was contended  that
    the judge acted unlawfully by finding and attaching adverse  weight  to
    the fact that the appellant did not seek to rely on her marriage  to  a
    British national in her original claim, that is her application of 21st
    October 2014.

 6. Further the judge's reasons for finding that the relationship  was  not
    genuine and subsisting had not been adequately  substantiated  and  the
    judge  had  given  no,  or  inadequate  reasons,  for   rejecting   the
    substantial evidence that was before him.  In particular the judge  had
    not given any reasons for  not  accepting  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant, her husband or her father-in-law.

 7. It was asserted in the application that the judge had  become  confused
    by the law and had erred by  unreasonably  deciding  to  attach  no  or
    little weight to the divorce  certificate.   The  judge  erred  in  his
    findings on Article 8 by departing from Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40
     and had misapplied Edgehill v SSHD Civ 402 and undertook an article  8
    assessment with reference to the law post 9th July 2014.  Permission to
    appeal was granted.

 8. At the hearing Ms Walker submitted that there were numerous letters  of
    support and there had been insufficient reasons for  the  rejection  by
    the judge.  The fact that they were self-serving was a fact shown to be
    an inadequate explanation by the cases of Moyo v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2002] UKIAT 01104 and MJ (Singh v Belgium: Tanveer
    Ahmed unaffected) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 00253.

 9. In response to the grounds Mr Kandola made various  submissions  and  I
    will weave these into my decision in relation to the grounds of appeal.

10. Although the grounds place the argument in slightly different  order  I
    have revised them for clarity.

11. The judge made a comprehensive assessment of the evidence.   There  was
    criticism made of him that he was  not  clear  as  to  whether  he  was
    applying the pre-July 2012 Rules  or  the  post-2012  Rules  but  as  I
    pointed out to Counsel at the hearing, the judge recorded at  paragraph
    19 that  it  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules as she was an overstayer.  Indeed
    Ms Walker accepted that the appellant could meet neither the old  Rules
    nor the new Rules but she submitted that the judge had become  confused
    and erred in his consideration of Article 8.

12. However, the judge reasoned at [23] that 'this leaves  me  to  consider
    the appellant's appeal purely under Article 8 in respect of her  family
    and private life claim.  It is not  that  he  failed  to  consider  her
    family life or her Islamic marriage. This evidence is fully considered.
      It  is  quite  clear  that  the  judge  at  [20]   directed   himself
    appropriately in relation to the five step approach in  Razgar  v  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27 and that the first question to be  assessed  is  whether
    the removal would be  an  interference  of  the  appellant's  right  to
    respect for her private or family life.

13. The judge also makes reference to the last question  under  the  Razgar
    principles and that is whether the interference is  proportionate.   He
    weighed the evidence in this regard.

14. He considered whether she had against this  background  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Mr Abdul Salam Amujee.

15. The judge set out at [22] the context of the appeal; that the appellant
    was not recognised as having a marriage in  English  law  and  he  also
    recorded that she  was  still  not  legally  divorced  from  her  first
    husband.  The evidence set out was that not only had she separated from
    her husband in  2006  (the  previous  determination  was  adopted)  but
    further she claimed that she was a  victim  of  domestic  violence  and
    submitted an application in support of that claim was refused.  It  was
    also dismissed on  appeal.  The  judge  also  clearly  found  that  the
    appellant's appeal rights came to an end on 30th September 2008 and any
    extant leave she might have during the  appeal  process  by  virtue  of
    Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 also came to an end  then  [22].
    The judge therefore recorded that the appellant had no further leave to
    remain in the UK from 30th September 2008 and became an overstayer.

16. It is against this background that the judge assessed  the  appellant's
    claim under Article 8 which is what he did [23].

17. The judge was criticised for his treatment  of  the  letter  from  Time
    Solicitors dated 22nd March 2012 but  he  recorded  at  [23]  that  the
    appellant produced a marriage certificate showing that she  entered  an
    Islamic marriage on 1st January 2012,  but there was  no  reference  to
    this marriage  in  the  letter  of  22nd  March  2012  written  by  the
    appellant's solicitors to the respondent.  This was  despite  the  fact
    that the letter of 22nd March 2012  was  after  the  claimed  marriage.
    Indeed the application was made on the basis of the appellant's private
    life.

18. The judge recorded the evidence, not least the respondent's submissions
    which placed his findings in context.  This  recorded  that  there  had
    also been no mention in the original application form about any form of
    relationship and this was only relayed in further representations after
    the wedding to Mr Amujee.  A relationship with a British  national  was
    referred to in the letter dated 22nd March 2012 (misdated as 2010)  the
    Home Office but the identity of the said spouse was not  disclosed  and
    nor was there any reference to a marriage in that letter.   It  is  for
    the appellant to put forward evidence and to  prove  her  case  on  the
    balance of probabilities.  The fact of an Islamic marriage may still be
    a relevant consideration  to  have  placed  in  the  letter  from  Time
    Solicitors but it was  not.  It was open to the judge to question  this
    and attach the weight he did.

19.  The  judge  looked  at  and  acknowledged  the  letter   and   further
    representations from the solicitors in relation to the relationship but
    considered them in the context of all of the evidence. Thus  the  judge
    had made an assessment against the background of  the  appellant  being
    appeal rights exhausted and having made a further application to remain
    in the UK on the basis of her private  life  without  mention,  at  the
    stage of the application  or  of  the  letter  in  March  2012  of  any
    marriage.  I do not find that the  judge  can  be  criticised  in  this
    respect.  The judge did not overlook  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  It is clear from the papers that the original  application  was
    not made on the basis of family life and a matter for the appellant  to
    address.  At [18] the judge recorded the submissions in which criticism
    was made by the respondent of the appellant for  failing  to  make  her
    original claim on the basis of her relationship.  It was  open  to  the
    appellant's representatives to counter this point at the time  and  the
    judge cannot be criticised for addressing a point which was  raised  in
    court at the time.

20. The judge gives further consideration to the witness statement  of  the
    appellant with regards to her marriage at [23] and further with respect
    to the husband's evidence states:  "Mr  Amujee  does  not  say  in  his
    witness statement when he first met the appellant or give  any  details
    about arrangements in relation to the marriage" [23].  The  judge  took
    into account the relevant evidence.

21. In the next sentence at (24) the judge states:  "There  is  a  lack  of
    satisfactory evidence to show that the parties are  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship."

22. At [24] the judge did acknowledge the wedding  photographs  but  stated
    that there "were no other photographs to show family life".  He  added:
    "There are also greeting cards in the bundle but there is  no  evidence
    as to who the cards were sent to and who were they  from."  He  clearly
    considered that there was a paucity of evidence.

23. The judge albeit briefly did  acknowledge  and  consider  the  numerous
    letters of support from various friends and family  but  did  not  find
    that these satisfied him that  the  appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting marriage because they were "entirely  self-serving".   There
    was criticism of the judge for the use of the term self-serving but  he
    also stated [24] at:

         "The authors of the letters never gave evidence and the only  other
         witnesses who actually did give evidence apart from  the  appellant
         and Mr Amujee were her sister and his father."

24. Even though the point was made in the grounds for permission  that  the
    witnesses were at court, it was for the appellant's  representative  to
    bring forward those witnesses if they wished, rather  than  expect  the
    judge to surmise evidence from the statements as if those witnesses had
    actually given evidence.

25. As stated above the judge did refer to Mr  Amujee's,  (the  appellant's
    said partner) evidence but he also  found  that  the  evidence  of  Mrs
    Nazir, the appellant's sister, was "grossly exaggerated"  [25]  and  he
    did, contrary to the  grounds  for  application  for  permission,  give
    reasons why he rejected her evidence.   He also added that she did  not
    make a formal witness statement but wrote a letter to be found at  page
    144 of the bundle.  This undermined the evidence.  As the judge  points
    out the sister stated that "she was very  happy  in  the  care  of  her
    husband and parents in law" but in fact "The main part  of  the  letter
    relates to Mrs Nazir needing help with her children when  she  is  away
    and that the appellant has fulfilled this  need."   The  judge  clearly
    placed less weight on this  evidence  because  the  emphasis  from  the
    sister was on the help that the appellant gave her and  the  importance
    of her in the use of childcare and the support they received  from  her
    rather than the emphasis on her relationship.

26. I can accept that there was no specific reference to Mr Amujee Senior's
    evidence but in the  context  of  the  whole  the  judge  rejected  the
    evidence that this was a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   Not
    least the judge at [27] cited the details of the  previous  claim  that
    the appellant had made to be a victim of domestic abuse which claim was
    rejected.  Although there may have been an error  in  not  specifically
    identifying the oral evidence, in the face of the remaining  assessment
    I do not accept that this would have materially affected  the  outcome.
    The judge was well aware of the  role  of  Mr  Amujee  Senior  and  the
    relationship asserted between his son and the appellant.

27. The judge noted that there was the previous determination  but  it  was
    not accepted that there was a valid reason  for  the  appellant's  non-
    attendance with her solicitors in London.  The judge further considered
    the appellant's claim that she could not remember signing the notice of
    appeal requesting a paper appeal.  Overall the judge did not accept the
    appellant's credibility in this respect and  found  that  there  was  a
    complete lack of independent evidence to support the appellant's  claim
    that she had been a victim of  domestic  violence.   Indeed  the  judge
    found that even to the date of the second appeal before him  there  was
    no satisfactory medical evidence.  In addition the judge  found  rather
    than in a relationship with the sponsor the appellant was in  a  caring
    role for the parents of Mr Amjuee.  He found the evidence of Mr  Amujee
    that they were in a relationship to be undermined by stating:

         "The letter also stated that the appellant was providing  care  for
         her  disabled  parents-in-law  which  included  helping  them  with
         activities of daily living and if this appeal  was  not  successful
         she would no longer be able to provide this care and thus her wider
         family would be directly affected.  This lends further  support  to
         the fact that the appellant is in essence looking after Mr Amujee's
         parents."

28. The judge then draws to a  conclusion,  on  a  recitation  of  all  the
    evidence,  in [29] that the appellant decided that she would  not  wish
    to return to India and decided to enter into a contrived marriage  with
    someone else in order to remain in the UK.

29. I find that the reference at paragraph 26 in relation  to  the  divorce
    document merely refers  to  a  further  disbelief  of  the  appellant's
    credibility whereby she stated that she was not asked  to  produce  her
    divorce certificate.  Nonetheless I find that  this  criticism  of  the
    judge's reference to the Sharia divorce does not assist the appellant's
    case.  On the one hand  it  was  not  produced  at  the  hearing  until
    requested by the judge who was then criticised for placing no weight on
    it.

30. What is clear is that  the  judge  found  that  she  had  not  produced
    evidence that she was divorced under English law by  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  The fact is that the appellant must prove the genuineness  of
    her present relationship which the judge did not accept in the light of
    all the circumstances.  This was not the  only  fact  which  the  judge
    found which weighed against the appellant.

31. In sum the judge assessed and examined the credibility of the appellant
    as a whole in relation to her first marriage and rejected  the  claimed
    facts.

32. Nevertheless, the judge at paragraph 30 of the determination went on to
    state that:

         "Even if I am wrong that the appellant is  not  in  a  genuine  and
         subsisting relationship  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  her  from
         returning to India and making an application in the proper way  for
         an entry clearance certificate to join Mr Amujee in the UK."

33. The judge noted VW (Uganda) and AB (Somalia) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  5
    and noted the ratio of Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40 which "called a halt to
    the false logic of there being relatively little hardship  in  breaking
    up a family by removal" but the judge then  stated  "it  would  not  be
    unreasonable to expect her to return and regularise her position rather
    than jump the queue".

34. However the question is whether the decision is  proportionate  to  the
    legitimate aim and the judge clearly did not  lean  to  the  view  that
    there  was  something  unreasonable  in  expecting  the  appellant   to
    undertake an application from abroad.  The judge had looked at  all  of
    the facts and looked at  the  facts  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    husband and the family and decided that interference was justified.  He
    found that the family and parents could care for themselves.  The judge
    had recorded that the appellant had been in the UK unlawfully  and  had
    made previous unmeritorious claims.  The judgment of  Kotecha  (on  the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2011]
    EWHC 2070 (Admin) confirmed that the test was not  one  of  insuperable
    difficulties but the  need  for  a  balanced  judgment  of  what  could
    reasonably be expected in the light of the material facts.   The  judge
    found that the appellant had contacts in India and indeed at  paragraph
    32 found that:

         "The fact of the matter is that the appellant is in regular contact
         with her mother, brother and sister in India and there is no reason
         why she could not return and  go  and  live  with  them.   She  was
         previously working as a religious teacher in India as evidenced  by
         documents in the bundle."

35. He found that she would have no difficulty whatsoever in readjusting to
    life in India in relation to her private life and that she displayed  a
    degree of independence; indeed at [25] the judge found that she had

         "been very busy in conducting herself in various different ways  in
         relation to her social, family and religious life including looking
         after her parents-in-law on account of their ill health as well  as
         having taken the time to improve her education  and  learn  English
         and looking after other people's children."

36. The judge in his decision did not expect a British  national  would  be
    expected to leave the UK but concluded that the appellant could  return
    to make an application from abroad if she so wished in other words that
    the interference  with  the  family  life,  in  the  circumstances  was
    justified. There was no indication from this that either the  appellant
    or her husband would have difficulty in  her  returning  to  India  and
    making an application to return and he could by choice, if  he  wished,
    accompany the appellant when making the application from abroad.

37. This is not a case such as in Chikwamba where the  appellant  would  be
    returning to unpalatable  conditions.   The  judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant still had family in India. There is no  indication  that  the
    judge departed from the reasoning in Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11  which
    confirms

         'In an article 8 case where this question is reached, the  ultimate
         question for the appellate immigration  authority  is  whether  the
         refusal of leave to enter or remain,  in  circumstances  where  the
         life of the family cannot reasonably  be  expected  to  be  enjoyed
         elsewhere, taking full account of all  considerations  weighing  in
         favour of the refusal, prejudices the family life of the  applicant
         in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount  to  a  breach  of  the
         fundamental right protected by article 8. If  the  answer  to  this
         question is affirmative, the refusal is unlawful and the  authority
         must so decide. It is not necessary that the appellate  immigration
         authority, directing itself  along  the  lines  indicated  in  this
         opinion, need ask in addition whether the  case  meets  a  test  of
         exceptionality.

38. The judge identified [30]  that there were other members of the  family
    who could give support to Mr and Mrs Amujee senior in the UK  and  took
    into account the affect on their lives Beoku Betts v SSHD  [2008]  UKHL
    39.  Although children are not a requirement for the application of the
    principle in Chikwamba the judge found that  the  elderly  parents  for
    whom she was caring could continue their lives with the  assistance  of
    their own family and as Kotecha states:

         "The question in these cases, as in all Article 8 cases, is whether
         the interference which will flow to the family life of the claimant
         and  his  or  her  family  members  from  removal  is  in  all  the
         circumstances proportionate."

39. On a reading of the determination as a whole the  judge  clearly  found
    that it was.  In Chikwamba factors such as the immigration  history  of
    the appellant and the fact  that  the  wait  would  be  temporary  were
    considerations.  Here the appellant had made a previous application  to
    remain in the UK regarding a previous relationship which  was  rejected
    (albeit on grounds of domestic  abuse).   The  appellant  was  also  an
    overstayer.

40. I therefore find that there is no error of law  in  this  determination
    and the decision shall stand.



Signed        Date  6th December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


