
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52901/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 8 January 2015                 |On 15 January 2015                |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             TIMOTHEW AKINBOBOYE
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr K Akomolede, Nathan Aaron, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as the Applicant, is a citizen  of
    Nigeria whose date of birth is given as 18 April  1989.   On  24  April
    2009 he entered into a marriage by proxy conducted in Nigeria  with  Ms
    Marie Misa, a French citizen said to be exercising Treaty rights in the
    United Kingdom.

 2. On 20 May 2013 the Applicant applied for a residence card on the  basis
    of his  marriage  under  Regulation  7  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as amended (the 2006 Regs.).

 3. On 30 November 2013 the Respondent (the SSHD) refused the  application.
    She stated that an individual named Timothy Olawaseun Akinboboye  whose
    date of birth was given as 18 April 1986 had been issued with a student
    visa on 30 August 2004 as disclosed by  the  Applicant's  passport  and
    considered that he and the Applicant were one and the same person.  The
    Respondent noted the Applicant had previously used  the  name  of  Abel
    Solomon  of  Ethiopian  nationality  and  referred   to   two   earlier
    applications for residence cards under  the  2006  Regs.  made  by  the
    Applicant which had been refused.

 4. The Applicant and Ms Misa had been interviewed and  the  SSHD  noted  a
    number of material discrepancies  in  their  answers.   The  SSHD  also
    considered the Nigerian proxy marriage had not been properly registered
    in accordance with Nigerian national law. The SSHD went on to  consider
    the application under Regulation 8 of  the  2006  Regs.,  treating  the
    Applicant as claiming to be the unmarried partner of Ms Misa.

 5. On 12 December 2013 Notice of Appeal was lodged under Regulation 26  of
    the 2006 Regs. and Section  82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The Grounds of Appeal asserted  the  proxy
    marriage was valid under Nigerian law and that a failure to register it
    under Nigerian law did not invalidate it.  The Applicant  and  Ms  Misa
    were in a subsisting and durable relationship.   The  Applicant  denied
    ever using another identity for the purpose of  facilitating  entry  to
    the United Kingdom. The grounds also made a claim under  Article  8  of
    the European Convention.

The First-tier Tribunal's Determination

 6. By a determination promulgated on 8 October 2014 Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Griffith referred to the determination in  Kareem  (Proxy
    Marriages - EU  Law)  [2014]  UKUT  24.   She  was  not  satisfied  the
    Applicant had shown his proxy marriage was recognised  as  valid  under
    United Kingdom law and went on to consider the Applicant's claim as  an
    unmarried partner under  Regulation  8  of  the  2006  Regs.   She  was
    satisfied the Applicant and Ms Misa  were  in  a  durable  relationship
    which had subsisted for a number of years and allowed the appeal  under
    Regulation 8(5).

 7. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the basis the Judge  had  erred
    in law because she had not taken  account  of  Regulation  17(4)  which
    reserves to the SSHD a discretion whether to issue a residence card  to
    a person found to be an extended family member under Regulation 8.

 8. On 25 November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal T R P Hollingworth
    granted permission to appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. The Applicant lodged a response under Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as amended.  He opposed the application for
    permission to appeal, asserting that the grounds  for  permission  were
    nothing more than a disagreement with the First-tier Tribunal Judge and
    reiterating that the application was originally made by  the  Applicant
    as the husband of  an  EEA  national  exercising  Treaty  rights  under
    Regulation 7 of the 2006 Regs.

10. The Applicant and his wife attended the hearing.  He pointed  out  that
    the grounds for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  were  based
    exclusively on the Judge's failure to consider  Regulation  17(4).   Mr
    Akomolede quite rightly accepted that the  point  was  unarguable.   Mr
    Melvin raised again the issue of  the  durability  of  the  Applicant's
    relationship with Ms Misa and the lack of evidence as to his  entry  to
    the United Kingdom.  Mr Akomolede pointed out that the Judge had  found
    the Applicant credible.

Findings and Consideration

11. The Applicant had accepted that the Judge had erred in law  in  failing
    to take account of Regulation 17(4).  I find  this  to  be  a  material
    error of law.  I noted there was no  cross-appeal  from  the  Applicant
    only the Procedure Rule 24 response already mentioned.

12. In the circumstances the determination must be set aside insofar as the
    Judge failed to remit the matter to the SSHD to consider  the  exercise
    of discretion in favour of the Applicant following the Judge's findings
    about the nature and durability  of  his  relationship  with  Ms  Misa.
    Consequently, I remit the appeal to the Secretary of State to  consider
    in relation to Regulation 17(4) in the light of the Judge's findings of
    fact.

Anonymity

13.  There was no request for an  anonymity  order.  Having  considered  the
    papers in the Tribunal file and heard the appeal, I find that there  is
    no need for such an order.

Notice of Decision

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law
    insofar as it failed to take account of the  provisions  of  Regulation
    17(4) of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006 as amended.


    The matter is remitted to  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  the
    exercise of her discretion under Regulation 17(4) in the light  of  the
    Judge's findings of fact.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 14. i. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal of the Applicant has been allowed in part and I  have  considered
whether a fee award should  be  made.   Having  regard  to  the  information
available to the SSHD at the time her decision was made, I do  not  find  it
appropriate to make a fee award in favour of the Applicant.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 14. i. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

