

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/46843/2013
                                                               IA/52631/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2nd February 2015                          |On 10th March 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                         KORONCHIGE MUDITHA DE SILVA
                           DENETH SURANGA MALLAWA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Dr Mynott, instructed by Jackson and Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety on 28th October 2014 and Mr Diwyncz on
                    2nd February 2014, Senior Home Office Presenting
                    Officers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Following a hearing on 28th October 2014 I found an error of law in
         the First-tier Tribunal decision dismissing the appellants'  appeal
         against a decision refusing them leave  to  remain  and  against  a
         decision to remove them pursuant  to  s47  Immigration  Asylum  and
         Nationality Act 2006, in the following terms:


          i. Mrs De Silva sought indefinite leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1
             (General) Migrant. Mr Mallawa, her husband is her dependant as
             are her two children born 2005 and 2007. Her  application  was
             refused by the respondent (and her dependants refused in line)
             under paragraph 245CD (c) and (d) and a decision to remove her
             and her dependants was made in accordance with s47 Immigration
             Asylum and Nationality Act 2007. She was served  with  a  s120
             Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  notice.  The
             reasons for the decision were:


             1. She had not been continuously lawfully resident  in  the  UK
                for a period of five years, her residence being broken by  a
                period of five months when she was unlawfully in the UK.
             2. She had not  presented  evidence  that  her  accountant  who
                provided details  of  her  earnings  was  a  member  of  the
                requisite specified bodies; that she did not qualify for any
                points on the basis of her age;  she  failed  to  score  the
                minimum 75 points required.
             3. She had not made an application for leave to remain  on  the
                basis  of  her  family  and/or  private  life  and  thus  no
                consideration was given by the respondent to Appendix FM  or
                paragraph 276ADE
             4. The respondent considered s55  UK  Borders  Citizenship  and
                Immigration Act 2009 and concluded that the  children  could
                reasonably be expected to return to Sri Lanka with her.
             5. The SSHD considered whether  there  were  any  circumstances
                such as to allow her to  remain  exceptionally  outside  the
                Rules and concluded that considering her circumstances as  a
                whole there  were  no  factors  sufficiently  compelling  or
                compassionate  to  warrant  granting  any  period  of  leave
                outside the Rules.


         ii. The appellant appealed on the grounds that she had established
             a private and family life in the UK; her  and  her  dependants
             removal would be unlawful as  it  was  incompatible  with  her
             rights under the ECHR; she had no  ties  with  Sri  Lanka  and
             discretion as to the qualifying period for  settlement  should
             have been exercised differently. She  did  not  challenge  the
             decision under  the  Rules  other  than  by  reference  to  an
             incorrect use of discretion.


        iii. The First-tier Tribunal judge found, as was  conceded  by  the
             appellant's representative, that  the  appellant's  accountant
             had not provided evidence with the application that he  was  a
             member of an approved body. As a  PBS  application  the  judge
             found that the appellant did not meet the requirements of  the
             Rules at the date of application and thus she could  not  meet
             them now, even with the submission of evidence to that  effect
             for the appeal. The judge also went on to consider the removal
             decision on the basis that he was not entitled to take account
             of post decision evidence. He addressed the length of time the
             appellant had been in the UK both lawfully and unlawfully, her
             private life, and s55 and concluded there  were  not  arguably
             good grounds for granting leave outside the Rules.


         iv. Permission to appeal was sought and  granted  on  the  grounds
             that it was arguable:


             1. That the calculation of the period of residence in the UK by
                the judge was incorrect and she had been lawfully present in
                the UK for a period of five years  when  taking  account  of
                various periods of overstay are permitted.
             2. That the judge erred in holding that the appeal against  the
                decision to remove could only be determined by reference  to
                the decision  to  refuse  leave  to  remain  and  thus  post
                decision evidence could not be considered.
             3. That the judge  erred  in  his  consideration  of  paragraph
                276ADE by taking account of a break in  the  eldest  child's
                residence in  the  UK  which  had  not  been  taken  by  the
                respondent.
             4. Had failed to give proper consideration to s55 issues.
             5. Erred in his consideration of Article 8;


          v. In so far as the challenge to the decision to refuse to  grant
             indefinite leave in accordance with the Immigration Rules as a
             Tier 1  (Migrant),  that  submission  is  plainly  wrong.  The
             applicant failed  to  submit  the  required  evidence  of  the
             membership of her  accountant  with  the  approved  membership
             body. Dr Mynott conceded that the appellant could not  succeed
             under this ground.


         vi. In so far as the s47 removal decision was concerned Dr  Mynott
             submitted that the fact that the appellant had  now  submitted
             evidence of the compliance by her accountant with the relevant
             regulatory body was a matter that could be taken into account.
             He further submitted that the calculation  of  the  period  of
             lawful residence in the UK was  incorrect  and  this  factored
             into  the  assessment  of  the  appeal  against  the   removal
             decision.


        vii. With regards to the length of residence the following  matters
             were agreed between Dr Mynott and Mr McVeety:


             1. The appellant arrived in the UK and  was  granted  leave  to
                remain as a Tier  1(General)  Migrant  until  13th  November
                2009.
             2. Her first application for further leave to remain  was  made
                on 5th November 2009.
             3. That application was refused on 5th  December  2009  with  a
                right of appeal, which she did not exercise.
             4. She had s3C Immigration Act  1971  leave  until  she  became
                appeal rights exhausted on 19th December 2009
             5. She submitted a further application for leave to remain, and
                paid a further fee, on 29th December 2009.
             6. That application was put in to the UKBA during a period that
                she was an overstayer but  within  the  period  of  28  days
                permitted to be ignored in calculating lawful residence.
             7. That application was refused on 2nd February 2010 without  a
                right of appeal.
             8. She put in a further application and paid a further  fee  on
                12th March 2010, which was granted on 7th April 2010.
             9. Each application was a fresh application, not a continuation
                of previous applications.
            10. She was an overstayer for a period exceeding 28 days between
                the rejection of her second application and  the  submission
                of her third application.
            11. She could not therefore rely on the discounting of  28  days
                unlawful stay on the  UK  when  calculating  the  length  of
                lawful residence.


       viii. Dr Mynott accepted that he could  not  pursue  his  submission
             that the first applicant had been lawfully in the UK  for  the
             period between her arrival in the UK in November 2007 and  the
             expiry of her leave in April 2013.


         ix. Dr Mynott continued to rely on  his  further  grounds  seeking
             permission notably that the children met the  requirements  of
             the Rules because they had been lawfully resident for a period
             in excess of 7  years  and  that  in  such  circumstances  the
             reasonableness of their removal  had  to  be  considered.  The
             First-tier Tribunal had made a finding that the  children  had
             not been lawfully resident for 7 years.


          x. The  children  had  initially  been  resident  in  the  UK  as
             dependants of their father who had leave to remain as a Tier 4
             student. The family had returned to Sri Lanka  and  then  been
             granted entry clearance as dependants of the  first  appellant
             namely as Tier  1  (General)  Migrant  dependants.  Dr  Mynott
             referred me to his skeleton argument produced for  the  First-
             tier Tribunal, which  set  out  that  the  children  had  been
             lawfully resident. He said that there had been no challenge to
             that assertion in his skeleton by the presenting  officer  and
             the First-tier Tribunal judge had not raised any objection  to
             that assertion. Mr McVeety did not dispute this submission.


         xi. In [24] of the determination the judge states


             1. ".....The older child was born in 2005, in the UK, but spent
                a period in Sri Lanka in 2007 between his  father's  student
                visa ending and his mother returning with her HSMP  visa.  I
                am not told how long the family was way from the UK  but  it
                must have been a short period. The younger child was born in
                Liverpool on 11/10/2007 and he and his  mother  returned  to
                the UK on 19/11/2007. I have not been told  what  date  they
                went back to Sri Lanka and neither representative  addressed
                me on this point. There must however have been  a  break  in
                the  period  and  so  neither  child  meets  the  continuous
                residence requirement."


        xii. The difficulty with this conclusion by the judge is  that  had
             he raised it with Dr Mynott and/or the presenting officer  the
             submission would have been made that in calculating continuous
             lawful residence, periods of  absence  can  be  ignored  if  a
             person left within a period of  existing  leave  and  returned
             within a period of existing  leave.  This  includes  where  an
             existing leave is extended  following  an  application  for  a
             variation in that leave  (TT  (Long  residence  -  "continuous
             residence" - interpretation) British Overseas  Citizen  [2008]
             UKAIT 00038).


       xiii. Mr McVeety acknowledged that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
             appeared to have based his conclusion on matters that were not
             put to the parties and of which no notice had been  given  and
             that it was thus possible  that  the  consequent  decision  to
             dismiss the appeals was tainted.


        xiv. One issue is that the respondent when taking her decision  did
             not take a decision on any human  rights  application  because
             one had not been made. Although the respondent made  reference
             to s55 there was no apparent engagement in the  decision  with
             the factual matrix of this family and in any  event  it  seems
             unclear why  the  respondent  considered  s55  yet  failed  to
             consider whether those considerations  were  relevant  to  any
             proportionality decision on the s47 removal decision.


         xv. Dr  Mynott  submitted  that  in  any  event  the  respondent's
             consideration of s55, and  that  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             judge, was inadequate because she and he had failed to  engage
             with the specific factual matrix. Furthermore any findings  on
             s55 could and should have  been  considered  as  part  of  the
             appeal against removal on human rights grounds.


        xvi. It is plain that  the  appellants  appealed  on  human  rights
             grounds against the decision to remove them in accordance with
             s47. The First-tier Tribunal judge has not properly considered
             such an appeal. He reached a  finding  on  the  continuity  of
             residence by the children without having put relevant  matters
             upon which he based that decision to the parties. The  finding
             as to the lawfulness of the children stay in the UK taints the
             whole of the findings on the proportionality of  the  decision
             to remove this family from the UK.


       xvii. I set aside the decision to be remade.


             Conclusions:


             The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its  decision  on  the
             appeal against the decision to remove the  appellants.  I  set
             aside that decision to be remade.


             The First-tier Tribunal did not err in its decision to dismiss
             the appeal against the refusal to grant  indefinite  leave  to
             remain as a Tier 1 (migrant) and dependants in accordance with
             paragraph 245CD (c) and (d) of  the  Immigration  Rules.  That
             decision stands.


             Consequential Directions


             1. I made the following directions on 28th October 2014:
             2. This matter will be listed for 2 hours for further hearing
                on the First Available Date after 8th December 2014 for
                submissions only unless either party notifies the Tribunal 7
                days prior to the hearing date that oral evidence is
                required, with reasons.
             3. The SSHD to disclose all documents relevant to applications
                for entry clearance and applications for leave to remain
                pertinent to the children by 10th November.
             4. Leave to the appellants to make further submissions to the
                respondent on the basis of those documents, if so advised,
                by 24th November 2014; such submissions to be served on the
                presenting officer as well as the UKBA.


         Resumed hearing on 2nd February 2015.


      2. Mr Diwyncz did not contest that the children  of  this  family  had
         accrued 7 years continuous lawful residence in the UK. He  conceded
         that the two appellants have a genuine and subsisting relationship.
         He did not challenge the assertion by Dr Mynott that the family met
         all of the "criteria" in s117B(1) to  (5)  Nationality  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002.  In  so  far  as  s117B(6)  was  concerned  he
         submitted that it was in the best interests of children to be  with
         their parents and it was reasonable for children  to  follow  their
         parents to their country of origin. He said that he was "struggling
         to advance any argument that it is reasonable for the  children  to
         leave the UK".


      3. Dr Mynott drew attention to the fact that the eldest child, who was
         born in the UK and had never left the UK, would be 10 years old  in
         March 2015 and thus eligible for registration as a British Citizen.
         He submitted that the  starting  point  was  the  very  significant
         period of time spent in the UK by the children. The private life of
         the children is well established. To go to Sri Lanka would  involve
         considerable and significant disruption to  their  education;  they
         would be attending school in a language they  did  not  know  where
         English was  taught  as  a  subject  and  was  not  the  medium  of
         instruction; the children are mono-lingual  (English).  The  family
         are  economically  self-sufficient  and  the  business  employs  12
         people. There is an absence of a poor immigration history and their
         time in the UK has not been precarious. Dr  Mynott  submitted  that
         the appeal should be allowed under paragraph 276ADE in addition  to
         being allowed on Article 8 grounds. He submitted that the Secretary
         of  State  had  manifestly  failed  to   show,   in   the   factual
         circumstances of this family, any justification for removal.


    Conclusion


      4. The appellants do not meet the criteria in paragraph  276ADE.  They
         have not resided in the UK for the requisite period  of  time.  The
         children are not appellants before me  and  they  do  not  have  an
         appeal to be determined. It is not  possible  to  allow  an  appeal
         where one does not exist.


      5. There was no challenge to the factual matrix as set out  above.  It
         is plain that the circumstances of the children are  such  that  it
         would not be reasonable for them to leave the UK - their  lives  in
         terms of schooling and socially are in the  UK.  They  know  of  no
         other life than living in the UK. The difficulties they would  face
         adjusting to life in Sri Lanka on a permanent basis would result in
         significant difficulties for them. Although  it  may  be  that  the
         parents would do all they could to reduce  those  difficulties,  it
         remains a fact that it would create very  significant  and  serious
         difficulties for them most particularly with regard to their future
         education. The parents have established a flourishing business  and
         meet the "criteria" in s117B of the 2002 Act.


      6. Applying the 2002 Act it is not in the public  interest  for  these
         appellants and their children to leave the UK.


      7. I allow the appeals on Article 8 grounds.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.


    I set aside the decision


    I re-make the decision in the appeals by allowing  them  on  Article  8
    grounds.




    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005; one  was
    not requested and I see no reason to make one.



         Date 9th March 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

