
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52862/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 31st October 2014                          |On 6th November 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MRs EUN JUNG PARK
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr D Kumu Du Sena, of Liyon Legal Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State I will refer to
       the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. The appellant is a citizen of South Korea. She arrived in the UK  on
       3rd August 2001 as a student.  She  had  leave  to  remain  in  that
       capacity until 11th July 2007. There then followed applications as a
       student and a spouse, and judicial review proceedings.  The  outcome
       of these applications  and  litigation  was  that  she  was  granted
       discretionary leave as a spouse from 24th May 2010 to 23rd May 2013.

    3. On 21st May 2013 she made an application  for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain as a spouse.  On  20th  November  2013  the  application  was
       refused because she could not  meet  the  requirement  at  paragraph
       287(a)(i) of the Immigration Rules  to  have  had  been  granted  an
       extension of stay as a spouse under paragraphs 281  to  286  of  the
       Immigration Rules. The respondent also refused the application under
       Appendix FM Rules relating to  Article  8  ECHR  as  she  said  that
       insufficient evidence had been submitted to show  the  marriage  was
       subsisting;  there  was  no  child  of  the  relationship;  and  the
       appellant could not meet the private life requirements at  paragraph
       276ADE of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  appellant  appealed  this
       decision. Her appeal against the  decision  was  allowed  under  the
       Immigration Rules stating she was entitled to  indefinite  leave  to
       remain by First-tier Tribunal Judge GJ Napthine in  a  determination
       promulgated on the 6th August 2014.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Brunnen on 23rd September 2014 on the basis  that  it  was  arguable
       that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law as Judge Napthine  had
       not explained how the appellant qualified for  indefinite  leave  to
       remain under paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules.

    5. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law.

Submissions - Error of Law

    6. Mr Tarlow relied upon the grounds of appeal.  These  contended  that
       the appellant could not qualify under paragraph 287 because she  had
       not previously been granted leave as required at paragraph 287(a)(i)
       of the Immigration Rules. Judge Napthine had  not  cited  any  other
       paragraph of the Immigration Rules to justify  his  conclusion  that
       the appellant should be granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
       spouse under the Immigration Rules, as set out at  paragraph  20  of
       his determination.

    7. Further  Judge  Napthine  had  erred  in  stating  that  the  normal
       probationary period for a spouse was two years (paragraph 19 of  his
       determination). At appendix FM of the Immigration Rules, paragraph E-
       ILRP 1.3 the probationary period was either 5 or 10 years.

    8. Mr Kumu Du Sena submitted that Judge Napthine had been  fully  aware
       that the appellant had discretionary leave and made his decision  in
       the light of this fact so it should be upheld.

    9. I informed the parties that I was satisfied that Judge Napthine  had
       erred in law for the reasons set out below.

Conclusions - Error of Law

   10. In order to obtain indefinite leave to  remain  in  accordance  with
       paragraph 287 of the Immigration Rules the  appellant  had  to  have
       been previously granted leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  under  the
       Immigration  Rules  in  one  of  the  ways  specified  at  paragraph
       287(a)(i) of the Immigration Rules. Judge Napthine had not specified
       that the appellant had previously held leave as a spouse in  one  of
       these ways, and it was clearly accepted by  her  own  representative
       that she had not been granted leave as a spouse under the provisions
       of the Immigration Rules but outside of them in accordance with  the
       UK's obligations under Article 8 ECHR to give respect to  her  right
       for  family  life.  Judge  Napthine  had  not  referred  to  another
       provision of the  Immigration  Rules  which  would  entitle  her  to
       indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse,  and  the  appellant's
       representative could not point to one which enabled her  to  qualify
       for this status.

   11. As such Judge Napthine erred in  law  when  he  concluded  that  the
       appellant should be granted indefinite leave to remain as  a  spouse
       under the Immigration Rules at paragraph 20 of his determination.

   12. Furthermore he was exceeding his jurisdiction if he found  that  the
       Immigration Rules could be overridden by his  conclusion  that  they
       were perverse in not granting  the  appellant  indefinite  leave  to
       remain after more than two years discretionary leave on the basis of
       Article 8 ECHR as a spouse, as he  would  appear  to  have  done  at
       paragraph 19 of his determination.

   13. I therefore set aside the conclusion  of  Judge  Napthine  that  the
       appellant was entitled to indefinite leave to  remain  as  a  spouse
       under the Immigration Rules but preserved his  findings  as  to  the
       genuine and subsisting nature of the appellant's marriage  as  these
       were not challenged in any way by the respondent.

Submissions - Re-making

   14. Mr Tarlow relied upon  the  refusal  letter,  but  made  no  further
       submissions. He did not have authority to  concede  the  appeal  but
       offered no reasons why it should not be allowed.

   15. Mr Kumu Du Sena submitted that  I  should  allow  the  appeal  under
       Appendix FM. The appellant had only been refused  further  leave  on
       the basis of her marriage by the respondent in  the  refusal  letter
       because it was not accepted that her relationship  was  genuine  and
       subsisting. I had preserved the findings of Judge Napthine that  the
       relationship was genuine and subsisting and so following  the  logic
       of the respondent's refusal letter the appeal should now succeed  on
       this basis.

   16. I informed the parties that I would allow the appeal under  Appendix
       FM of the Immigration Rules.

Conclusion - Re-making

   17. I conclude that the appellant is entitled to limited leave to remain
       as a partner under Appendix FM as when consideration  was  given  to
       this option in the reasons for  refusal  letter  of  the  respondent
       dated 20th November 2013 the only obstacle identified was  that  the
       appellant did not have a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  in
       accordance with E-LTRP 1.7. Judge Napthine found that the  appellant
       and her husband did  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
       having considered the evidence of both parties and documents  before
       him. I adopt these findings at paragraphs  12  to  17  and  19  with
       respect to the genuine and  subsisting  nature  of  the  appellant's
       relationship.

   18. I therefore find that the  appellant  fulfils  the  requirements  of
       Section R-LTRP of Appendix FM as the appellant and her  partner  are
       in the UK; the appellant has made a valid application for leave as a
       partner and she does not fall to be refused under Section S-LTR  and
       she meets all the requirements of E-LTRP.

Decision

   19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law.

   20. The conclusion that the appellant is entitled to indefinite leave to
       remain is set aside but the findings relating  to  the  genuine  and
       subsisting nature of her marriage are preserved.

   21. The appeal is remade allowing the appellant's appeal  in  accordance
       with Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
4th October 2014


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
    I have considered making a fee award and have decided to  make  no  fee
    award as I was not requested to do this and it  appears  that  evidence
    given at the appeal and further documentation provided  at  the  appeal
    stage were key in Judge Napthine concluding that the  appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley
4th October 2014

