
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52681/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15 September 2014                            |On 29 September 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Mrs KHADIJA ASSILA
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:              Mr T Melvin, Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr M Jackson, Counsel instructed by J
                           McCarthy Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the claimant's appeal  against  the
    decision to refuse her application for a residence card on  the  ground
    that she had entered into a marriage of convenience.

 2. The claimant is a national of  Morocco,  whose  date  of  birth  is  17
    November 1986.  She claims to have last entered the United  Kingdom  on
    13 February 2013, and on 15 May 2013 she sought a residence card.   She
    was living at an address in London W1, and her spouse was living at  an
    address in London W2.  The spouse was an Italian national,  Samuele  Di
    Novo, and his date of birth was 19 October 1971.   He  had  been  doing
    agency work through a firm  called  Classified  Personnel  in  Hounslow
    since 23 November 2012.  The marriage  certificate  enclosed  with  the
    application showed they had got married in Hackney on 3 May  2013,  and
    the separate addresses given for  each  of  them  corresponded  to  the
    separate addresses given for each of them in the application form.  She
    enclosed initial rent receipts evidencing that they had  taken  a  four
    month tenancy of bedroom two in an address in  Orchard  Street,  London
    NW8.

 3. The appellant and her husband were summoned for a marriage interview in
    Liverpool, which took place on 24 September 2013.   The  appellant  was
    interviewed in Arabic, and her husband was interviewed in Italian.

 4. On 5 October 2013 the Secretary of State gave her reasons for  refusing
    to issue the appellant with a residence card as confirmation of a right
    to reside in the United Kingdom as the family member of an EEA national
    exercising treaty rights here.  As a result of the marriage  interview,
    there were a  significant  number  of  discrepancies,  inconsistencies,
    irregularities and issues concerning  the  credibility  of  both  their
    accounts  that  led  this  department  to  believe  that  her   claimed
    relationship was not genuine.  The respondent then went on to set out a
    transcript of their interviews.

 5. While it was believed that they both knew each other and were aware  of
    various elements of each other's life, the "above highlighted sections"
    from the marriage interview indicated numerous  occasions  where,  when
    questioned about their relationship, she and her EEA  national  sponsor
    were  unable  to  provide  consistent  answers  when  recalling  basic,
    sometimes fairly recent, moments from their life together.  Some of the
    major  discrepancies  and   issues   highlighted   in   the   interview
    demonstrated, among other things:

       . You and your EEA sponsor's account of what you both did on a  first
         date together was insignificantly different.  All the  details  you
         provided about your first date were notably different  to  that  of
         your EEA sponsor.

       . You and your EEA sponsor gave a different  response  to  where  you
         claimed he proposed to  you.   You  said  he  proposed  to  you  in
         Starbucks, yet your EEA sponsor stated he  proposed  to  you  in  a
         Lebanese restaurant.

       . You and your EEA sponsor gave a completely different account of how
         you both practice your religions.

       . You and your EEA sponsor did not give the same response as to  when
         you last entered the UK.

       . Your EEA sponsor did not know that since arriving in the UK you had
         to report to the UK Border Agency.  This is despite  you  reporting
         as recently as March this  year  when  you  both  claimed  to  have
         started dating each other.

 6. Having taken into account all the above,  it  was  concluded  that  her
    marriage to an EEA national sponsor was one of  convenience  contracted
    purely to circumvent the United Kingdom Immigration Rules.

The Hearing Before, the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Maxwell sitting in the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Richmond Magistrates' Court in June 2014.  Mr  Jackson
    of Counsel appeared on behalf of the claimant,  and  Mr  Chaudri,  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, appeared  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The judge received oral evidence from both the claimant and the
    sponsor.  In his subsequent determination,  he  set  out  her  case  at
    paragraph 5.  She had first come to the UK on 3 June  2012  with  valid
    entry clearance as a Tier 4 Student.  She went back to  Morocco  on  25
    October 2012 and returned on 4 November 2012, but  was  not  officially
    landed due to some discrepancies.  Her passport was seized and she  was
    obliged to report to the police until 3 February 2013 when her passport
    was returned to her.   She  and  her  sponsor  had  first  met  at  the
    beginning of December 2012 at a Starbucks coffee shop.  They met  again
    later in the month, and the claimant asked for her sponsor's  telephone
    number.  Matters developed from there after she got  in  touch  on  New
    Year's Eve.  The couple decided to marry.  This was towards the end  of
    March 2013.  They moved in together after the marriage on 3  May  2013.
    They attained  a  joint  tenancy  at  the  Orchard  Road  address,  and
    thereafter they had had a joint tenancy at an address in Edgware Road.

 8. The judge's findings are set out at paragraph 6 onwards.  In  paragraph
    8, he disagreed with Mr Jackson's submission that  the  respondent  had
    not discharged her evidential burden to  produce  evidence  of  matters
    supporting a suspicion  that  the  marriage  was  one  of  convenience.
    Whilst a number of the claimed discrepancies relied on were clearly ill-
    founded, a limited number of them might be regarded as  reasonable;  in
    particular responses given in respect of the claimant's practice of her
    religion.  In addition, the claimant and the sponsor  knew  each  other
    for a very short period of time before deciding to marry; and there was
    a significant age difference between them as well as a language  bar  -
    they both required interpreters in their mother tongue.

 9. The judge went on to find at paragraph 10 that the documentary evidence
    "although a little confused" indicated a period of cohabitation by  the
    claimant and her sponsor at two different addresses.  At paragraph  11,
    he noted that the Secretary of  State's  representative  chose  not  to
    further explore the private lives of the claimant and her sponsor.   He
    had therefore had to give anxious scrutiny to the interview record,  in
    which some 137 questions were asked of them.  The couple were unable to
    answer a number of personal questions  "relating  one  to  the  other".
    Some of the  concerns  were  frankly  fatuous.   Some  assertions  were
    plainly wrong.  The concerns were based on a difference of phraseology.
     No account seems to have been taken of the fact that both parties were
    giving evidence in his or her own language and their answers were being
    translated by different interpreters.  The judge continued in paragraph
    12:

         Looked at in the round, the answers given  by  each  of  them  were
         largely in accordance one  with  the  other.   The  evidence  given
         before me did not give rise to concerns about the  relationship  as
         between the parties and they came  across  as  credible  witnesses.
         True there is an age gap however this is only about  fifteen  years
         and not so wide, in my judgment, it is to undermine their claim  to
         be in a genuine relationship.

10. He went on to find that the  claimant  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proof, and the reasons given by the Secretary of State did not  justify
    the refusal.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

11. A member of the Specialist Appeals Team sent application for permission
    to appeal on behalf of the Secretary of  State.   The  judge  had  made
    material errors of law in  the  determination  by  failing  to  resolve
    material conflicts, and  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    conclusions on material matters.  While  the  judge  plainly  disagreed
    with some of the points taken by the Secretary of State in the  refusal
    letter, he also clearly accepted that some of them had merit.   Despite
    this, at no point  in  the  determination  did  he  explain  why  these
    discrepancies did not undermine the claimant's claim to be in a genuine
    marriage.  At questions  116  to  118  of  the  interview  record,  the
    claimant stated that while she was a Muslim, she did not pray  at  all.
    Her husband on the other hand claimed that she prayed every day, in the
    bedroom and/or in the kitchen, kneeling on the rug.   This  discrepancy
    fundamentally undermined the claim that the couple had been  cohabiting
    for six months by the date of the interview.  No reasons were given  by
    the judge for his decision not to treat this as fatal to the  claim  of
    cohabitation and a genuine  marriage.   The  same  could  be  said  for
    various other issues raised in the  refusal  letter,  which  the  judge
    neither clearly identified, nor resolved with any reasoning at all.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

12. On 27 July 2014 Judge Lambert granted permission to  appeal,  observing
    that there was no attempt in the short paragraph  12  to  identify  the
    discrepancies  to  which  the  judge  had  referred  in  the   previous
    paragraph.  He found merit in the Secretary of State's contention  that
    the phrase "looked  at  in  the  round"  was  an  inadequate  means  of
    reasoning in an appeal such as this.  The conclusion  reached  was  not
    demonstrably evidence based.  There was therefore an arguable error  of
    law.

The Error of Law Hearing

13. At the hearing before me, Mr Melvin developed the arguments  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal.  Mr Jackson mounted  a  robust  defence  of  the
    judge's determination.  He had reached a conclusion that was reasonably
    open to him on the evidence.  He had applied the  correct  standard  of
    proof, and had directed himself appropriately.




Reasons of Finding an Error of Law

14. There is a stark inconsistency between the position taken by the  judge
    in paragraph 8 and the position taken  by  him  in  paragraph  11.   In
    paragraph 8, he acknowledges that "a limited number" of the  identified
    discrepancies in  the  interview  record  give  rise  to  a  reasonable
    suspicion that the marriage is one of convenience,  in  particular  the
    responses given in respect of the claimant's practice of her  religion.
    When returning to the topic of the interview record  at  paragraph  11,
    the judge focuses exclusively on the other claimed discrepancies relied
    on by the Secretary  of  State,  which  he  has  already  dismissed  in
    paragraph 8 as "clearly ill-founded".  So what he is doing in paragraph
    11 is merely elaborating on this finding.  There is  no  discussion  of
    the limited number of discrepancies  which  he  had  earlier  found  to
    engender reasonable grounds  for  suspicion.   Not  only  is  there  no
    discussion of these discrepancies, but the judge effectively performs a
    volte face.  His conclusion at the beginning of paragraph 12  is  that,
    "looked at in the round", the  answers  given  by  each  of  them  were
    largely in accordance one with the other.  So he is effectively  saying
    that, taken  as  a  whole,  the  interview  record  does  not  engender
    reasonable grounds for suspicion.

15. It is acknowledged in the  refusal  letter  that  the  parties  to  the
    marriage knew various details about  each  other,  and  so  it  is  not
    sufficient for the judge merely to undertake a  quantitative  analysis.
    He also had to  undertake  a  qualitative  analysis,  focusing  on  the
    discrepancies which  he  had  found  to  be  suspicious,  such  as  the
    discrepancy over the claimant's practice of her religion.  While it  is
    going too far to say that the stark discrepancy on this topic was fatal
    to the claim that the parties had genuinely been cohabiting  with  each
    other as husband and wife for a period of six months prior to the  date
    of the interview, it demands an explanation.  It is not enough for  the
    judge to say that the parties came across as credible  witnesses,  when
    there is no indication that they addressed this  discrepancy  (and  any
    others which come within the scope of the judge's finding at  paragraph
    8) in the course of their oral evidence.  The result is the  judge  has
    failed to resolve a material  matter,  and  the  judge  has  failed  to
    explain  why  the  discrepancies  in  the  interview  giving  rise   to
    reasonable suspicion did not outweigh the other evidence which  pointed
    to the marriage being a genuine one, such as the evidence given  before
    him that did not give rise  to  any  concerns  about  the  relationship
    between them.

16. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is vitiated  by  a
    material error of law, such that it should be set aside and remade at a
    de novo hearing.  I consider that the appropriate forum for a  de  novo
    hearing is, as submitted by Mr Melvin, the First-tier Tribunal as  both
    parties have thus far been deprived of a fair hearing in the First-tier
    Tribunal.

Conclusion

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law, such
    that it should be set aside and remade.




Directions

18. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Taylor  House  or
    Richmond Magistrates Court for a de novo hearing, with a time  estimate
    of two hours (Judge Maxwell not compatible).






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
