

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/52360/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 January 2015                            |On 21 January 2015           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                        IMMIGRATION OFFICER, HEATHROW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     JM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither  party  invited
    me to rescind the order and I continue it pursuant to rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).



Introduction

 2. This is an appeal against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge
    Doyle) allowing JM's appeal against the Immigration Officer's  decision
    refusing to grant him leave to enter taken on 11 December 2013.

 3. For convenience, I will refer to the parties hereafter as they appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant, a citizen of Namibia, was born on 13 December 2003.  His
    mother, TR lives in the UK and has indefinite  leave  to  remain.   The
    appellant entered  the  UK  as  a  visitor  in  October  2007  and  his
    subsequent application for leave to remain to settle  with  his  mother
    was unsuccessful.  As a result of that, he returned to Namibia where he
    lived with his grandmother.  An application to settle in  the  UK  made
    from Namibia was refused by the Secretary of State  in  February  2008.
    Finally, on 31 October 2008, the appellant was refused leave  to  enter
    the UK as a visitor.

 5. The current appeal arises out of the appellant's arrival in the  UK  at
    Heathrow Airport on 11 December 2013.  He sought leave to  enter  as  a
    visitor.   He  did  not  have  entry  clearance.   On  that  day,   the
    Immigration Officer at Heathrow refused the appellant leave to enter as
    a visitor and proposed to remove him to  Namibia.   Relying,  in  part,
    upon the appellant's immigration history the  Immigration  Officer  was
    not satisfied that the appellant would leave at the end of his visit.

 6. In refusing the appellant leave to enter, the notice of decision points
    out that the appellant  only  had  a  limited  right  of  appeal  under
    sections 88 and/or 89 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002 as the decision has been taken on the basis that the appellant:

         "Do[es] not have entry clearance valid for the  purpose  for  which
         your application for leave to enter was made."

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In his  grounds  of
    appeal  the  appellant  specifically  relied  upon   the   grounds   in
    s.84(1)(b), (c) and (g) of the 2002 Act namely, race  relations,  human
    rights and Refugee Convention grounds.   That,  as  will  become  clear
    shortly, is consistent with the limited right of  appeal  available  to
    the appellant under s.89(2) of the 2002 Act.  In particular, of course,
    the appellant was relying upon Article 8 and the right to  respect  for
    his private life based on the fact that his mother had ILR in  the  UK,
    his step-father was in the UK as her spouse and his sibling also  lived
    in the UK.

 8. Judge Doyle allowed the appellant's appeal.  He did so  on  two  bases.
    First,  he  was  satisfied  that,  in  fact,  the  appellant  met   the
    requirements of the  visitor  rule,  namely  para  41  of  HC  395  (as
    amended).   Secondly,  Judge  Doyle  concluded  that  the   Immigration
    Officer's decision  was  "not  in  accordance  with  the  law"  as  the
    Immigration Officer had failed to have regard to his duty under s.55 of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and  the  welfare  of
    the appellant who was an 11 year old child.  As regards the appellant's
    reliance upon his human rights, and  in  particular  Article  8,  Judge
    Doyle concluded that there was not a valid appeal before him.

 9. The Immigration Officer sought permission to appeal on the  basis  that
    there was no valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  On 6 October
    2014, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Lever)  granted  the  Immigration
    Officer permission to appeal on that  basis.   Thus,  the  appeal  came
    before me.

10. At the hearing, the appellant was unrepresented but his step-father, SK
    spoke on his behalf.

11. Mr Richards submitted that the Judge was  wrong  to  allow  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on the basis that the decision was "not
    in accordance with the law" as the only  permitted  grounds  of  appeal
    under s.89(2) of the 2002 Act were race  relations,  human  rights  and
    Refugee Convention grounds.  Mr Richards accepted  that  the  appellant
    had relied upon Article 8 in his notice of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, however, he submitted that  nevertheless  the  appellant  had
    only an out of country appeal on that ground because of the  effect  of
    s.92 of the 2002  Act.   Consequently,  he  invited  me  to  allow  the
    Immigration Officer's appeal and substitute a decision that  there  was
    no valid appeal on any basis before the First-tier Tribunal.

Discussion

12. The relevant statutory  provision  which  creates  a  right  of  appeal
    against a decision to refuse an individual leave to enter is set out in
    s.82(1) and (2)(a) of the 2002 Act.  That states as follows:

         "(1)     Where an immigration decision is  made  in  respect  of  a
             person he may appeal to the Tribunal.

          2) In this Part 'immigration decision' means -

             (a) refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom,..."

13. That was the relevant immigration decision made against  the  appellant
    on 11 December 2013.

14. However, by virtue of s.89 of the 2002 Act, in  certain  circumstances,
    the right of appeal against refusal of leave to  enter  is  limited  to
    "bringing" an appeal  on  one  or  more  of  the  grounds  set  out  in
    s.84(1)(b), (c) and (g) which in shorthand, amount to  race  relations,
    human rights and Refugee Convention grounds.

15. So, s.89(2) states that:

         "(1)     A person  may  not  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against
             refusal of leave to enter the United Kingdom unless -

               a) On  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  had  entry
                  clearance, and

               b) The purpose of entry specified in the entry  clearance  is
                  the same as that specified in his application for leave to
                  enter."

16. The appellant did not have entry  clearance  when  he  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom and so s.89(1) applied so that he "may not appeal  under
    section 82(1)".  However sub-section 2 provided for a limited right  of
    appeal as I have already indicated above:

         "(2)     Sub-section (1) does not prevent the bringing of an appeal
             on any or all of the grounds referred to in section  84(1)(b),
             (c ) and (g)."

17. Consequently, and Mr Richards accepted, in this  appeal  the  appellant
    could in principle bring an appeal against  the  Immigration  Officer's
    decision on 11 December 2013 but only on one or more of  the  specified
    grounds, namely race relations, human  rights  and  Refugee  Convention
    grounds.

18.  In  fact,  the  appellant  relied  upon  all  of  these  although,  in
    particular, the substance of his appeal was  under  Article  8  of  the
    ECHR.

19. It is clear to me that when an individual is permitted  to  "bring"  an
    appeal because he has relied on  one  of  the  specified  grounds,  his
    appeal is limited to the grounds relied  upon.   He  cannot  rely  upon
    other grounds set out in s.84 of the 2002 Act,  for  example  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules  (s.84(1)(a))
    or that the decision was "otherwise not in accordance  with  the  law".
    (s.84(1)(e)).  The effect of section 89 when  s.89(2)  allows  for  the
    bringing of an appeal is not to open up an appeal on  any  grounds  but
    only those upon which the individual has the limited  right  of  appeal
    specified in s.89(2).  In my judgement the "bringing of an  appeal"  in
    s.89(2) is not limited to 'commencing' an appeal but also delimits  the
    scope of any appeal properly brought on one or more of those grounds.

20. Even without more, therefore, it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  was  not
    entitled to allow the appellant's appeal on the basis that he  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules or that the Immigration Officer's
    decision was not in accordance with the law.  That  was  not  a  ground
    upon which the appeal could be brought or subsequently maintained.

21. However, there is a further reason  why  the  Judge  erred  in  law  in
    dealing with the appellant's appeal.  That is because even  though  the
    appellant had a right of appeal under s.89(2) on  the  limited  grounds
    specified in s.89(2) he could only bring that appeal  out  of  country.
    He had no in-country right of appeal against the refusal to  grant  him
    leave.  Whether an appeal,  can  be  brought  from  within  the  United
    Kingdom is governed by s.92 of the 2002  Act.    Section  92(1)  states
    that:

         "(1)     A person may not appeal under section 82(1) while he is in
             the United Kingdom unless his appeal is of  a  kind  to  which
             this section applies."

22. Section 92(2) set out a number of immigration  decisions  contained  in
    s.82(2) to which s.92 "applies".  Section 92(2) provides:

         "(2)     This section applies to an appeal against  an  immigration
             decision of a kind specified in section 82(2)(c ),  (d),  (e),
             (f), (ha) and (j)."

23.  Omitted  from  that  list  is  the  immigration  decision  defined  in
    s.82(2)(a), namely a refusal of leave to enter.

24. However, s.92 goes on to recognise a number of situations where an  in-
    country right of appeal exists.  Section  92(3)  deals  with  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom.  It provides as follows:

         "(3)     This section also applies to an appeal against refusal  of
             leave to enter the United Kingdom if -

               a) at the time of the refusal the appellant is in the  United
                  Kingdom, and

               b) on his arrival in the United  Kingdom  the  appellant  had
                  entry clearance."

25.  Sub-sections (3A)-(3D) create a number of exceptions to the in-country
    right of appeal conferred by s.92(3) but  none  are  relevant  to  this
    appeal.

26. The effect of s.92(3) is that, subject to sub-sections (3A)-(3D), there
    is an in-country right of appeal against  refusal  of  leave  to  enter
    where the appellant is in the UK and on  his  arrival  in  the  UK  the
    appellant had entry clearance.  That, obviously, has no application  to
    the appellant as he did not have entry clearance on arrival in the  UK.
    That was the very basis upon which his right of appeal was  limited  by
    s.89.  Consequently, s.92(3) did not  confer  an  in-country  right  of
    appeal against the refusal of leave to enter made  in  respect  of  the
    appellant even on the limited grounds set out in s.89(2).

27. The remaining provision in s.92 potentially relevant to  the  appellant
    is in s.92(4) which states that:

         "(4)      This  section  also  applies  to  an  appeal  against  an
             immigration decision if the appellant -

               a) has made an asylum claim, or a human rights  claim,  while
                  in the United Kingdom, ..."

28. In this appeal, the appellant raised for the first time  the  issue  of
    human rights in his notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  In  R
    (Nirula) and First-tier Tribunal (Asylum  and  Immigration  Chamber)  v
    SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 1436, the Court of Appeal held that a  person  who
    raised human rights for the first time in a notice  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal did not  fall  within  s.92(4)(a).   The  Court  of
    Appeal noted the definition of a "human rights claim" in s.113  of  the
    2002 Act as:

         "A claim made by a person to the Secretary of  State...at  a  place
         designated by the Secretary of State".

29. The Court of Appeal concluded that the reliance by an individual on his
    human rights in a notice of appeal was not a claim  "made  ...  to  the
    Secretary  of  State"  but  rather  to  the  Tribunal.   Further,   the
    requirement that  the  individual  "has  made"  a  human  rights  claim
    requires that the claim must proceed any appeal  which  meant  that  it
    must have been made before the institution of an appeal.

30. It follows, therefore, that when the appellant raised Article 8for  the
    first time in the notice of appeal it could not be said  that  he  "has
    made ... a human rights claim" whilst in the UK such that by virtue  of
    s.92(4)(a) his limited right of appeal could be exercised whilst he was
    in the UK rather than out of country.

31. That was, in effect, the reasoning that led Judge Doyle at  para  15(d)
    and (e) to conclude that there was "not a valid appeal in terms of  the
    1950 Convention before me".  In fact, there was not a valid  appeal  on
    any basis before Judge Doyle as the appellant could only exercise  that
    right of appeal out of country  on  the  limited  grounds  set  out  in
    s.89(2).

Decision

32. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to  hear
    the appellant's appeal.

33. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow the appellant's
    appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  the  basis  that   the
    Immigration Officer's decision was not in accordance with the law.

34. I substitute a decision that there was no valid appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Date: 20 January 2015


To the Respondent
Fee Award

As a result of my decision that there was no valid appeal before the First-
tier Tribunal, no fee award can be made.




                               Signed


                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                               Date: 20 January 2015
