
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/52701/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 2 July 2014                                  |On 7 November 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             HAJI MUHAMMAD DAUD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Hussain, instructed by Hussain Immigration Law
Ltd


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Haji Muhammad Daud, was born on 20 April 1954 and is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  I shall hereafter refer to the respondent as
    the appellant and to the Secretary of State as the respondent (as  they
    were respectively before the First-tier Tribunal).

 2. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Henderson)
    against a decision of the respondent dated 25  November  2013  refusing
    leave to remain and to give directions for his removal under  paragraph
    10A of Schedule 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.  The First-tier Tribunal
    allowed his appeal on human  rights  grounds  (Article  8  ECHR).   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. The appellant's application was considered under the Immigration Rules,
    in particular Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE.   The  appellant  had
    previously appealed against a decision of the respondent to refuse  him
    further leave to remain and he had been found by an  Immigration  Judge
    to be a British citizen.  That error (as both parties  accept  it  was)
    was "later rectified."  As Judge Henderson  notes  [2],  the  appellant
    being notified by the UK Visa Immigration  and  Nationality  Department
    that he was not entitled to British citizenship.  At that time, as now,
    the appellant's wife (Zojan) settled in the United Kingdom.

 4. Judge Henderson noted that the appellant and  his  wife  are  the  sole
    carers of their British grandchild, MU who was aged  17  years  at  the
    date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  MU has severe  mental  health
    difficulties and has an educational age of approximately 5 years.   His
    mother has (as Judge Henderson  noted)  "abdicated  responsibility  and
    gone to Spain to start a new  life  with  her  current  husband."   The
    appellant and his wife have lived with their grandchild  for  a  little
    less than four years.

 5. Having dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules,  the  judge
    proceeded to consider Article 8 ECHR and allowed the appeal.  It is the
    taking of that step in the proceedings which the grounds of appeal  now
    challenge.  The sole ground of appeal reads as follows:

         "At paragraph 40 of the  determination,  the  judge  concluded  the
         appellant did not qualify for leave under the Immigration Rules and
         went on to consider the appellant's family and private  life  under
         Article 8 ECHR.  This approach is wrong in law.  Only if  there  is
         an arguable case that there are good grounds for granting leave  to
         remain outside the Rules is it necessary for Article 8 purposes  to
         go on to consider whether there are  compelling  circumstances  not
         sufficiently recognised under the Rules to  require  the  grant  of
         such leave (Gulshan (Article 8-new rules-correct  approach)  [2013]
         UKUT 640 (IAC) ) whilst the judge referred to Gulshan he (sic)  did
         not adopt the correct approach as set out in that case."

 6. It is indeed the case that the judge referred to Gulshan and  a  number
    of other items of jurisprudence at [40].  She noted that,

         "The final cases [including Gulshan and Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  ]
         confirm  the  approach  of  the  Upper  Tribunal   but   with   the
         modification that if after fully considering family or private life
         under the Rules and finding that a claim fails  then  it  would  be
         sufficient to say that and it would not be necessary to have to  go
         on and consider the case separately from the Rules."

    At [41], and without making  any  formal  reference  to  compelling  or
    exceptional circumstances, Judge Henderson proceeded to  consider  "the
    appellant's family life outside the Immigration Rules  ..."   [At  44],
    she

         "considered that the facts of this  case  are  highly  unusual  and
         exceptional.  The primary  reason  for  the  appellant  wishing  to
         remain here is to be with his wife and his grandson.  ... if I  was
         simply considering the couple as a  unit  then  it  is  clear  that
         removal would be proportionate."

    She found, however, that MU had "physical  and  emotional  needs  which
    cannot be satisfied by 'quick fix' alternatives such as living with his
    uncle."  She also  found  MU  to  be  a  vulnerable  adult  whose  best
    interests needed be considered [46].  "It was down to the appellant and
    his wife to provide a secure and stable home life for MU, an adult  who
    cannot support himself."  MU himself told Judge Henderson that  he  was
    frightened and worried about  his  grandparents  having  to  return  to
    Pakistan.  The judge considered that the appellant and his wife met the
    physical and daily  care  needs  of  MU  but  also  provided  him  with
    "emotional security."  The judge also considered factors which were not
    favourable to the appellant's appeal; she did not accept that there was
    an absence of ties to Pakistan [50] and also that the  appellant's  son
    had the means to support them in Pakistan, if that were necessary.  She
    concluded that,

         "[MU] has a stable family and private life here  in  spite  of  his
         history and has made the decision to go  and  live  in  Spain.   In
         conclusion I find that there are a range of unusual and  compelling
         circumstances which make removal  of  the  appellant  unjustifiably
         harsh."

 7. Care should be exercised  in  applying  the  principles  enunciated  in
    Gulshan.   Gulshan  does  not  provide  a  bright  line  "test"   which
    appellants must pass before the possibility of the appeal being allowed
    under Article 8 ECHR becomes available  to  them.   The  central  point
    established by Gulshan is that the Immigration Rules now achieve in the
    great majority of cases,  a  paradigm  for  the  proper  assessment  of
    Article 8 taking into account the public interest  and  Strassburg  and
    domestic jurisprudence.  If the facts of an appeal fall squarely within
    the circumstances anticipated by the Immigration Rules, nothing can  be
    achieved by, in addition, carrying out an  Article  8  ECHR  assessment
    outside the Rules; such an assessment would be nugatory.   The  problem
    for the respondent is that the grounds of appeal do nothing  more  than
    assert that the judge has erred in  law  such  that  her  determination
    should be set  aside  because  she  has  not  found,  as  part  of  the
    application  of  some  Gulshan  "test,"  that  there  were   especially
    compelling  circumstances  in  the  case.   In  the  passages  of   the
    determination which I have quoted above, it is  abundantly  clear  that
    the judge did find that there were  "highly  unusual  and  exceptional"
    circumstances.  In the light  of  those  very  clear  findings,  it  is
    frankly not conceivable that, even if she had been obliged to  consider
    a Gulshan "test," she would  have  found  that  no  such  circumstances
    existed justifying an Article 8 ECHR assessment.  I am  satisfied  that
    she was fully aware of the  ratio  in  Gulshan;  indeed,  at  [40]  she
    summarises it in her own words.  And whilst it would have been  helpful
    if she had said in terms that there  were  compelling  and  exceptional
    circumstances justifying an Article 8 assessment, her failure to do  so
    is not fatal to her determination.  That may not,  however,  have  been
    the case had she found that the circumstances of  this  appellant  fell
    firmly and exclusively within the provisions of the Immigration  Rules.
    However, she did not do so.  She clearly believed that MU's  needs  and
    rights were such that Article 8 was engaged.  I find that she  did  not
    err in law by proceeding with the Article 8 ECHR analysis.

 8. Having reached that finding, there is nothing left in  the  grounds  of
    appeal which justifies  further  consideration.   The  grounds  do  not
    assert that there is anything wrong  with  the  judge's  assessment  of
    Article 8 outside the Rules nor, indeed, is it even asserted  that  the
    judge should not have found the facts of this appeal to be exceptional.
     I have to say that I cannot fault the judge's detailed and even-handed
    assessment of the  evidence  and  can  find  no  reason  whatsoever  to
    interfere with her conclusion that was clearly available  to  her  upon
    the evidence.  I find that the judge did not err in law such  that  her
    determination falls to be set aside.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 31 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


