

                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/52842/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated   |
|On May 30, 2014                      |On June 2, 2014             |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                          MR GERISHON KATANA KENGA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Saunders (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born April 15, 1984, is a citizen of Kenya. On June  19,
    2013 he applied for residence card based  on  his  marriage  to  Marina
    Constantin on August 25, 2012. The respondent refused  his  application
    on November 20, 2013 on the grounds she was not satisfied the appellant
    was a family member and because the appellant had failed to show Marina
    was a qualified person under Regulation 6 of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (hereinafter referred to  as  the  2006
    Regulations).

 2. On December 12, 2013 the appellant appealed under section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and under Regulation 26 of
    the 2006 Regulations.

 3. The matter was listed as a paper case before Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Grimmett (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ")  on  February
    20, 2014 and in a determination promulgated on February  25,  2014  she
    dismissed his appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision on March 4,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cruthers on  the
    basis the FtTJ may have erred having  regard  to  all  of  the  grounds
    combined.

 5. The matter was listed before me on the above date and the appellant and
    Ms Constantin were in attendance.

    SUBMISSIONS

 6. The appellant relied on his typed grounds of appeal and submitted  that
    the FtTJ had failed to have regard to his letter of December 5, 2013 in
    which he set out all of his circumstances and in addition she failed to
    consider  the  various  letters  of  support   that   confirmed   their
    relationship.  He  also  submitted  that  the  FtTJ  had   erred   when
    considering Regulation 6(2) because sub-section  (iii)  made  it  clear
    that if the EEA person had been unemployed for more than six months but
    could show he/she had been seeking employment and had a genuine  chance
    of being engaged then she was a jobseeker under Regulation 6(1)(a). The
    FtTj erred because she only considered the  position  under  Regulation
    6(2)(ii)  and  failed  to  consider  the  position   under   Regulation
    6(2)(iii).

 7. Mr Saunders initially submitted that the FtTJ considered  the  evidence
    and made findings open to her at paragraph  [7]  of  her  determination
    regarding the issue of whether  the  appellant  was  a  family  member.
    However, after hearing  the  submissions  of  the  appellant  and  upon
    further consideration of the appellant's original  bundle  he  accepted
    that the FtTJ had failed to assess all of the  available  evidence  and
    her finding that the appellant was not a family member  was  inadequate
    based on the evidence. He also  accepted  that  the  FtTJ  should  have
    considered Ms Constantin's evidence that  she  had  attempted  to  gain
    employment.





    ERROR OF LAW FINDING

 8. The appellant provided a letter on December 5,  2013  and  this  letter
    addressed the respondent's concerns and he also provided  five  letters
    from various people confirming the relationship including a letter from
    Ms Constantin. There was no evidence that the FtTJ had  considered  any
    of this evidence.

 9. There was also evidence Ms Constantin had been seeking  employment  and
    had been offered a job albeit she turned it down due  to  the  distance
    involved.  The  FtTJ  should  have  considered  this   evidence   under
    Regulation 6(2). Regulation 6(2)(iii) is an alternative  to  Regulation
    6(2)(ii).

10. In light of my findings above and taking into account the  observations
    from both the appellant and Mr Saunders I am  satisfied  there  was  an
    error in law.

    FACTORS TO CONSIDER FOR REMAKING OF THE DECISION

11. Mr Saunders did not require either the appellant or  Ms  Constantin  to
    give evidence. In IS (marriages of  convenience)  Serbia  [2008]  UKAIT
    00031 the Tribunal held that the burden of proving that a  marriage  is
    not a "marriage of convenience" for the purposes of the EEA Regulations
    rests on the appellant but he is not required to discharge  it  in  the
    absence of evidence of matters supporting a suspicion that the marriage
    is one of convenience (i.e.  there  is  an  evidential  burden  on  the
    Respondent). In Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of  convenience)
    Greece [2012] UKUT 00038(IAC) the Tribunal held that there is no burden
    at the outset of an application on a claimant  to  demonstrate  that  a
    marriage to an EEA national is not one of convenience.

12. There was evidence before me that the parties were married in the  form
    of a marriage certificate. There were two letters  from  the  appellant
    and Ms Constantin. Mr Saunders did not require them  to  give  evidence
    even though they were present at the hearing. In  the  original  bundle
    there was evidence from four other witnesses about the extent of  their
    relationship.

13. I was satisfied this was not a marriage of convenience and I accept the
    written evidence of both the appellant and Ms  Constantin  about  their
    claim to be married.

14. I find the appellant is a family member for the purposes  of  the  2006
    Regulations.

15. This is an EEA application and as an in-country application it  is  not
    caught by s 85(5) of the 2002 Act. I had  evidence  before  me  of  the
    appellant's wife's attempts to gain employment. Some of  this  evidence
    was also before the FtTJ.

16. I accept the appellant's wife comes within Regulation 6(2)(iii) as  she
    has a genuine chance of employment and has been seeking  employment.  I
    understand she has now been offered employment.

17. The appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  him
    a  residence  card  is  therefore  allowed  because  he  satisfied  the
    requirements of Regulation 17 of the 2006 Regulations.

    DECISION

18. There was a material error of law. I set aside the FtTJ's decision.


19. I allow the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

20. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no fee award because I have allowed the appeal based on the evidence
that was submitted after the respondent's refusal letter.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
