

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/53620/2013
                                                               IA/53626/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2 February 2015                           |On: 9 March 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana

                                   Between

                              MR SANDEEP KUMAR
                              MRS SHARUTI SHAMA
                      (anonymity directions not made).
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Dogra, instructed by Jade Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr R Peterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.      This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department
   ("SSHD") from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. However, for the
   sake of convenience I shall continue to refer to parties as they were
   referred to at the First-tier Tribunal.


2.      The appellants are citizens of India born on  16  June  1984  and  4
   February  1988.  They  are  husband  and  wife.   The  first  appellant's
   application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2 Migrant
   was refused and a decision was made to remove both  appellants  from  the
   United Kingdom by way of Directions under section 47 of the  Immigration,
   Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.


3.      Permission to appeal was refused on 11 September 2014 by  first-tier
   Tribunal Judge Mark Davies. However, permission to appeal was granted  by
   Judge R Keckic on 15 December 2014 stating that it was arguable that  the
   Judge misdirected himself by applying Tier 4 fairness principle to Tier 2
   cases without giving any reason for why they should apply.  It  was  also
   arguable that given that there was no requirement of sponsorship  at  the
   date of the decision and the Judge failed to identify how the  respondent
   had been unfair to the appellant given that the appellant  was  aware  of
   the raid on the premises where he  worked  some  10  days  prior  to  his
   application.


       First-tier Tribunal's Findings


4.      At paragraph 22- 27 of the determination, Judge Norton  Taylor  gave
   reasons as to why he thinks that the fairness  principle  which  commonly
   apply to Tier 4 applications can apply to  Tier  2  cases.  There  is  no
   recognised prohibition  in  applying  fairness  to  Tier  2  applications
   because the common law duty of fairness is applicable to all matters.


5.      The Judge stated that there is a common law duty  of  fairness  that
   can potentially apply to the decision-making process of  the  respondent.
   "The Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine issues  of  fairness  and  to
   allow an appeal on these bases wherever appropriate. Second,  whether  or
   not a duty of fairness does indeed bite in a particular case will  depend
   on the circumstances pertaining to that case. Third as far as I can  see,
   all the fairness cases have  involved  students  and  the  revocation  of
   sponsor's licenses. However I cannot think of any compelling  reason  why
   those applying in the Tier 2 category should  be  less  entitled  to  the
   protection of fairness than students. It is right the students  invest  a
   large sum of money into courses and may be at risk of losing  both  their
   funds and chance of educational achievements where licences are  revoked.
   Yet Tier 2 applicants will often have their commitment such  as  property
   costs, families to support, bills to pay and the  like,  arising  out  of
   their employment (and normally  without  additional  support  from  third
   parties) they may well have been in the United Kingdom for longer periods
   and have established themselves here".


6.      "In essence the significance of applications to Tier 2  migrants  is
   (when seen in context) as great as that to Tier  4  migrants.  Fourth  in
   student cases, the respondent has taken positive  action  to  revoke  the
   sponsor's licence. The respondent was in a position of knowledge prior to
   the decision being made on the individual's application. And the same  is
   true in a case such as the  present.  The  respondent  raided  UK  stacks
   limited and thereafter began an investigation. The respondent  ultimately
   took the decision to revoke the licence. The respondent was in control of
   the process throughout. Fifth, as a  student  could  come  if  forewarned
   about the  licence  issue,  potentially  take  remedial  action  to  help
   themselves by, for example, seeking a new  sponsor  and  verifying  their
   pending application under section 3C (5) of the immigration act 1971,  so
   too could a Tier 2 applicant. They would at least have an opportunity  to
   seek to obtain a favourable result (see Lord Mustill in Doody [1994]  one
   AC 531, 560). Sixth, the respondent does not appear as far as I can  see,
   to have engaged with the potential unfairness arising out  of  situations
   such as the present. There is no policy or  guidance  in  place.  In  the
   decision letter in the first appellant's case is anything to go  by,  nor
   is regard to fairness given whatsoever".


7.      The Judge noted at paragraph 9 that the first appellant  arrived  in
   the United Kingdom on 16 December 2008 as a working  holidaymaker.  On  8
   November 2010 he was granted leave to remain as a Tier 2 migrant until 15
   October 2013. The second appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  as  her
   husband's dependent on 23 February 2012 and her leave also ran  until  15
   October 2013. The first appellant had been employed by UK Stacks  Limited
   since 20 August 2010 and this employment was the  basis  upon  which  the
   initial period of his Tier 2 leave was granted. The appellant remained in
   this employment until his last application to the  respondent  which  was
   refused.


8.      On 4 October 2013 the respondent carried out a  raid  on  UK  Snacks
   Limited, presumably because of concerns about  the  company's  compliance
   with legal obligation. The first appellant was aware of this raid at  the
   time it occurred.  However  the  respondent  did  not  inform  the  first
   appellant of the need to find another sponsor or take any other action at
   that time. The appellant then submitted his application to the respondent
   14 October. At the point of submission the appellant had no knowledge  as
   to whether the sponsor's licence had been revoked or not.  He  was  aware
   that UK Snacks Limited was being investigated. Therefore the licence  was
   in fact in place until  an  unspecified  date  on  which  the  respondent
   revoked it. The respondent refused the application on  28  November  2013
   and the respondent did not contact the first appellant to inform him that
   the sponsorship licence of UK snacks limited had been  revoked  prior  to
   the decision to refuse his application.


9.      "Turning back to the appeals before me  and  in  the  light  of  the
   above I conclude that the respondent was under a duty to  act  fairly  in
   respect of the first appellant's application.  The  respondent  obviously
   knew about the results of the investigation into UK Snacks Limited  prior
   to her decision on the  application.  The  revocation  of  the  sponsor's
   licence was fatal to that  application  (as  points  were  awarded  under
   appendix B and C). There is no reason as to why the respondent could  not
   have contacted the first appellant to inform him of the  situation  prior
   to the decision  on  the  application  being  made.  The  respondent  did
   nothing. Indeed, to compound this the respondent does not  even  set  out
   what happened with the sponsor's licence in the decision letter. There is
   no explanation (even in brief form (as to the nature and  result  of  the
   investigation. On the reading of the decision letter  in  isolation,  one
   may  think  it  was  the  first  appellant  who  was  at  fault  for  his
   application's failure. I would add that whilst the  first  appellant  was
   aware of the raid on his employers, he was entirely justified  in  making
   his application on 14 October. As far  as  he  was  aware  the  sponsor's
   licence was in place, as indeed it was until the revocation. No  one  yet
   knows the date of that revocation because the respondent  has  failed  to
   state it. The appellant should have been afforded an opportunity to  seek
   another sponsor and to vary his pending application if he so desired. The
   respondent acted in a materially unfair manner in respect  of  the  first
   appellant's application. The  appeals  succeed  on  these  bases  and  he
   allowed both appellant's appeals".


       Grounds of Appeal


10. The respondent in her grounds of appeal states  the  following  which  I
   summarise. The respondent refused the appellant's application because  he
   did not have a valid certificate of sponsorship. The Judge concluded that
   this was a case with the principles of fairness applied. The Judge relied
   analogously on the cases of Thakur and  Patel  at  paragraph  26  of  the
   determination. The Judge materially erred in law by concluding that these
   fairness cases which applied to Tier 4 students also applies  to  Tier  2
   cases. The Judge simply does not give any valid or adequate  reasons  for
   stating that  fairness  principles  apply  equally  to  Tier  2  migrants
   particularly when the required sponsorship did not exist at the  date  of
   decision. It is simply not clear as to how the Secretary of  State  acted
   materially unfairly to the appellants.


       The hearing.

  11. At the  hearing  I  heard  submissions  from  both  parties.  For  the
      respondent, Mr Peterson submitted that in  the  original  application,
      the main appellant stated that he did not have a valid certificate  at
      the date of application. Even if the appellant would have  been  given
      an opportunity to obtain another employer there is no evidence that he
      has done so in the interim.


  12. On behalf of the appellant I have  taken  into  account  the  skeleton
      argument provided. It is stated that the common law duty  of  fairness
      may frequently arise in the context of Tier 4 cases but  there  is  no
      prohibition on it applying to Tier 2 cases because the common law duty
      of fairness as applicable to all matters.  In  Patel  (revocation  the
      sponsor's licence-fairness) India [2011] UKUT 02111 (IAC) it is  noted
      at paragraph 14


                   "we also note the discussion of procedural  fairness  in
             De Smiths judicial review (sixth edition) at paragraphs  7-003
             to 7-009. We accept the authors proposition that the  law  has
             advanced from imposing public law requirement of  fairness  in
             particular situations, to the general proposition  that  where
             ever  a  public  function  is  being  performed  there  is  an
             inference that the function is required to be performed  there
             is an inference that the function is required to be  performed
             fairly, in  the  absence  of  an  express  indication  to  the
             contrary".


  13. The Judge of the first-tier Tribunal cannot have erred in law  by  her
      finding that the common law duty of fairness applies given that  there
      was no express prohibition to the contrary and stated that there is no
      policy guidance in place. Secondly she  found  that  gaining  guidance
      from similar situations i.e. Tier 4 cases with the duty is considered,
      and applying them in similar situations if applicable.


  14. It was argued that the respondent's question as to how she was  unfair
      to the appellant when the appellants knew at least 10  days  prior  to
      his application that the raid had been carried out on the premises. It
      is submitted that the ground that there was "no  required  sponsorship
      at the date of decision" is irrelevant. The issue of unfairness arises
      in the present matter because at the time the  application  was  made,
      the sponsor did have a valid licence for sponsorship  and  it  is  the
      fact that it was subsequently revoked  that  raises  the  argument  of
      whether the respondent should have notified the main appellant of this
      in advance and  given  him  an  opportunity  to  find  an  alternative
      sponsor. Judge Norton Taylor at  paragraph  30  of  her  determination
      stated that while the first appellant was aware of  the  raid  on  his
      employers he was entirely justified in making his  application  on  14
      October as far as he was aware the sponsor's licence was in place,  as
      indeed it was until the revocation. No one yet knows the date of  that
      revocation because the respondent has failed to  state  it.  The  fact
      that the sponsor's premises were raided  did  not  automatically  mean
      that its licence would be revoked.

       Is there a material error of law in the determination of the  First-
       tier Tribunal?


15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor allowed the  appellant's  appeal
   and found that the appellants cannot succeed under the Immigration  Rules
   as there is no valid certificate of sponsorship so they cannot  meet  the
   requirements of paragraph 245 HD (F) in conjunction with appendix A.  The
   Judge stated that the issue of fairness  is  raised  in  the  grounds  of
   appeal and there is real merit to the fairness argument in these appeals.
   The Judge concluded in a situation such as that arising in these appeals,
   the respondent is under a common law  duty  of  fairness  to  provide  an
   applicant with the opportunity to take  remedial  action  in  respect  of
   their pending application.


16. The  relevant  provisions  of  paragraph  Appendix  A  provide  that  an
   applicant will only if he has a sponsorship licence. As at the  date  the
   application, it is common cause that the appellant  sponsor  licence  had
   been revoked after they carried out a raid on  UK  Snacks  Limited  on  4
   October 2013. The appellant then made an application on 14 October  which
   was 10 days after the raid and his application was refused on 28 November
   2013 for the appellant's application not complying with  the  Immigration
   Rules. There was however no evidence before the Judge  exactly  when  the
   licence was revoked. The Judge stated that the fact that there was a raid
   on the premises does not automatically mean that  the  licence  would  be
   revoked which is a logical conclusion.

  17. On the strict interpretation of the law, the respondent's decision was
      in accordance with the Immigration Rules in force as at  the  date  of
      decision because the appellant's sponsor licence had been revoked  and
      he did not have a sponsor licence on the date of his application which
      the Judge noted in her determination.

  18. The Judge noted that the respondent did not contact the appellant  and
      afford him an opportunity to take remedial action  such  as  look  for
      another sponsor. She stated that given that it was the respondent  who
      was in control of the entire process including the raid, it would have
      been fair in the circumstances for the respondent  to  have  contacted
      the appellant so that he could take remedial  action.  The  Judge  was
      entitled in the circumstances to find  that  the  respondent  has  not
      acted fairly by  not  contacting  the  appellant  and  giving  him  an
      opportunity to take whatever remedial action which  was  available  to
      him.


19. The case of Thakur (PBS decision-common law fairness) Bangladesh  [2011]
   UKUT 151 (IAC) was relied on, where reference is made to earlier guidance
   by  Lord  Mustill:  "(1)  where  an  act   of   parliament   confers   an
   administrative power there is a presumption that it would be exercised in
   a manner which is fair in all the circumstances.  (ii) The  standards  of
   fairness are not immutable.  They may change with  the  passage  of  time
   bought in the  general  and  in  their  application  to  decisions  of  a
   particular type.  (iii) The principles of fairness are not to be  applied
   by rote  identically  in  every  situation.   What  fairness  demands  is
   dependent on the context of the decision and this is  to  be  taken  into
   account in all its aspects.  (iv)  an essential feature of the context is
   the statute which creates the discretion, as regards to both its language
   and the shape of the legal and administrative  system  within  which  the
   decision is made.  (v) Fairness will often require that a person who  may
   be adversely affected by the decision will have an  opportunity  to  make
   representations on his own behalf either before  the  decision  is  taken
   with a view to producing a favourable result, or after it is taken with a
   view to procuring its  modification,  or  both.  (vi)  since  the  person
   affected cannot usually make worthwhile representations  without  knowing
   what factors may weigh against his interests, fairness will often require
   that he is informed of the gist of the case which he has to answer".


20. The respondent's argument essentially is that there  is  no  requirement
   for the respondent to act fairly for Tier 2 applications as fairness only
   applies to  Tier  4  applications.  I  do  not  accept  the  respondent's
   submission that in the circumstances of these  two  appellants  that  she
   should not have given  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to  find  another
   sponsor. The Judge give ample reasons which I have set out above for  why
   principles  of  fairness  apply  to  the  circumstances  of   these   two
   appellants. The Judge correctly found that he respondent was in a  better
   position to alert the appellant and it  would  have  been  fair  for  the
   respondent not to make a decision until they had afforded  the  appellant
   an opportunity to find another sponsor because she was in charge  of  the
   whole process.


  21. I find that the Judge did not make an error of law by stating that the
      respondent had not applied principles of fairness to the appellants in
      their particular circumstances.


22. I therefore  uphold  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Norton Taylor as not being erroneous in law.



DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                           Dated this 23rd day of March 2013
Mrs S Chana


