
[pic]
IAC-TH-WYL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53842/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 October 2014                           |On 5 October 2014             |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR MUHAMMAD UMER FAROOQ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a respondent's appeal but  I  shall  henceforth  refer  to  the
    parties in the original terms detailed in the determination of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal J J Maxwell following a hearing on 16 July 2014
    and within his resulting determination promulgated on 22 July 2014.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who applied for leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  His application was refused on the same date  a
    decision was made to remove him by  way  of  removal  directions  under
    Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality  Act  2006.   He
    appealed that decision and following  the  above-mentioned  hearing  at
    Hatton  Cross  Judge  Maxwell,  amongst  other  things,   allowed   the
    appellant's appeal directing that it be remitted to the  respondent  to
    be decided in accordance with the law.

 3. On 16 September 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Foudy  gave  her
    reasons for granting the respondent permission to appeal.  They are:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal,  in  time,  against
             the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Maxwell, who  in
             a determination promulgated  on  22  July  2014,  allowed  his
             appeal against the refusal of his  application  for  leave  to
             remain.

         2.   The grounds of appeal  complained  that  in  relation  to  the
             absence of a CAS, the judge failed  to  follow  Rahman  [2014]
             EWCA Civ 1.

         3.   An arguable error of law is disclosed by the application."

 4. Thus the appeal came before me  today.   There  was  no  appearance  by
    either the appellant or indeed anyone instructed to represent  him.   I
    was satisfied that he had been  properly  served  with  notice  of  the
    proceedings and accordingly proceeded to deal with the hearing.

 5. Mr Kandola submitted that the judge made a material misdirection in law
    and  failed  to  apply  binding  case  law.   The  appellant's  Tier  4
    application was refused because the  CAS  had  been  withdrawn  by  the
    sponsor and as  such  the  appellant  did  not  possess  a  valid  CAS.
    Consequently the appellant could  not  meet  the  requirements  for  30
    points to be awarded under Appendix A of the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    issue of whether a CAS is withdrawn or is invalid is a  matter  between
    the appellant and the relevant institution.   The  CAS  system  is  not
    under the control of the respondent and he submitted that  it  was  not
    for the respondent to seek further information as to  why  the  CAS  is
    withdrawn.  In particular he relied on the authority of Rahman which is
    wrongly cited by the judge granting permission to appeal.  The citation
    is Md Mahamudur Rahman v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 11.  He further submitted
    that any prejudice to the appellant would only arise where it  was  the
    Secretary of State herself who, for example, revoked a  CAS.   That  is
    not the position here where, he emphasised, the CAS  was  withdrawn  by
    the appellant's own sponsor.

 6. I have considered the authority of Rahman.  Paragraph 32 states:

        "32. I am not sure whether the  appellant  had  an  opportunity  to
             check the CAS following its completion by the  sponsor,  and  I
             note that part of the argument for the  appellant  is  that  he
             should not be penalised for the shortcomings of an  institution
             of study over which he had no control.   Nevertheless  I  agree
             with the tribunal that the situation  here  is  very  different
             from that in Naved  and  that  fairness  did  not  require  the
             Secretary of State to give  the  appellant  an  opportunity  to
             address any deficiency in the CAS.  There was  no  question  in
             this case  of  the  Secretary  of  State  obtaining  additional
             information without reference to the applicant and  relying  on
             it to refuse the application.  The Secretary  of  State  simply
             applied the terms of the Immigration Rules  themselves.   Under
             the Rules it was the appellant who had  the  responsibility  of
             ensuring that his application was supported by a CAS  that  met
             the requirements laid down.  If the  CAS  did  not  meet  those
             requirements, it could not earn him an entitlement  to  points.
             If the deficiency in the CAS was the result of a mistake on the
             part of the sponsor (a point which, as I  have  said,  was  not
             even raised by the appellant in the tribunals below), it was  a
             matter to be pursued between the  appellant  and  the  sponsor.
             There was no obligation on the Secretary of State to  give  the
             appellant an opportunity to seek an amendment to the CAS before
             a  decision  was  taken  on  the  application.    Indeed,   the
             importance of all relevant information being provided  as  part
             of the application was underlined  by  the  tribunal  in  Naved
             itself, in the passage I have quoted from paragraph 21  of  the
             determination."

 7. This is an appeal where the judge has materially erred in finding  that
    the appellant's application was treated unfairly by the respondent  and
    in relying on the authorities of Patel (revocation of sponsor licence -
    fairness) India [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC)  and  Thakur  (PBS  decision  -
    common law fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC).

 8. The judge has failed to take account of the fact that here it  was  the
    appellant's own sponsor who withdrew  the  CAS  thereby  rendering  the
    appellant unable to meet the requirements for 30 points to  be  awarded
    under Appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  In so doing the  judge  has
    materially erred as asserted by the respondent.   In  simplistic  terms
    this was an appellant who  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  accordingly  his  appeal  should   have   been
    dismissed.

 9. For all these reasons I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

Decision

10. I re-make the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 4 November 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award on the  basis  that  the  appellant's  appeal  has  been
dismissed.




Signed                              Date 4 November 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

