

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/53307/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 1st December 2014                         |On: 3rd February 2015        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         Charmaine Sherrilyn Simpson
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Eaton, Counsel, Garden Court Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Grenada date of  birth  31st  January
       1974. On the 8th September 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Phull)
       allowed her appeal against a decision to remove her from  the  United
       Kingdom pursuant to s10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.   The
       Secretary  of  State  now  has  permission  to  appeal  against  that
       determination[1].


    2. The appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  concerned  Mrs  Simpson's
       Article 8 rights. She had come to the United Kingdom  in  1998  as  a
       visitor and had  thereafter  sought,  unsuccessfully,  to  vary  that
       leave.  The  basis  of  the  present  application   was   her   'long
       residence'/private life and the fact that she  was  in  a  long  term
       relationship with a British citizen, Mr Howard Morant.


    3. The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence from both Mrs Simpson  and  Mr
       Morant. Judge Phull found as  fact  that  theirs  is  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship.  The Judge  was  directed  to  the  test  of
       "insurmountable obstacles" in paragraph EX.1  of  Appendix  FM.   The
       nature of the relationship accepted, Mrs Simpson could succeed  under
       that  provision  if   she   could   demonstrate   that   there   were
       "insurmountable obstacles" to Mr Morant relocating  to  Grenada  with
       her, and in so doing leaving  the  UK.  Mrs  Simpson  relied  on  the
       decision in MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 which  underlined  that
       there is no 'exceptionality' test in Article 8 and that  the  overall
       question was one of reasonableness.  Judge Phull  considered  that  a
       number of cumulative factors meant that this  test,  however  it  was
       framed, was passed.  Those  factors  were  that  Mr  Morant's  entire
       private and family life was in the UK, he having left his country  of
       origin Jamaica some 33 years ago; he has children in the UK with whom
       he enjoys a close relationship; his elderly mother  has  considerable
       health problems (at the date of appeal she  was  in  hospital  having
       undergone heart bypass surgery) and he was required  to  provide  her
       with regular care; he has a business which he runs in  the  UK  which
       would close down if he had to leave. Having made those findings Judge
       Phull found there to be insurmountable obstacles to Mr Morant leaving
       the UK  and  resettling  in  Grenada  and  allowed  the  appeal  with
       reference to EX.1. In the  alternative  the  appeal  was  allowed  on
       Article 8 Razgar grounds.


    4. The Secretary of State appeals on the  grounds  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal was wrong to have equated "insurmountable obstacles" with  a
       test of whether it is "reasonable" to expect Mr Morant to  leave  the
       UK. It is submitted that this determination represents  the  kind  of
       "free-wheeling Article  8  analysis"  deprecated  by  Cranston  J  in
       Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
       (IAC). The Tribunal has failed to apply the "seriousness  test  which
       requires the obstacles or difficulties to go beyond matters of choice
       or inconvenience" set out in VW (Uganda) and AB (Somalia) [2009] EWCA
       Civ 5.


       No Error of Law


    5. At the hearing before me Mr  Duffy  candidly  acknowledged  that  the
       Secretary of State could not realistically argue that "insurmountable
       obstacles" meant something very different from "reasonableness"  when
       she had conceded precisely that point in MF (Nigeria): see  paragraph
       24, endorsed by the court at 47-49.  The  question  was  whether  the
       First-tier Tribunal had appreciated the weight to be attached to  the
       public interest in removing persons with  no  right  to  remain,  and
       balanced against that matters which went beyond a mere  inconvenience
       for the parties concerned. There  was  a  "seriousness  test"  in  VW
       (Uganda) which, Mr Duffy submitted, the Tribunal had failed, in  this
       instance, to refer itself to.


    6. I have read the grounds with care, alongside the determination.    It
       seems to me that the matters identified by the Tribunal  in  reaching
       this decision are precisely the kind of matters that go  beyond  mere
       inconvenience or preference. Mr Morant was not objecting to going  to
       live in Grenada simply because he likes living  here;  his  objection
       was far more fundamental. He has responsibilities here which  include
       his own children, his business,  and  crucially,  the  care  for  his
       elderly  and  unwell  mother.   All  of  those  factors,   considered
       cumulatively, were found by the Tribunal to amount to "insurmountable
       obstacles" to his relocation such that the test under EX.1  was  met.
       That was a finding that was open to  the  Tribunal  on  the  evidence
       before it. There was no error in approach to either EX.1 or Article 8
       ECHR.


       Decision


    7. The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  an
       error of law and it is upheld.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           28th January 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Granted on the 21st October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson

