
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number:     IA/53426/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 24th July 2014                     |On: 1st August 2014       |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                             Samuel Kwaku Sarfo
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Akohene,  Afrifa and Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Ghana born on  the  2nd  February
       1974.  He has permission to appeal against the decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal  (Judge Troup) dated the 6th   May  2014  to
       dismiss his appeal against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse
       to issue him with a residence card as confirmation of his  right
       of residence as the  family  member  (spouse)  an  EEA  national
       exercising treaty rights in the UK.

    2. The Appellant claimed to be married under Ghanaian customary law
       to Dutch  national  Mrs  Juliana  Osei.   He  submitted  to  the
       Respondent evidence that a customary marriage had  taken  place,
       including the extract from the 'Form of  Register  of  Customary
       Marriages'.  There was  also  a  statutory  declaration  by  the
       fathers  of  the  Appellant  and  Mrs  Osei   confirming   their
       attendance at the marriage ceremony.

    3. In a refusal letter dated 28th November 2013 the Respondent  set
       out her position on proxy marriages. They could only be valid if
       recognised in the country where the marriage was celebrated, the
       marriage must have been properly executed so as to  satisfy  the
       requirements of the law of the country in which it  took  place,
       and there must be nothing in the law of either  party's  country
       of domicile  that  restricts  the  freedom  to  enter  into  the
       marriage.  The Respondent did not consider  that  the  Appellant
       had demonstrated that the second provision was met.  The  letter
       sets out various provisions of Ghanaian law and  concludes  that
       the  Appellant  has  not  demonstrated  that  his  marriage  was
       registered in accordance with the provisions  of  the  Customary
       Marriage and Divorce (Registration)  Law  1985.  The  Respondent
       goes on  to  consider  whether  the  couple  are  in  a  durable
       relationship  but  finding  no  evidence  to   demonstrate   co-
       habitation refuses the application on this ground as well.

    4. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal dealt with the matter  on  the
       papers. It found that the statutory declaration was "crucial" to
       establishing that the marriage was valid in  Ghanaian  law.  The
       determination acknowledges the existence of such a document  but
       discounts   it,   and   further   documents   "certifying"   its
       authenticity, as "self-serving".   The Appellant's claim  to  be
       married to Mrs Osei is accordingly rejected. The  Tribunal  goes
       on at paragraph 11 of the determination as follows:

         "That conclusion is reinforced by the singular absence of  evidence
         from Ms Osei herself either orally or in writing. I  am  driven  to
         the conclusion that it is highly probable that the claimed marriage
         is a sham fabricated to enable  the  Appellant  to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom".

Finally the Tribunal finds no evidence to show that the two  are  in  a
durable relationship and the appeal is dismissed.

    5. The grounds of appeal are that the First-tier Tribunal erred in:



   a) Having no regard to the Upper Tribunal decision in NA  (customary
      marriage and divorce) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 00009 in  which  it  was
      held that the legal requirements to register a customary marriage
      in Ghana have in effect been optional since  1991  and  that  any
      failure in that regard  does  not  affect  the  validity  of  the
      marriage itself.


   b) Making a finding that this was a sham marriage when there was  no
      evidential basis for doing so, particularly since the  Respondent
      had never raised the matter herself.

    6. Before me Mr Bramble agreed that both  these  grounds  had  been
       made out. The First-tier Tribunal had no regard at  all  to  the
       guidance in NA and the findings  on  whether  the  marriage  was
       lawful in Ghana were therefore flawed. There was  no  evidential
       basis for concluding that this marriage  was  a  sham  and  that
       paragraph too must be set aside.

    7. I entirely agree.   I find that the decision does contain  those
       material errors of law identified by the parties.

    8. Mr Bramble submitted that none of that  assisted  the  Appellant
       since he  had  failed  to  provide  evidence  showing  that  the
       marriage was considered valid by the Dutch authorities. It  will
       be observed that this was not originally a  requirement  of  the
       Respondent, who in the letter of 28th November  2013  speaks  of
       the marriage being recognised in the country of domicile of  the
       respective parties. At present that is the UK.   The notion that
       it should be the Dutch authorities who  recognise  the  marriage
       was introduced by the Upper Tribunal decision in  Kareem  [2014]
       UKUT 24, a decision not promulgated until the 16th January 2014.



    9. As Mr Akohene realistically had to concede,  the  Appellant  had
       over five months between the  promulgation  of  Kareem  and  the
       determination in his own case in which he could  have  submitted
       that evidence.  Even if he could be forgiven for not being aware
       of Kareem the matter was raised expressly by the  Respondent  in
       the Rule 24 response of the 23rd June 2014 and yet  no  evidence
       had been produced  before  me.  The  appeal  must  therefore  be
       dismissed since  there  is  at  present  no  evidence  that  the
       marriage is considered lawful  by  the  Dutch  authorities.   In
       respect of whether the parties are  in  a  durable  relationship
       there is insufficient evidence before me upon which  to  make  a
       finding. The Appellant has therefore  failed  to  discharge  the
       burden of proof and the appeal is dismissed.



Decisions

   10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains error  of  laws
       and it is set aside.

   11. I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

   12. I make no direction as to anonymity.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             24th  July 2014
