
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53231/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th July, 2014                            |On 06th August 2014          |
|Given extempore                               |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                Tahir Ghafoor

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  He was born on  28th  January,
    1983 and first landed in the United Kingdom on 15th February, 2009,  in
    possession  of  a  visa  that  conferred  leave  to  enter  until  30th
    September, 2010.  The appellant was subsequently granted further  leave
    to remain from 25th October, 2010 to 21st October, 2013.  Both  periods
    of leave contained conditions restricting employment  and  recourse  to
    public funds.

2.   On 19th October, 2013 the appellant made  a  combined  application  for
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant under the points-based system and  for  a  biometric  residence
    permit.  That  application  was  refused  by  the  respondent  on  28th
    November, 2013.

3.   In refusing the application the respondent said this:

         "Grants of entry clearance or leave to remain for Tier 4 applicants
         to undertake studies at degree level or  above  are  limited  to  a
         maximum of five years unless


         (i)  the applicant has successfully completed a  course  at  degree
             level in the UK of a minimum duration of 4 academic years, and
             will follow  a  course  of  study  at  Master's  degree  level
             sponsored by a sponsor that is a Recognised Body or a body  in
             receipt  of   public   funding   as   a   higher   educational
             establishment (HEI) from  the  Department  of  Employment  and
             Learning in Northern Ireland,  the  Higher  Education  Funding
             Council for England, the Higher Education Funding for Wales or
             the Scottish Funding Council, and the grant of leave must  not
             lead to the applicant having spent more than 6 years in the UK
             as a Tier 4 (General) Student or as a student studying courses
             at a degree level or above.


         (ii) the grant of leave to remain is to follow a course leading  to
             the award of a PhD and the applicant is sponsored by a sponsor
             that is a Recognised Body or  a  body  in  receipt  of  public
             funding as a higher educational establishment (HEI)  from  the
             Department of Employment and Learning in Northern Ireland  the
             Higher Education  Funding  Council  for  England,  the  Higher
             Education Funding Council for Wales or  the  Scottish  Funding
             Council; or


         (iii)    the applicant is finding a course of study in:


             (1)  Architecture;


             (2)  Medicine;


             (3)  Dentistry;


             (4)  Law, where the applicant has completed a course at degree
                  level in the United Kingdom and is progressing to:


                  a.   the Common Professional Examination;


                  b.   the  Graduate  Diploma  in  Law  and  Legal  Practice
                      Course, or


                  c.   the Bar Professional Training Course.


             (5)  Veterinary Medicine & Science or


             (6)   Music  at  a  music  college  that  is   a   member   of
                  Conservatoires UK (CUK).


         You have previously been granted leave to enter/remain in order  to
         study:


         1.   MA  in  International  Human  Resource  Management  at  London
             Metropolitan University for 18 months.


         2.   ACCA & MBA at Finance & Business  Training  from  28  February
             2010 to 21 June 2013.


         Your  current  application  is  to  study  a  Diploma  in  Business
         Management at Taitec College, Manchester from 22 October 2013 until
         27 April 2014.


         Your course is not one  of  the  courses  listed  in  (iii)  above.
         Therefore you do not satisfy the requirements  of  the  Immigration
         Rules for this category and it has  been  decided  to  refuse  your
         application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
         Migrant under paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules."

4.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pacey, who heard the  appeal  without  an  oral  hearing  at  the
    request of the appellant on 11th March, 2014.

5.   She correctly directed herself on the law and noted that the  appellant
    had first been granted leave to enter as a student in February 2009. As
    at the date of the Secretary of State's decision, this was  just  under
    five years, the five year period expiring on 15th February  2014.   The
    course for which the appellant applied did not end  until  27th  April,
    2015, a further period of more than a year.   In  paragraph  9  of  the
    determination the judge said this:


         "I have taken into account the Appellant's argument relating to the
         ACCA.  However, he has not given a clear timeline as to his studies
         in the UK.  He has not disputed the Respondent's statements  as  to
         his history of study but  has not set out the dates of his  studies
         for the MA at London Metropolitan University or for  the  ACCA  and
         MBA.  His grounds of appeal imply that he  has  not  completed  the
         latter course, but his application is to study for a different, and
         on the face of it lower level course."

6.   The judge dismissed his appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules.   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Saffer granted permission, but failed  to  identify
    the arguable errors of law in his grant.

7.   The matter was listed for hearing before  me  at  10am  on  25th  July,
    2014.  The respondent was represented by Mr  Harrison.   There  was  no
    appearance by or on behalf of the appellant.

8.   Sky Solicitors had written indicating that they were not instructed  to
    attend the hearing and enclosed  what  they  referred  to  as  being  a
    "skeleton argument".  It is not a skeleton argument at all but  written
    submissions, a copy of them is attached to  this  determination  as  an
    appendix.

9.   Mr Harrison told me that he relied on the Secretary of State's Rule  24
    response.

10.  It is suggested on behalf of the  appellant  that  the  respondent  has
    misunderstood what is meant by "studying".  There is no merit at all in
    the argument that the appellant was granted eighteen months'  leave  in
    order to study a master of arts degree between 15th February, 2009  and
    30th September, 2009, but because he did not use all the time studying,
    only the period of time during which he was studying counts.

11.  The grant of leave followed his application: he applied  for  a  period
    of eighteen months' leave and that is why he was granted  a  period  of
    eighteen months' leave.  If he had only  wanted  a  shorter  period  of
    leave he should have said so.

12.  The second period of leave was for forty  months.   This  was  for  the
    period between 25th October, 2010  and  21st  October,  2013.   In  the
    skeleton argument the course is referred to as  being  "ACCA",  but  of
    course the appellant actually applied not only to  undertake  an  ACCA,
    but also to undertake an MBA.  An MBA  is  a  degree,  so  that  having
    already been granted eighteen months' leave to study  his  MA,  he  was
    then granted forty months so that he could study his MBA as well as his
    ACCA.  The fact that his course only lasted 36 months is, with respect,
    irrelevant.  He applied for leave for  forty  months  to  complete  the
    course and that was the period of leave granted to him.  If he had  not
    wanted forty months' leave then he should have applied  for  a  shorter
    period.

13.  The second challenge is without merit also.  It suggests that the  ACCA
    qualification is not a course at degree level.   I accept  that,  as  I
    believe did the Immigration  Judge.   However  the  appellant  was  not
    simply studying for an ACCA professional qualification, but he was also
    studying for a degree, namely a Masters in Business Administration,  so
    that the total period of leave, as the judge pointed  out,  would  have
    been for more than five years, had  the  appellant's  application  been
    granted.

14.  It is also suggested  that  in  some  way  the  decision  defies  basic
    standards of fairness.  I am afraid  I  have  had  some  difficulty  in
    understanding the rather confused argument, but there is  no  merit  in
    the suggestion that in some way the Secretary of State,  or  the  judge
    have erred in interpreting the Immigration Rules.  They  did  not.   So
    far as human rights are concerned I accept that the judge  did  err  in
    failing to consider whether or not the appellant met  the  requirements
    of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,  but  on  the  evidence
    before her and properly applying MF (Nigeria) v SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192, Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT
    00640 (IAC)  and Nagre, R (on the application of) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin),  she  could  not  have
    done anything other than to dismiss the appellant's Article  8  appeal.
    Her failure to consider it was therefore immaterial, because it has  no
    bearing on the outcome of the appeal.   I  uphold  her  decision.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

