
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53489/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th October 2014                             |On 14th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                  Between:


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              HAJA FATMATA BAH
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D T Popoola, Community Legal Centre


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant is a national of Sierra Leone born  on  25th  February  1936.
    Her appeal against the Respondent's  refusal  of  indefinite  leave  to
    remain was allowed by the First-tier Tribunal  on  11th  June  2014  on
    Article 8 grounds.  The Secretary of State appealed.

2.   The Appellant entered the UK as a visitor on 2nd  February  2012.   Her
    visa expired on 2nd June 2012.  On 29th  September  2012  she  made  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain.  This  was  rejected  twice
    for non-payment of fee.  A further application made on 14th March  2013
    was considered substantively and refused on 20th  November  2013  under
    paragraph 322(1), Appendix FM,  paragraph  276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8.

3.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher applied the five stage test  set  out
    in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 and concluded, at  paragraph  9:  "This
    family history is quite unique and the place of this Appellant  in  her
    family is something that is worthy of protection and that the interests
    of immigration control do not outweigh  that  in  these  very  specific
    circumstances."


4.   Permission to appeal was sought on the grounds that  the  Judge  failed
    to properly direct himself following R (on the application of) Nagre  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).  It
    was  submitted  that  there  were  not  compelling  circumstances   not
    sufficiently recognised under the Immigration Rules.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P.J.M.
    Hollingworth on 28th July 2014 on the grounds that insufficient  weight
    had been attributed to the policy and rationale  of  the  Secretary  of
    State as reflected in the Immigration Rules.

6.   At the hearing before me, Mr Tarlow relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal
    and submitted that the Appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    visitor and overstayed.  The Appellant was  an  elderly  lady  and  had
    family here.  She suffered from hypertension, which was  controlled  by
    medication. The Appellant could not satisfy the Immigration  Rules  and
    would have to show compelling and compassionate  circumstances  outside
    the  Rules.   There  was  nothing  in  paragraph  9  of   the   Judge's
    determination that showed exceptional or compelling circumstances.  The
    Appellant had lived in Sierra Leone without her family since 2005.  The
    Judge had failed to adopt the  correct  approach  following  Nagre  and
    Gulshan, and Article 8 should not be used to circumvent the Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant had made her way here and could return  and  make
    an application as an adult dependant.  The failure to refer to Nagre or
    indeed  Gulshan  was  material  to  the  decision  and  there  were  no
    compelling or compassionate circumstances  identified  at  paragraph  9
    which would outweigh the public interest.

7.   Mr Popoola submitted that there was no error of law which was  material
    to the decision.  He relied on  R  (on  the  application  of)  Zhang  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 891  (Admin)  at
    paragraph 69 onwards  where  the  principle  set  out  in  Chikwamba  v
    Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2008]  UKHL  40  was
    summarised.  Mr Popoola pointed out that a case requiring an  Appellant
    to return for two months was considered  disproportionate.  Mr  Popoola
    submitted that the Judge had properly  considered  proportionality  and
    there was no material error in his decision.

8.   Having considered all the documentary evidence and the  submissions,  I
    come to the following conclusions:  The Appellant is 78 years old.  Her
    application was refused under Appendix FM  because  she  did  not  have
    leave to enter as a dependent relative when she made her application in
    the  UK.   Having  had  some  discussion  with  Mr  Tarlow  during  his
    submissions, I am of the view that paragraph 322(1) of the  Immigration
    Rules is not applicable in this case because the Appellant was  seeking
    leave to remain as a dependent relative which was a purpose covered  by
    the Immigration Rules.

9.   Unfortunately, the  Appellant  cannot  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules because she entered the UK as  a  visitor,  not  as  a  dependent
    relative.  The application was refused on that basis. The Appellant was
    not refused indefinite leave to remain because she  could  not  satisfy
    the maintenance requirements or the suitability requirements.

10.  I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Wilsher failed to direct  himself
    following Nagre and he  failed  to  make  a  finding  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances not recognised under  the  Rules.  However,  I
    find that this error was not material in this case.  The Judge  clearly
    identified compelling  circumstances  at  paragraphs  5  to  9  of  the
    determination and I find that there were arguably good grounds to carry
    out an Article 8 assessment following Razgar.

11.  The Judge found that the Appellant had established family life  in  the
    UK and gave cogent reasons for that conclusion at paragraph 9. In fact,
    this point was conceded by the Presenting Officer at the hearing.   The
    issue, which was  therefore  before  the  Judge,  was  whether  it  was
    proportionate to require the Appellant to return  to  Sierra  Leone  to
    obtain entry clearance as a dependent relative.  The  Judge  found,  at
    paragraph 9, that it was not proportionate to do so. He considered  the
    effect on the whole family and took into account the particular  family
    history. The Appellant had no family in Sierra Leone and her  neighbour
    could no longer look after her. The  Judge  found  that  the  Appellant
    would not be able to live alone in Sierra Leone given her dependency on
    her family members for everyday tasks.  He  found  that  the  Appellant
    provided emotional and other support and the family unit was  extremely
    strong. He found that any  subsequent  recourse  to  public  funds  was
    unlikely to be sufficiently large so  as  to  outweigh  the  compelling
    compassionate factors in  this  case.  The  Judge's  finding  that  the
    Appellant's right to family life outweighed  the  public  interest  was
    open to him on the evidence.

12.  Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination and the Respondent's appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.  The determination dated 11th June 2014 shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
13th October 2014
