
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53927/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16th July 2014                             |On 25th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                         PAULINA GEORGIEVA TODOROVA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT given)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a female citizen of Bulgaria born 15 July 1991.   The
      appellant made an application for the issue a Registration Certificate
      under the Immigration (EEA) Regulations  2006.   The  application  was
      refused on 27 November 2013 upon the basis that the appellant had  not
      provided  evidence  that  her  family  member   was   supporting   her
      financially whilst she was in UK.  In addition the respondent was  not
      satisfied that the appellant continued  to  be  financially  dependent
      upon her family member.

   2. The appellant appealed against that decision.  She did not request  an
      oral hearing and the appeal was determined by a Judge  of  the  First-
      Tier Tribunal Hutchinson on 16 April 2014.  In a written determination
      of that date the judge  accepted  that  evidence  indicated  that  the
      appellant was dependent upon her mother whilst living and studying  in
      Bulgaria but "there was no adequate evidence provided to indicate that
      this dependency has continued  since  the  appellant  arrived  in  the
      United Kingdom on 20 May 2013".  The judge went onto comment as to the
      lack of a  witness  statement  from  the  appellant's  mother  and  at
      paragraph 12  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
      demonstrate that she was currently a  family  member  of  a  qualified
      person.  The appeal was dismissed.

   3. The appellant sought leave to appeal in a letter dated 6 May in  which
      she referred  to  supporting  documentation  that  she  had  submitted
      including reference to bank statements as proof of her dependency.

   4. The application for leave was considered by another judge of the First-
      Tier Tribunal who noted that the  appellant  had  opted  to  have  her
      appeal considered "on the papers" and that although  Judge  Hutchinson
      had indicated that all evidence  had  been  taken  into  account  bank
      statements might have been overlooked.  It was  also  considered  that
      Judge Hutchinson had found that the appellant had failed to show  that
      she was a family member of a qualified person which was a  point  that
      had not been in issue with the respondent.   Arguable  errors  of  law
      were therefore found.

   5. Following the grant of leave the respondent filed a  written  response
      under Rule 24 of the Procedure  Rules.   It  was  indicated  that  the
      respondent had not had  sight  of  any  bank  statements  but  it  was
      submitted that it was not clear that any evidence had been overlooked.
       The judge had said that there was no  "adequate"  evidence  and  that
      accordingly the respondent was not able to conclude that errors of law
      rendered the determination fatally flawed.

   6. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.  The respondent
      was represented.  The appellant did not attend.  I note that notice of
      the hearing was sent to the appellant at her last  known  address.   I
      therefore conclude that she was notified of the hearing.   I  consider
      it in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing  by  reason
      of Rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

   7. Mr Tufan supported the contents of the Rule 24 response and invited me
      to dismiss the appeal.

   8. I note that there was  indeed  a  bundle  of  documents  before  Judge
      Hutchinson.  There is no indication that this bundle was  served  upon
      the respondent.

   9. The bundle does contain copy bank statements and these appear to be in
      the name of the appellant's mother  and  there  is  nothing  there  to
      connect any of the payments out (or  indeed  in)  with  the  appellant
      herself.   Other  documents  include  invoices  and  statements  again
      relating to the appellant's mother and with no obvious connection with
      payment to the appellant herself.

  10.  Under  separate  cover  the  appellant  subsequently  forwarded  bank
      statements in her own name with a letter of explanation that she  had,
      with some difficulty, managed to open a bank account.  The  statements
      cover the period from January to March 2014 and do show some  payments
      from (presumably) her mother.  It is  not  clear  if  this  additional
      information was before  Judge  Hutchinson.   However  this  subsequent
      information relates to  aspects  following  the  respondent's  initial
      decision.  Because of the nature of the appeal it is possible for such
      information to be taken into account in certain circumstances.

  11. Paragraph 7 of the determination refers to the documents including the
      appellants grounds of appeal and "supporting  documents".   The  judge
      also says "I confirm that I have carefully taken into account all  the
      evidence (even if not specifically referred to in this  determination)
      prior to determining the appeal".  In  the  absence  of  any  contrary
      evidence the judge must be believed.  Whilst specific mention of  bank
      statements has not been made there is not an obligation on the judge's
      part to  name  them  individually  and  indeed  the  judge  refers  at
      paragraph 9 to "no adequate  evidence"  with  regard  to  the  claimed
      dependency.  As  the  judge  says  there  was  no  supporting  witness
      statement from the appellant's mother  and  no  explanation  from  the
      appellant herself.

  12. In these circumstances I consider the judge was entitled to reach  the
      conclusions that he did and that no error of  law  exists.  It  was  a
      question of adequacy of the evidence. The judge  considered  that  the
      evidence was lacking.

  13. Paragraph 12 of the determination makes reference to  whether  or  not
      the appellant has shown that she is a family  member  of  a  qualified
      person.  It is correct to say that that was not an  issue  before  the
      judge and whilst he may well have made an error in  setting  out  that
      finding I do not consider it is material to the overall outcome of the
      appeal bearing in mind the findings made by the judge with  regard  to
      maintenance.

  14. In all the circumstances I find that  no  material  error  of  law  is
      contained  within  the  determination  of  Judge  Hutchinson  and  his
      conclusions must stand.

  15. The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

  16.  No  application  for  an  anonymity  direction  has  been  made   and
      accordingly I do not now make one.

Signed                                  Date:  23/7/14


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole

