

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: IA/53010/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On February 13, 2015                 |On February 19, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                           MISS HOANG DUONG NGUYEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, born July 15, 1987 is a citizen of Vietnam. She  entered
    the United Kingdom on December 16, 2005 as a student and her leave  was
    valid until October 31, 2006. This leave was subsequently extended on a
    number of occasions until October 29, 2012. On that  date  she  applied
    for leave to remain on the basis of private life and leave  outside  of
    the Rules due to a fear  of  persecution  due  to  her  sexuality.  The
    respondent refused to vary her leave to remain on December 3,  2013  on
    the basis she did not satisfy the requirements of paragraph  276ADE  HC
    395  and  there  were  no  exceptional  circumstances  that   warranted
    consideration outside of the Rules. A decision was also taken to remove
    her by way of directions under section 47 of  the  Immigration,  Asylum
    and Nationality Act 2006. The appellant was further advised that if she
    feared persecution then she should make the appropriate application  at
    an asylum-screening interview.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under  Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  December  12,
    2013 and on September 19, 2014 Judge of the First Tier  Tribunal  Majid
    (hereinafter referred to  as  the  "FtTJ")  heard  her  appeal  and  in
    determination promulgated on September 30, 2014 he allowed  her  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules, which  he  said  embodied  the  spirit  of
    Articles of the ECHR.

 3. The respondent appealed that decision on  October  6,  2014  submitting
    that there were two material errors:

      a. The FtTJ failed to take into account the respondent's evidence  and
         submissions and to resolve conflicts of fact on a  material  matter
         namely return to Vietnam and reception in Vietnamese society.

      b. Misdirection on Article 8 by failing to have regard to all  of  the
         circumstances.

 4. The matter came before me  on  December  17,  2014  and  after  hearing
    submissions I found there had been an error in law because the FtTJ did
    not properly consider the issues and appears to have been  swayed  more
    by his concern for the appellant rather than have  regard  to  all  the
    evidence. It was unclear whether the FtTJ allowed this appeal under the
    Immigration Rules, Article 8 or Article 3.

 5. I adjourned the matter to the  above  date  and  gave  directions.  The
    appellant's  solicitors  complied  with  my  directions  by  filing   a
    statement setting out the basis of the appellant's claim and submitting
    a bundle of evidence.

 6. The appellant indicated that the claim was being brought on two grounds
    namely Article 3 (health and risk to transgender persons) and Article 8
    (private life).

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Khan referred me to the recent USAID report on LGBT  (Lesbian,  Gay,
    Bisexual and Transgender) for Vietnam and in particular to pages 6, 14,
    19, 25 and 29 of the report. He submitted that transgender  persons  no
    longer feel safe in Vietnam and have experienced violence. There was  a
    lack of medical facilities available to them for future operations  and
    the law stated that it was illegal for a hospital to carry  out  future
    surgery for a transgender or provide medical  treatment.  Such  persons
    also suffered general discrimination and whilst gay and lesbian  people
    were accepted transgender persons were not and employment opportunities
    were restricted. He further referred  me  to  paragraph  20.13  of  the
    latest COIS report and submitted that this evidence amounted human  and
    degrading treatment. Alternatively, he submitted the appellant had been
    here lawfully since December 2005 as a student and  had  established  a
    private life since arriving as a student  and  her  student  life  went
    beyond merely being a student.  She  had  undergone  hormone  treatment
    whilst here and was integrated  into  the  transgender  scene.  Removal
    would be disproportionate.

 8. Mr Wilding submitted the threshold for Article 3 was high and there was
    no evidence that returning the appellant to  Vietnam  would  amount  to
    inhuman and degrading treatment. The appellant had to show there was  a
    foreseeable breach of Article 3 and he argued that  any  discrimination
    the appellant may  suffer  did  not  amount  to  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment. He also referred to the LGBT report and in particular to the
    fact there was a thriving LGBT community in Vietnam especially  in  the
    larger cities. Whilst he accepted there were some problems he relied on
    the fact that there was access to HIV treatment and  there  were  other
    avenues available for further "corrective" surgery such  as  by  having
    the treatment abroad and there  was  nothing  in  any  of  the  country
    evidence that suggested hospitals would not treat  transgender  persons
    for general medical problems. There was  a  lack  of  medical  evidence
    submitted and whilst there were two  letters  in  the  original  bundle
    neither of these letters suggested her life was in danger.  The  report
    from the Monteiro Clinic concluded "her examination  was  unremarkable"
    and the report from Guy's and St Thomas NHS hospital confirmed she  was
    in receipt of medication for HIV. He  submitted  the  Court  of  Appeal
    recently in GS (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 made  clear
    foreign nationals may be removed from the UK even where by reason of  a
    lack of adequate health care in the destination state their lives  will
    be drastically shortened.  With  regard  to  her  Article  8  claim  he
    reminded me what the Court of Appeal had said in GS from paragraph [85]
    onwards and submitted lawful residence in the United  Kingdom  did  not
    create a stronger claim but he accepted it was a  factor  to  be  taken
    account of when considering the public interest element  of  Article  8
    ECHR. The fact she was here  lawfully  did  not  alter  the  precarious
    nature of her student leave, as she had had to extend her stay here  on
    regular occasions. Her leave gave her no rights  to  permanent  status.
    The appellant had failed to provide any evidence of what she  had  been
    doing here. There  were  places  in  Vietnam  where  she  could  obtain
    employment and medical care more easily  especially  where  there  were
    large LGBT communities. Removal would be disproportionate.

    DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

 9. The appellant came to the United Kingdom as a student in December 2005.
    In her original statement dated September 16, 2004 she  confirmed  that
    when she entered the United Kingdom she was  "male"  and  it  was  only
    whilst here that she felt herself becoming "female". In 2007 she stated
    she began taking female hormone- a treatment she indicated through  her
    representative she has paid for privately.  Evidence  of  her  hormonal
    treatment is contained in a letter dated September  5,  2014  from  the
    Monteiro Clinic although according to this letter  she  only  became  a
    patient of this  clinic  in  April  2009.  She  has  hormonal  therapy,
    progynon-depot injections, and the  clinic  described  the  process  as
    being without problems and her examination as "unremarkable".

10. Whilst the clinic diagnoses her as a transsexual and comments that  she
    lives and functions as  a  female  their  letter  contains  no  further
    information  about  future  treatment  and  possible  gender   altering
    operation.

11. It is fair to say that this aspect  of  her  private  life  is  at  the
    forefront of her private  life  and/or  Article  3  claim  because  the
    appellant seeks to persuade the Tribunal that  returning  would  either
    breach her Article 8 right to private life or would lead to inhuman  or
    degrading treatment.

12. In approaching the appellant's claim that return would breach Article 3
    ECHR I have had regard  to  the  evidence  submitted,  submissions  and
    general case law on Article 3.

13. In Hariri v SSHD [2003] EWCA CIV 807 the appellant's case depended on a
    real risk being established that he would suffer unlawful treatment  as
    a member of a class or perhaps of two classes. The Court of Appeal said
    that, in such a situation, "a consistent pattern of gross and  systemic
    violations of fundamental human rights far from being at variance  with
    the real risk test was a functional application of it.  The  fact  that
    ill treatment or misconduct may be routine or  frequent  would  not  be
    enough unless  the  appellant  was  likely  to  stand  out  as  someone
    subjected to ill treatment".In AA (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 149
    the Court of Appeal observed that the correct test to be applied by the
    Tribunal was whether  the  evidence  showed  a  consistent  pattern  of
    mistreatment suffered by returning asylum  seekers,  such  that  anyone
    returning after a  failed  asylum  claim  faced  a  real  risk  of  ill
    treatment, even though not everyone did.

14. With this test in mind I have had regard to the material that has  been
    submitted by both parties. Whilst there is  little  evidence  available
    both parties have attempted to provide  me  with  material  that  would
    assist me in my assessment of conditions facing transgender persons.

15. I have reviewed the June 2013 OGN Report and at paragraphs  3.13.4  and
    3.13.6 there is the following:

          "3.13.4 ...  Reports  suggest  that  although  discrimination  and
         harassment do take  place,  Vietnamese  society  is  becoming  more
         accepting of LGBT individuals and culture. In  the  larger  cities,
         such as Ho Chi Minh City, Hanoi and others, there are thriving LGBT
         communities with supportive services.

         3.13.6 Same sex  relationships  are  not  illegal  in  Vietnam  but
         societal hostility and discrimination  against  LGBT  persons  does
         occur. However there is no evidence to  show  that  in  general  it
         would amount to persecution or reach the threshold to  engage  UK's
         obligations under Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights. ..."

16. At paragraph 20.30 of the August 2013 COIS Report it is reported:

         20.30 "... Vietnam's Decree 88/2008/ND-CP forbids sex  reassignment
         according to an individual's perception of their identity or  their
         desire to change  sex.  As  a  result,  transgender  people  cannot
         undertake sex reassignment surgery in Vietnam. If  they  have  such
         surgery outside Vietnam, they cannot  register  their  identity  or
         renew their personal identity papers...."

17. Both parties referred me to the "Being LGBT in Asia" report prepared by
    USAID. This reported conducted national dialogue  and  interviews  with
    LGTB communities in Vietnam including over 650 LGBT people and 220 LGBT
    organisations. Page 18 of the report confirms that there have been many
    public events in Vietnam and in November  2013  Vietnam  decriminalised
    same sex wedding ceremonies and gave same-sex couples the right to live
    together. Punishments for organising or participating  in  a  same  sex
    marriage ceremony were overturned. Mr Khan submitted that the situation
    for gay and lesbian citizens had improved but  there  were  still  many
    problems for transgender persons for the reasons set out on page 19  of
    the report but  this  report  whilst  containing  some  negatives  also
    contained positives for the future:

      a.  Limited  resources  dedicated  to  the  specific  needs   of   the
         transgender  community  especially  female  to   male   transgender
         persons.

      b. Difficult for  transgender  people  to  establish  a  separate  and
         independent community although cyberspace has opened the  doors  to
         many transgender individuals,  especially  young  people,  to  make
         friends and share information about gender identity and participate
         on various websites.

      c. Not  legal  for  transgender  people  to  have  gender-confirmation
         surgery in Vietnam and surgeons are forbidden from performing  such
         operations.

      d. Illegal for transgender people to change their name  or  gender  on
         identification and legal documents. Transgender people who  undergo
         gender confirmation surgery  outside  Vietnam  cannot  reflect  the
         gender change on their legal documents.

18. What the evidence appears to demonstrate is that there is  progress  in
    Vietnam  but  as  Mr  Khan   properly   pointed   out   there   remains
    discrimination. There is no evidence  of  penalties  being  imposed  on
    transgender persons but in light of the comments of  the  court  in  GS
    (India) and Others v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and earlier case law I  am
    satisfied that this discrimination does not reach  the  level  required
    for there to be a breach of Article 3.

19. I have also considered the position facing the appellant under  Article
    3 due to her HIV condition. Paragraphs  25.14  to  25.17  of  the  COIS
    Report  and  the  decision  of  VP  (Palliative  Aids  Treatment-return
    permissible) Vietnam [2004] UKIAT 00267 confirm that HIV sufferers  can
    receive medical attention in Vietnam and in VP [2004] UKIAT  00267  the
    Tribunal dismissed an appeal by an end-stage AIDS sufferer,  who  would
    only survive for a few months without the retroviral treatment  he  was
    currently receiving, even though no such treatment would  be  available
    to him in Vietnam.

20. I therefore find the appellant cannot  demonstrate  there  would  be  a
    breach of Article 3 if she were returned to Vietnam.

21. I have also considered her claim that returning her  would  breach  her
    rights under Article 8. As I am considering this appeal now I  have  to
    have regard to the Immigration Rules  (paragraph  276ADE  HC  395)  and
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014.

22. I accept the appellant has studied here since 2005 and  I  also  accept
    the appellant has been here  lawfully  throughout  her  stay.  Her  two
    statements tell me little about what  she  has  been  doing  but  I  am
    prepared to accept the appellant has visited gay and transsexual clubs.
    At paragraph [11] of her latest statement he referred to her  visit  to
    Vietnam in November 2011 and noted he could  not  walk  in  the  street
    without adverse comments being passed.

23. The COIS report and USAID report both describe large areas  where  LBTB
    persons are accepted and I do not accept the appellant's one  and  only
    experience of life back in her own country as  being  evidence  that  a
    transgender person  cannot  enjoy  a  life.  The  evidence  coming  out
    suggests that there are growing communities and whilst  life  would  be
    different to that she currently experiences  that  does  not  mean  she
    cannot live a life in Vietnam as a transgender person.

24. The USAID report described employment opportunities  in  certain  areas
    being readily available  but  more  importantly  the  reports  describe
    changes that are being brought in by the authorities.

25. The appellant cannot meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE  as  at
    today's date. She has not lived here continuously for twenty years, she
    has not spent half her life in the United  Kingdom  and  there  are  no
    significant obstacles to her integration into Vietnam-there is  nothing
    preventing her travelling there  and  there  are  LGBT  communities  in
    Vietnam.

26. I have considered his case outside of the Rules and  applied  the  test
    set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027. I accept that she  has  a  private
    life here and that removal  would  interfere  with  the  life  she  has
    created. Removal is in accordance with the  Rules  because  she  cannot
    meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE and removal would be  for  a
    reason set out in Article 8(2) ECHR. Whilst the appellant has  indicted
    she has not had recourse to public funds it seems she has  used  public
    services such as the NHS because of her HIV condition.

27. The  issue  is  therefore  one  of  proportionality  and  in  assessing
    proportionality I must have regard to the public interest as set out in
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014. Applying section 19 I find:

      a. She speaks English and she  would  be  less  of  a  burden  on  the
         taxpayers and able to integrate better.

      b. Limited evidence was adduced of her financial status despite  leave
         being given at the earlier hearing before me.  She  has  only  ever
         been here as a student with a limited capacity to work. No evidence
         of qualifications has  been  adduced  and  the  appellant  did  not
         address this in her statement. She was not  prevented  from  giving
         evidence at the hearing before me.

      c. She has been here lawfully throughout her stay.

      d. She came as a student with limited leave to remain. She has had  to
         extend her stay on a  regular  basis  and  I  view  her  status  as
         precarious as against unlawful.

      e. She cannot benefit from Section 117B(6) of section 19.

28. I have to have regard to all of the appellant's private life  including
    her HIV condition and transgender status. In GS (India)  and  Others  v
    SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at paragraph [86] Laws LJ stated:

          "If the Article 3 claim fails (as I  would  hold  it  does  here),
         Article 8  cannot  prosper  without  some  separate  or  additional
         factual element which brings the case within the Article 8 paradigm
         - the capacity to form and enjoy relationships  -  or  a  state  of
         affairs having some affinity with the paradigm."

29. The appellant suffers from HIV but there is no  evidence  that  she  is
    either in serious ill  health  or  he  cannot  obtain  medication.  Her
    condition did not reach a level where Article 3 was breached and  I  am
    satisfied his condition does not invoke Article 8 from either a medical
    or relationship prospective. . The country evidence confirms  that  she
    would not be the only transgender person in Vietnam.

30. I have considered whether Vietnamese laws  would  mean  her  Article  8
    rights would be breached because the country  does  not  allow  gender-
    altering operations. I am satisfied no evidence has been  submitted  to
    me demonstrates it is illegal to be transgender. It may  not  currently
    be possible to have further operations but there is  no  evidence  that
    there is any risk to the appellant per se as a transgender. She is able
    to mix freely with whom she wants to especially in  areas  where  there
    are larger LGTB communities.

31. I have also had regard to the fact she has been here as a student but I
    find nothing special about her student life. There is little  evidence,
    other than her claims about her studies, of her life here and  applying
    the Tribunal decision of Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 00025
    (IAC) I do not find any exceptional about her study life.

32. The appellant had not claimed she is unable to work and whilst jobs may
    be difficult to obtain I cannot overlook the fact  the  appellant  came
    here to study and presumably  has  obtained  qualifications  that  will
    benefit her otherwise the respondent would not have extended her Tier 4
    leave.

33. In  considering  his  Article  8  claim  I  have  also  considered  the
    combination of her period of time here, medical condition and the  fact
    she is transgender. Balancing all of the above together including those
    matters outlined to me by the representatives I  do  not  find  removal
    would be disproportionate. Life would not be as easy for the  appellant
    there as it is  in  the  United  Kingdom  but  In  assessing  what  the
    appellant wants I also have to  have  regard  to  the  public  interest
    element and in particular those matters  outlined  above  in  paragraph
    [27].

34. I ultimately find removal would not be disproportionate and there is no
    breach of Article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did disclose an error in law. I
    previously set aside that decision and I have now remade it.

36. I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

37. I dismiss the appeal under ECHR (Articles 3 and 8)

38. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. An
    order was not made in the First-tier and I see no reason to amend  that
    order.



Signed:     Dated: February 19, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no award on fees.



Signed:     Dated: February 19, 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
