
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Appeal Number: IA/53819/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 26 November 2014                             |On 1 December 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

               THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ELISABETH LAING DBE
                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                            atifullah atif ullah

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                                 Ex tempore

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 9 September 2014. We refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  Permission
    to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge Davidge on 20  October  2014.
    When granting permission to appeal she explained that the Secretary  of
    State was appealing (in time) the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowing the appellant's appeal against a refusal by the respondent  to
    grant leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

 2. Unknown to the First-tier Tribunal the appellant had already  left  the
    United Kingdom with the result that the appeal was  to  be  treated  as
    abandoned  by  reference  to  Section  104(4)   of   the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  As a result of  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal lacked jurisdiction.

 3. The appeal was heard on 26 August 2014 and  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal recorded, at paragraph 4, that no  one  had  appeared  at  the
    hearing on behalf of the appellant, that  the  Tribunal  had  contacted
    Messrs Sky solicitors, who had represented him previously, and had been
    told that the firm no longer represented the appellant. At  that  point
    Mr Martineau, who had appeared on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    invited the Tribunal to proceed with the appeal.  So it seems that  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer at that stage did not know, and did  not
    tell the Tribunal, that the appellant  had  in  fact  left  the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. The grounds of appeal attached an entry from the Home Office CID  which
    confirmed that the appellant had left the United  Kingdom  on  29  June
    2014. We accept on the basis of this entry that the  appellant  did  in
    fact leave the United Kingdom on that date.

 5. Section 104(1) of the 2002 Act describes when an appeal  under  Section
    82(1) is 'pending'. It t is 'pending' during the period beginning  with
    when it is instituted and ending with when it  is  finally  determined,
    withdrawn or abandoned.

 6. Section 104(4) provides that an appeal under Section 82(1) brought by a
    person while he is in the United Kingdom shall be treated as  abandoned
    if the appellant leaves the United Kingdom.

 7. So it is clear as a matter of statute that once the appellant had  left
    the United Kingdom his appeal was treated by  statute  as  having  been
    abandoned and was no longer pending for the purposes of Section 104(1).
     In the light of that it seems to us that the  Tribunal  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to decide the appeal or indeed to embark on the appeal  at
    all in the first place.  The Tribunal of course is not to blame because
    the respondent was represented and did not tell the Tribunal  that  the
    appellant had left the country.

 8. For those reasons it seems to us that the Tribunal lacked  jurisdiction
    and we have no option but to allow the Secretary of State's appeal. The
    consequence of that is that we set aside the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal allowing the appeal, and re-make the  decision  by  dismissing
    the appeal for want of jurisdiction.


Signed                              Date 28/11/2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Mrs Justice Elisabeth Laing DBE

