
IAC-AH-DP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53371/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 23 April 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 manju baral
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri of Counsel instructed by Sam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as the Applicant is a  citizen  of
    Nepal born on 19 March 1982.  On 17 January 2006 she arrived with entry
    clearance as a student.   That  leave  was  extended  on  a  number  of
    occasions and then varied to  leave  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)
    Migrant which in turn was varied to leave as a Tier 4 (General) Student
    Migrant which expired on 14 October 2013.  On that day,  in  time,  the
    Applicant applied for further leave  in  the  same  capacity.    On  29
    November 2013 the Appellant (the  SSHD)  refused  the  application  and
    decided to remove the Applicant by way of directions under  Section  47
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 2. On 13 December 2013 the Applicant lodged notice of appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended  (the
    2002 Act).  The grounds are brief, generic and formulaic and  refer  in
    similar vein to Article 8  of  the  European  Convention.   No  further
    details are contained in the grounds.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

 3. By a decision promulgated on 31 December 2014 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal J S  Law  allowed  the  appeal  of  the  Applicant  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  He found at paragraph  14  that  if  the  SSHD  had
    complied with its practice on revoking the licence of  the  college  at
    which the Applicant had been studying then the Applicant would have had
    a period time to find  an  alternative  educational  provider  but  the
    Applicant had not been afforded such an opportunity..

 4. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the Judge  had
    incorrectly directed himself as to the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules. He had failed to take into account that the appeal was bound  to
    fail under the Immigration Rules because the Applicant had not provided
    a valid Certificate of Acceptance  for  Studies  (CAS).   Further,  the
    Judge had taken into account evidence of the Applicant's  intention  to
    study at the University of Sunderland which had not been  submitted  to
    the SSHD at the time of the Applicant's original application and so was
    not admissible evidence by reason of Section 85A of the 2002 Act.

 5. By a decision of 11 February 2015 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Alan
    R Williams granted the Respondent  permission  to  appeal  on  the  two
    grounds described in the SSHD's application.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 6. The Applicant attended the hearing with a friend.  Mr  Jaisri  informed
    me he had discussed the appeal with Ms Fijiwala.  He was instructed  to
    concede there was an error of law as disclosed in the  grounds  in  the
    SSHD's application for  permission  to  appeal.   Both  representatives
    acknowledged the point made  by  the  Judge  at  paragraph  14  of  his
    decision and that there had been some procedural unfairness because the
    Applicant had not been given the opportunity  to  find  an  alternative
    educational provider. In these circumstances both agreed that the whole
    matter should be remitted to the SSHD.



Findings and Consideration

 7. In view of  the  parties'  agreement  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision contained material errors of law as identified in the grant of
    permission, I find that it must be set aside in its entirety.  In  view
    of what the parties had stated in relation  to  the  issues  raised  at
    paragraph 14 of the decision, I find that the original decision of  the
    SSHD was not in accordance with the law and therefore the matter should
    be remitted to the SSHD to make a lawful decision.

Anonymity

 8. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    matter I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law  such
    that it should be set aside.  The following decision is substituted:

    The decision of the SSHD is not in accordance with the law.  The matter
    is remitted to the SSHD for a lawful decision to be made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 27. iv. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE SSHD: FEE AWARD

The matter has been remitted to the SSHD.  For  the  reasons  given  in  the
First-tier Tribunal's decision I find that it is not appropriate to  make  a
fee award.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 27. iv. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

