
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/53282/2013
     IA/53285/2013
     IA/53290/2013
     IA/53298/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 29th September 2014                        |On 6th November 2014         |
|Prepared                                      |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               MRS OLUBUNMI TEMILADE ADENUGA (FIRST APPELLANT)
               MR OLUKOYA ADENYINKA ADENUGA (SECOND APPELLANT)
             MISS KIKELOMO SINMILOLUWA ADENUGA (THIRD APPELLANT)
            MISS JADESOLA OLUWANIFEMI ADENUGA (FOURTH APPELLANT)


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr P Corben, Counsel instructed by Chipatiso
Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Application for permission to appeal was made by the Secretary of State
    but nonetheless for the purposes of this appeal I shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were described before the First Tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria born  on  27th  September  1972,
    28th December 1971, 11th September 2003 and  17th  October  2007.   The
    first appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  visitor  on  16th
    September 2006 with the third appellant Kikelomo Adenuga  and  in  2007
    her husband entered the UK.  The  fourth  appellant  was  born  in  the
    United Kingdom.  On 8th October 2013 the appellants made an application
    for leave to remain in the UK based on their private  and  family  life
    and the applications were refused on the basis that the spouses did not
    have any legal basis for remaining in the UK.  Kikelomo  was  10  years
    old and had lived in the UK for seven years but as the first and second
    appellant lived together in a family unit with the younger child it was
    reasonable to expect them to be able to return to Nigeria as a  family.



 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Sullivan heard the appeal of  the  appellants
    on 17th June 2014 and allowed the appeal on 4th July 2014.

 4. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  by  the  respondent
    because the judge at paragraph 25 stated that "the  best  interests  of
    the children are a primary consideration and  should  be  determinative
    unless other factors point to a need to remove.  As the family  have  a
    good immigration record there are no countervailing considerations."

 5. The application for permission to appeal submitted the judge had  erred
    in law.  The line of authority on the best interests of the children is
    extensive beginning with ZH Tanzania  [2011]  UKSC  4  and  SS  Nigeria
    [2013] EWCA Civ 550 and following with  EV Philippines [2014] EWCA  Civ
    874.  It was submitted that the test is "treating the best interests of
    the child as a primary  consideration  which  could  be  outweighed  by
    others provided that no other consideration was treated  as  inherently
    more significant" (EV (33)).

 6. The respondent asserted that IJ Sullivan suggested that the burden  had
    shifted to the Secretary of State to show countervailing factors  which
    weighed against the interests of the child to stay in the UK and  there
    was no authority which supported that proposition.

 7. It was submitted that the determination  displayed  irrationality  when
    suggesting that there were no countervailing factors  at  all  in  this
    case due to the good immigration history.

 8. Further in paragraph 36 to 38 the judge found that the third and fourth
    appellants met the provisions of paragraph 276ADE because there was  no
    history of criminality.  Nasim and Others (Article 8)  Pakistan  [2014]
    UKUT 25 that was an irrelevant factor and not a test for  the  purposes
    of Article 8.  Following EV it was held that a  similar  set  of  facts
    were not sufficient to meet the test of reasonableness on removal.

 9. The judge erred in law by  failing  to  have  regard  to  the  parents'
    immigration status.  The parents had no  right  to  remain  in  the  UK
    independently of their children.  The most important  consideration  in
    the assessment of the child's best interests was allowing the child  to
    be brought up by their parents.  In EA (Article 8 Best Interests of the
    Child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 it was stated

         "It is important to recall that although the  appellants  may  have
         been here lawfully they came to the UK for a temporary purpose with
         no expectation of being able  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The  third
         appellant happened to be born in the UK  whilst  her  parents  were
         here for a temporary purpose.  The expectation was that they  would
         all return to Nigeria  once  the  first  appellant's  studies  were
         completed."

10. At the hearing before me Mr Corben submitted that the  application  for
    permission to appeal was made out of time by the Secretary of State and
    that in the absence of any explanation  for  the  late  filing  it  was
    difficult to  see  on  what  material  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    exercised his discretion in favour  of  extending  time.   It  was  not
    apparent that the Secretary  of  State  had  made  an  application  for
    extending time.  It was submitted that the fact that the case  involved
    a claim from four family members for further leave to remain in the  UK
    could hardly amount to a special  circumstance  and  nothing  else  was
    apparent from the judge's reasoning as having been considered.

11. Further to the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005
    an application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  states
    that an application must be sent or delivered to the Tribunal so it  is
    received no later than five days after the  date  on  which  the  party
    making  the  application  is  deemed  to   have   been   served.    The
    determination was dated 4th July 2014, received  by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 7th July 2014 and therefore  the  last  day  for  an  in  time
    application was  14th  July.   The  Secretary  of  State  submitted  an
    application dated 21st July 2014 and it was received  by  Leicester  on
    that date.  Further to paragraph 24 the Tribunal may  extend  time  for
    appealing if satisfied that by reason of special circumstances it would
    be unjust not to do so.

12. Further to BO and Others (Extension  of  Time  for  Appealing)  Nigeria
    [2006] UKAIT 00035 this states that

         "The strength of the grounds is a factor to be considered if  there
         is some explanation or excuse for the lateness.  But  it  does  not
         seem to us that strong grounds could by themselves  be  the  reason
         for extending time.  If it was so a person who had  strong  grounds
         would in essence be exempt  from  the  requirements  as  to  time."



     All that was stated by the judge in the grant of permission  to  appeal
    was that at paragraph 2 stating

         "The application for permission to appeal is out of time (by  about
         seven days).  But having regard to the nature of the case,  I  have
         decided to admit this application."

12.  As indicated in BO and Others

         "Good grounds of appeal cannot be a substitute for timeliness.   If
         there is an explanation for the delay, however, the strength of the
         grounds of appeal may help to compensate for a bad excuse  ...  the
         stronger the grounds are the more likely it is  that  justice  will
         demand that they be heard."

13.  However a further factor is the consequences of the decision and as  Mr
    Corben pointed out the factors  of  certainty  for  the  appellants  is
    important but the fact is it is not the case that the appellants  would
    for example be refused an in-country right of  appeal.   There  was  no
    suggestion that there was an error by Mr and Mrs Adenuga.

14.  It was not clear on the face of the decision that the judge had  indeed
    explored the  factors  and  Huang  and  Chin  (Extension  of  Time  for
    Appealing) [2013] UKUT 00343 (IAC) confirmed that a judge must consider
    all available material and consider the extent of the delay and whether
    any explanation covers the whole of that period.


16.  It was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  Carruthers'  grant
    of permission to appeal was defective in that no reasons were given  or
    reasons were inadequate as to why this application  was  admitted.  The
    Secretary of State in the application for permission to  appeal  merely
    stated

         "The reason this application was not made  in  time  is  due  to  a
         shortage of resources within the Secretary  of  State's  Specialist
         Appeals Team,  it  was  not  possible  to  have  the  determination
         reviewed within the time limit for appeal."

18.  No evidence was produced in relation to sickness  or  otherwise  within
    the Special Appeals Team and to  merely  argue  shortage  of  resources
    would not explain the routine permission to appeal  applications  which
    had been submitted throughout the period and if this is  considered  to
    be a special circumstance to be accepted this could  justify  all  late
    applications or certainly a departure from the Rules as  they  are  set
    out.

20.  However I find that it is clear that permission was granted and  it  is
    not for me to go behind that grant of  permission.   I  note  that  the
    delay on the par of the Secretary of State was for a  relatively  short
    time and Judge Carruthers clearly addressed his mind to the  fact  that
    the application for permission to appeal was made out of time.   Should
    the appellants have an issue with this  they  must  institute  judicial
    review proceedings.  In respect of the application  for  permission  to
    appeal itself I found that ground 1 which suggests that the  judge  has
    misdirected herself in law has no  substance  to  it  because  in  fact
    paragraphs 22 to 31 are  a  record  of  the  submissions  made  by  the
    appellant and not a direction in law by the judge.

21.  Nonetheless ground 3 that the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  a
    relevant consideration has greater weight.  As recorded at paragraph 58
     of EV Philippines [2014] EWCA Civ 874,  there  was  an  assessment  of
    what should be recorded in the assessment of the best interests of  the
    children and this should be made on the facts as they are 'in the  real
    world'.  It was stated that the parental  rights  to  remain  were  the
    background against which the assessment should  be  conducted  and  the
    ultimate question would be is whether it was reasonable to  expect  the
    child to follow the parent with no right to remain to  the  country  of
    origin.  The case states that if the mother was removed the father  had
    no independent right to remain and if the parents were removed then  it
    was entirely reasonable to expect the children to go with them.

22.  The judge at paragraph 34 took into account that  the  third  appellant
    had been here for seven years since her 4th birthday  and  would  leave
    the UK with her parents and would continue  to  enjoy  their  love  and
    support but the judge failed to take into account the background of the
    parents into her assessment of the reasonableness of whether the  child
    should be expected to be able to stay or not.  A further error  in  the
    judge's determination is the failure to assess the factors in  relation
    to the first and second appellant,  that  is  the  parents,  and  there
    appeared to be almost an entire absence of reasoning in that respect.

23.  I therefore find there is an error of law and the determination is  set
    aside.  In view of the nature and extent of the  findings  to  be  made
    particularly in respect of the first and second appellants  the  matter
    should be returned to the First-tier  Tribunal  as  this  determination
    cannot stand and the matter is remitted further to paragraph 7.2 of the
    Presidential Practice Statement.



Signed                                  Date 5TH November 2014




DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


