
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number IA/53456/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons promulgated
On 9 December 2014     On 12 December 2014


                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Abdul Gafur Patel
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms. J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. M. Afzal of M A Consultants (London).


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Buckwell promulgated on 22 September 2014, allowing Mr  Patel's  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 28  November  2013
    to remove him from the UK.

 2. Although before me the Secretary of State is the appellant and Mr Patel
    is the respondent, for the sake of  consistency  with  the  proceedings
    before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to Mr  Patel  as
    the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

Background

 3. The Appellant is a national of India born on 23 May 1959. His  personal
    and immigration histories are set out in the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal, in particular at paragraphs 1 and 2: it  is  unnecessary
    to repeat them in detail here. The  following  dates  are  particularly
    germane: the Appellant arrived in the UK on  14  July  1994;  his  most
    recent application, an application "for indefinite leave to  remain  in
    the UK on the basis of  continuous  residency"  -  to  quote  from  the
    representatives' letter of 18 March 2013 - was made on 19  March  2013;
    the application was refused for reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL')  dated  25  November  2013  and  a  Notice  of
    Immigration Decision communicating a removal decision was  prepared  on
    28 November 2013 and served on 3 December 2013.

 4. The Appellant appealed against the removal decision  to  the  IAC.  The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules with reference to paragraph 276ADE, and also under Article  8  of
    the ECHR, for reasons set out in his determination.

 5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  which
    was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth  on  10  November
    2014.

Consideration

 6. There was no dispute between the parties that  the  Appellant  met  the
    suitability  requirements  stipulated  in  paragraph  276ADE(i)  -  see
    determination  at  paragraph  8.   Subparagraphs   (iii)-(vi)   provide
    alternative methods of meeting paragraph 276ADE, depending upon age and
    length of time spent in the UK. The requirement under  276ADE(iii),  is
    that the applicant "has lived continuously in the UK for  at  least  20
    years (discounting any period of imprisonment)".

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal under the Rules on the
    basis that it was uncontested that by  the  date  of  the  hearing  the
    Appellant had completed a period exceeding 20 years residence in the UK
    - "On  that  basis  he  satisfied  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE  of  HC  395,  and  succeeds  in  that
    regard" (paragraph 14).

 8. The Respondent has challenged that conclusion  on  the  basis  that  it
    represents an incomplete reading of  paragraph  276ADE,  which  in  its
    initial sentence states "The requirements to be met by an applicant for
    leave to remain on the grounds of private life in the UK  are  that  at
    the date  of  application,  the  applicant:".  The  Appellant  had  not
    completed 20 years residence as of the date of his  application  on  19
    March 2013. It was not until 13 July 2014 that 20 years were completed.
    In such circumstances the Respondent's decision was in accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules.

 9. I accept that submission.

10. In doing so I have had regard to the  fact  that  pursuant  to  section
    85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 the  Tribunal
    may consider evidence about any matter which it thinks relevant to  the
    substance of the decision, including evidence which concerns  a  matter
    arising after the date of the  decision.  Although  the  Appellant  has
    indeed after the date of the Respondent's decision completed  20  years
    residence in the UK, such a circumstance does not alter the  fact  that
    he did not meet the requirements of the Rules, which specify  that  the
    period  of  residence  is  to  have  been  completed  at  the  date  of
    application.

11. Mr Afzal sought to persuade me that the decisions in MU ('statement  of
    additional grounds' - long residence -  discretion)  Bangladesh  [2010]
    UKUT 442 (IAC) and Patel [2013] UKSC 72, were such that  the  Appellant
    could avail  himself  of  the  post-decision  completion  of  20  years
    residence in order to succeed in his appeal against the decision of  28
    November 2013 under the Rules.

12.  In  this  context,  my  attention  was  directed  to  the  letter   of
    representations dated 26 August 2014  (Appellant's  bundle  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal at page 3), which requested  a  reconsideration  of
    the Appellants human rights claim "on the basis  of  our  client  being
    resident in the UK for over 20 years", and a  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds (pages 4-7) asserting "I have lived  in  the  UK  for  over  20
    years, I now meet the relevant criteria".

13. I do not accept that either MU or Patel provide the assistance that  Mr
    Afzal claims. MU was concerned with an earlier version of the so-called
    'long residence' rule, which did not stipulate that the relevant period
    of years required to be met at the date of  application.  The  passages
    relied upon in Patel, at paragraphs 42 and 43, whilst  indicating  that
    new information may be dealt with  during  the  course  of  an  appeal,
    (which finds an echo in section 85(4)), does not in any way  alter  the
    express meaning of the relevant Rule herein. More particularly, it does
    not result in the post-decision fact of  the  Appellant  completing  20
    years residence on 13 July 2014 somehow satisfying the  requirement  to
    have completed 20 years residence as of the date of his application  on
    19 March 2013. The Statement of Additional Grounds and  the  letter  of
    representations of 26 August 2014 did not constitute a variation of the
    application made on 19 March 2013 because they post-dated the  decision
    on that application. Even if they had constituted a  variation  of  the
    application, this would not have altered the date of  the  application.
    Furthermore, they did not constitute a new application because the  due
    fee had not been paid. Even if they did constitute such an  application
    there was no relevant decision on that application  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

14. I pause to note  that  Mr  Afzal  stated  that  he  had  advanced  such
    submissions before the First-tier  Tribunal,  and  initially  suggested
    that his submissions must have informed the Judge's decision  to  allow
    the appeal under the Rules. However, whilst it  is  apparent  that  the
    Judge made some reference to the further representations  submitted  on
    26 August 2014 (determination at paragraphs 7 and 8),  it  was  in  due
    course accepted by Mr Afzal that the Judge did not  otherwise  indicate
    in his determination an acceptance of the submissions now relied upon.

15.  In  the  circumstances,  accepting  as  I  do  the  substance  of  the
    Respondent's challenge, I conclude that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in law in his consideration of the Appellant's appeal  under  the
    Rules. This aspect of  his  decision  requires  to  be  set  aside.  In
    remaking the decision, only one outcome is possible. The Appellant  did
    not satisfy the Rules at the date of his application,  and  accordingly
    the Respondent's decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules.
    I remake the decision under the Rules by dismissing that aspect of  the
    Appellant's appeal.

16. The Respondent also sought to challenge the  Judge's  conclusion  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR, essentially pleading  that  the  Judge  had  not
    given adequate reasons for concluding in the  Appellant's  favour,  and
    that he had  essentially  based  his  conclusion  on  his  misconceived
    approach to the decision under the Rules.

17. The key passage in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination  in  this
    regard is set out in the following terms at paragraph 15: "The  outcome
    would turn on proportionality, and in  that  respect  in  view  of  the
    evidence presented overall, and the  satisfaction  of  the  Immigration
    Rule requirements for indefinite leave to remain, the Respondent  would
    not be entitled to rely upon  Article  8(2)  ECHR  in  response  to  an
    engagement   of   Article   8(1)   rights.   That   would   be   wholly
    disproportionate in all the circumstances".

18. I pause to note that the reference to indefinite leave to remain is  in
    error, because the satisfaction  of  paragraph  276ADE  results  in  an
    initial grant of leave not exceeding 30 months: see paragraph 276BE. In
    my judgement, nothing of significance turns on this particular error in
    considering the Judge's approach to proportionality.

19. It was common ground before me that in contrast to the appeal under the
    Rules where the wording of 276ADE focused on the circumstances  at  the
    date of the application, the Tribunal was not so constrained in respect
    of Article 8, and was entitled to have regard to the  circumstances  as
    they were at the date of  the  appeal  hearing  -  by  which  time  the
    Appellant had indeed completed 20 years residence. It follows that  the
    Judge was correct to observe (save in respect  of  the  requirement  of
    making an application) the Appellant did indeed meet  the  requirements
    under the Rules that would secure leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of
    private life.

20. The amendments to the Immigration Rules introduced from  9  July  2012,
    including specifically paragraph 276ADE in respect of private life, and
    Appendix FM in respect of family life,  were  expressly  introduced  to
    indicate where the Respondent considered  the  proportionality  balance
    generally lay in Article 8 cases. Given that  it  is  therefore  to  be
    taken that the Respondent's position is that it would be  proportionate
    to  grant  leave  to  remain  to  a  person  meeting  the   suitability
    requirements who has resided in the UK for 20 years, I can see no fault
    in the reasoning, or the conclusion of, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove  the   Appellant   in
    circumstances where he has now obtained. 20 years residence.

21. Accordingly I find no error of law in respect  of  the  decision  under
    Article 8, and that aspect of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  under  the  Immigration
    Rules involved an error of law and is set aside.

23. I remake the decision under the Immigration Rules.  Mr  Patel's  appeal
    under the Rules is dismissed.

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge under Article  8  of  the
    ECHR contained no error of law and stands.

25. Mr Patel's appeal remains allowed on human rights grounds.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     10 December 2014

