
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53429/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent, Bennett     |Determination Promulgated            |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 18 December 2014                  |On 19 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                           ms Ophelia Esi Bempong
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant/Respondent:   Ms Rutherford of Counsel
For the Respondent/Appellant:   Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The present appeal is by the  respondent  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FTT), who is the appellant before this Tribunal.  I will refer to  the
    parties by their designations before the FTT notwithstanding that their
    roles are reversed in the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a Ghanaian national who was born in March 1988.

3.   The appellant entered the UK on 1 June 2012 on a six month visit  visa.
     On 17 May 2013 she submitted a residence card application.   This  was
    on the basis of her relationship with Andrew Kwesi Hasford, an  Italian
    national born in December 1989.  The appellant claims to have started a
    relationship with Mr  Hasford  which  subsequently  resulted  in  their
    marriage. Mr Hasford, who is believed to be from a Ghanaian background,
    had a job in the UK and is therefore entitled to exercise Treaty rights
    in the UK.

4.   The respondent, having considered the application, refused to  issue  a
    residence  card  on  24  November  2013  because   she   regarded   the
    relationship to be a marriage of convenience.  The appellant had failed
    to produce a valid  marriage  certificate  as  evidence  that  she  was
    related as claimed to an EEA national and having regard to the contents
    of Regulation 8 the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 ("2006 Regulations") the appellant had failed to prove  a  durable
    relationship with an EEA national such as would entitle her to stay  in
    the UK under the 2006 Regulations.

Appeal Proceedings

5.   The appellant appealed to the FTT.  Her appeal  came  before  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ferguson   sitting   in   Birmingham   ("the
    Immigration Judge").  He decided that the appellant was entitled  to  a
    residence card as confirmation of her right to reside in the UK as  the
    spouse of an EEA national exercising Treaty rights.  The judge accepted
    that a proxy marriage conducted in Ghana  is  "recognised  as  a  valid
    marriage".  The Immigration Judge also  referred  to  the  case  of  CB
    Brazil [2008] UKAIT 00080.  That case,  according  to  the  Immigration
    Judge, confirmed there was no exception in  immigration  cases  to  the
    Rule that a marriage is governed by the domestic law of the country  in
    which it takes place.  In his view, provided the marriage was valid  in
    Ghana this was sufficient for the respondent to recognise that marriage
    certificate and grant the necessary residence  card.   The  Immigration
    Judge therefore allowed the appeal and made no anonymity  direction  or
    fee award.

6.   The respondent appeals.  Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Easterman
    considered that the grounds were at least arguable having regard to the
    case of Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT  24.   That  case
    was  clear  authority  for  the  proposition  that  when   a   marriage
    certificate is issued by  a  competent  authority  in  the  country  of
    marriage there was an additional requirement that an applicant  had  to
    show that the marriage was valid and recognised in the country  of  the
    EEA state from which the marriage partner  comes.   In  this  case  the
    marriage partner, i.e. the sponsor, was an Italian national who claimed
    to be  exercising  Treaty  rights  in  the  UK.  He  therefore  had  to
    demonstrate a valid form of document recognising that the  validity  of
    the marriage in Italy before a residence card could  be  issued.   This
    important principle  was  reinforced  by  the  case  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal of TA (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316 (IAC).   This
    was a matter therefore that required proper consideration by the  Upper
    Tribunal.



The Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

7.   I heard oral  submissions  by  both  representatives.   The  respondent
    relied on the grounds of appeal.  These relied on the  case  of  Kareem
    and stated that there was no valid marriage recognised in the UK.   The
    grounds also pointed out that the Immigration Judge had failed to reach
    a conclusion as to the  "durable  relationship"  issue,  although  that
    "matter was clearly in play".  The respondent sought a reversal of  the
    decision and if necessary a rehearing to determine  the  durability  of
    the relationship.

8.   Ms Rutherford, who  appeared  for  the  appellant,  accepted  that  the
    Immigration Judge had not dealt fully with the issue of the validity of
    the marriage in Italy but the parties were living at the  same  address
    and new  evidence  was  available  to  establish  this.  She  therefore
    submitted that there was a durable relationship between the sponsor and
    the appellant.

9.   At the end of the hearing I indicated my decision which was to  find  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FTT on the basis that  the
    Immigration Judge had not considered the case of Kareem or reached any,
    any adequate conclusions, on the issue of the  extent  of  the  durable
    relationship between the appellant and the sponsor.  I indicated that I
    would re-make the decision leaving in place the original  fact-findings
    of the Immigration Judge, which were not impugned.   I  also  indicated
    that I would take account of the new documents submitted to support the
    durable relationship before reaching a conclusion on  that  point.   Mr
    McVeety did not object to me taking this course.

10.  I now turn to consider the substantive merits of the  appellant's  case
    that she qualified for a residence card either  on  the  basis  of  her
    marriage to Mr Hasford or, in  the  alternative,  that  she  was  in  a
    durable relationship with the  sponsor,  an  EEA  national,  so  as  to
    qualify as an "extended family member" under Regulation 8 of  the  2006
    Regulations.

My Conclusions

11.  The appellant had the burden of showing that she was  a  family  member
    of an EEA national who was exercising treaty rights in the UK  or  that
    she was an "extended family member".  Regulation 7,  which  deals  with
    family members, requires only  that  the  appellant  is  the  sponsor's
    "spouse". However, it has been established in the case  of  Kareem  and
    the case of TA that the marital relationship  recognised  by  the  2006
    Regulations had been recognised under the laws of the member state from
    which the EEA citizen obtained his nationality.  The issue  of  whether
    the appellant was in a durable relationship with an EEA national within
    the meaning of Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations  was  an  issue  of
    fact to be determined at the date of the hearing before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

12.  The only documents relating to the marriage between the  appellant  and
    the sponsor before the First-tier Tribunal confirmed the existence of a
    customary marriage between them recognised in Ghana.  No documents were
    produced to confirm that the marriage was recognised in  Italy.   There
    are peripheral documents about Italian marriage law  but  nothing  that
    would satisfy the Kareem principle.  Ms Rutherford  did  not  seriously
    dissent from the view that this case could not succeed under Regulation
    7 because the appellant had not demonstrated that she  was  married  to
    the sponsor and that that marriage was recognised by the laws of Italy.

13.  The position in relation to Regulation 8 needs  revisiting  to  reflect
    the recent documentation.

14.   Unfortunately,  the  evidence  of  the  parties  were  in  a  "durable
    relationship" is lacking.  They had a child together (K born in  2014).
    However, at the time of the appellant's application she claims to  have
    lived with the sponsor at a certain address. This is also  the  address
    on the marriage certificate from Ghana in March 2013. There are several
    documents which refer to the sponsor living at that  address  but  none
    showing the appellant  and  the  sponsor  as  being  resident  at  that
    address. An interview was conducted with both  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor on 22nd November 2013. There  were  discrepancies  in  the  two
    accounts given in interview.  For example in  describing  the  previous
    day the appellant said that they had eaten their  evening  meal  at  6,
    whereas the sponsor said it had been  at  "around  7  or  8".  This  is
    something one would have expected them to remember  from  the  previous
    day.  A  full  list  of  these  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  is
    contained in the respondent's reasons for  refusal  letter  dated  24th
    November 2013.

15.  Several additional documents were submitted  at  the  hearing  on  25th
    June 2014. The appellant and the sponsor claim to have cohabited  at  a
    second address in a nearby town. They include a tenancy agreement dated
    3 December  2013  within  those  additional  documents.  However,  this
    document does not have many of the hallmarks of a modern private sector
    tenancy agreement.  It does refer to the rent payable, but it refers to
    "nil" deposit being payable, which is highly unusual.  It refers to the
    tenancy being a "controlled" tenancy  in  clause  1.10  but  controlled
    tenancies as  such  were  abolished  in  1989.  Unfortunately  for  the
    appellant, the documents which post-date the tenancy agreement in 2013,
    such as the NHS letters which were submitted at the hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal do not refer to the appellant as living at  the  address
    on the tenancy  agreement.  Again,  there  do  not  appear  to  be  any
    documents which show that both  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  were
    living at the same address. For example a  TV  licence  renewal  notice
    refers to the appellant as living at a third address.  The  photographs
    produced do not demonstrate a durable relationship but  can  easily  be
    taken solely for that purpose. Nor does the single birthday card, which
    was handed in at the Upper Tribunal hearing, help  to  show  a  durable
    relationship.

16.  In the circumstances I find that the appellant has not  discharged  the
    burden which rests on her of showing that the relationship between  her
    and the sponsor was a durable one.  It seems much more likely that  the
    relationship  was  a  "marriage  of  convenience"  as  the   respondent
    suspects.     It follows that  the  appellant  has  failed  to  satisfy
    either  the  requirements  of  Regulation  7  or  the  requirements  of
    Regulation 8 of the 2006 Regulations.



My Decision

17.  In all the circumstances I am satisfied  that  the  respondent  reached
    the correct decision.  Having found a material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  I  set  aside  that  decision  and
    substitute the decision of this Tribunal.  The appeal before me by  the
    respondent is allowed.  I substitute my  decision  which  is  that  the
    appeal against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse  a  residence
    card is dismissed.

18.  There is no application before me and there was no  application  before
    the FTT for an anonymity direction and I make no such direction.

19.  The Immigration Judge did not make any fee award.



Signed        Dated 17 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
