
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/53022/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                        |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 22 June 2015                              |Promulgated On 1 July 2015     |
|                                             |                               |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA

                                   Between

                THE SECETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               ms fahmida rohi
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms J Isherwood, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Muquit, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and  the
   respondent is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 January 1946.  For the sake
   of convenience I shall refer to the latter as the "appellant" and to  the
   Secretary of the State as the "respondent", which  are  the  designations
   they had in the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal.




2.    The appellant's appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  the
   decision of the respondent to  refuse  the  appellant  further  leave  to
   remain in the United Kingdom  pursuant  to  Article  8  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights. A Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal,  Coleman
   allowed the appellant's appeal pursuant to  Article  8  of  the  European
   Convention on Human Rights.



3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen in  a  decision  dated  19  March  2015
   granted the respondent permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  it
   being found to be arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  by
   misconstruing section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
   2002 and treating the appellant is exempt by  reasons  of  age  from  the
   effects of subsection (2), ability to speak English and (3)  relating  to
   financial independence.



4. Thus the appeal came before me.




   The first-tier Tribunal's findings


5.       The First-tier Tribunal allowed the appellant's appeal,  concluding
   that :



          "[26]." It is argued that paragraph 117B is not fulfilled  because
          the appellant is not able to  speak  English  and  does  not  have
          skills to make her financially independent.  I  think  this  is  a
          misreading of the paragraph. Under all the present rules, English-
          language requirements are not required for persons over the age of
          65. It must therefore be recognised that such a requirement  could
          not  be  imposed  upon  the  appellant   to   fulfil   Article   8
          requirements. Similarly it would not be contemplated that a  woman
          of her age would need to be financially  independent  by  her  own
          earning capacity. It is anticipated in all the rules that  in  the
          case of elderly relatives, the test is whether or not the families
          can maintain and accommodate the  appellant  without  recourse  to
          public funds. In this case the families  have  provided  financial
          evidence to show that they are in a position to  do  so  and  they
          have as a matter of fact been doing so for the past three years."


          [27] "The only basis on which the appellant fails pursuant to  the
          immigration rules is the requirement to return to Pakistan to make
          an appropriate application to return as a dependent  relative.  To
          ask a 69-year-old woman in poor health, wheelchair-bound, to do so
          must  be  disproportionate  to  the  need   to   maintain   proper
          immigration control. I therefore find that the decision does beach
          the appellant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR.  I  allow  the
          appeal on human rights grounds".


     Grounds of appeal




6. The grounds of appeal state the following which I  summarise.  The  Judge
   has materially misdirected himself in  respect  of  the  requirements  of
   section 117B. At paragraph 26 of the determination the Judge  appears  to
   apply the language requirements of the Immigration Rules when considering
   the appellant's ability to speak English when having  regard  to  section
   117B (2). The approach taken by the Judge is an incorrect  interpretation
   of section 117B. The appellant is over 65 years of age and therefore this
   is not  an  exemption  named  under  section  117B  (2).  The  Judge  has
   materially erred in law by finding that this  applies  to  the  appellant
   when considering factors outlined in section 117B.





7. When performing the balancing exercise, the Judge into material error  by
   not taking into account the appellant's inability to speak English  is  a
   factor which weighs against the appellant.




8. Similarly, the Judge materially misdirected himself in his  consideration
   of the appellant's financial independence when considering  section  117B
   (3). The Judge has looked at the appellant age instead  of  her  lack  of
   financial independence is weighing against her in the balancing exercise.




9. The Judge failed to take into account  the  findings  in  Akhalu  (health
   claim; ECHR article 8) [2013] UK UT00400 (IAC) which applies the findings
   of MM Zimbabwe [2012] EWCA Civ 279 in the  headnote  (1)  and  (2)  which
   states the following.



           ( 1) MM (Zimbabwe)v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
           [2012] EWCA Civ 279 does not established that  the  claimant  is
           disqualified from assessing the protection of article 8  wherein
           aspect of her claim is  a  difficulty  or  inability  to  access
           health care in her country of nationality  unless,  possibly,  a
           private life has a  bearing  upon  her  prognosis.  The  correct
           approach is not to leave out of account what is, by any view,  a
           material consideration of central importance to  the  individual
           concerned but to recognise the countervailing public interest in
           removal will outweigh the consequences for  the  health  of  the
           claimant because of a disparity of health care facilities in all
           but a very few cases.




           (2) The consequences of removal for the health of  the  claimant
           who would not be able to access equivalent health care in  their
           country of nationality as was  available  in  this  country  are
           paying is relevant to the question of proportionality. But, when
           weighed against the public interest in ensuring that the limited
           resources of this country's health service are used to the  best
           effect for the benefit of those  for  whom  they  are  intended,
           those consequences do not weigh heavily in the claimant's favour
           but speak cogently in support of the public interest in removal.




10. The Judge's finding that the appellant's  removal  is  disproportionate,
   has placed significant weight on the appellant's health. In the  case  of
   Akhalu, the appellant's requirement to seek NHS treatment for her medical
   treatment should weigh heavily against her  in  the  balancing  exercise.
   There is no evidence to suggest that the appellant  has  private  medical
   insurance/treatment or that treatment for her condition is unavailable in
   Pakistan. The Judge has not taken this  into  account  in  the  balancing
   exercise, and has therefore  materially  erred  in  law  by  finding  the
   appellant's removal is disproportionate.






Decision on the error of law

11. Having considered the determination as  a  whole,  I  find  the  Judge's
   consideration of the appellant's  appeal  in  respect  of  Article  8  is
   materially flawed.  The  Judge  comes  across  clearly  confused  in  his
   determination as to the factors he must take into  consideration  and  to
   place the correct emphasis on these factors. The  Judge's  evaluation  of
   the public interest question of the public interest was cursory  at  best
   in the determination.

  12. The appellant considered the criteria set out in the Immigration Rules
      and s117B in his assessment of Article 8 when all he was  required  to
      do was to consider the appellant's failure  to  meet  the  Immigration
      Rules as the starting point and then go on to consider the  Strasbourg
      jurisprudence in respect of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on
      Human Rights. Section 117A-117D is not to be  taken  to  override  the
      previous case law on Article 8 and needs for a structured approach.




  13. The Judge has to take into account  the  five  questions  set  out  in
      Razgar [2004] UK HL 27. The effects in section 117 a-117D is a further
      elaboration  of  these  five  questions  which  is  essentially  about
      proportionality and justify ability in respect of proportionality. The
      definition in section 117 a (3) states:

           (2), "the public interest question" means the question of whether
        an interference with a person's right to  respect  for  private  and
        family life is justified under Article 8. [Emphasis added]

14. Mr Muquit argued that in this appeal, "money is not the problem" as  the
   appellant and her family members have sufficient money.  He  argued  that
   the Judge took into account that the appellant's doctor's  evidence  that
   the appellant needs emotional care and section 117 issue are in any case,
   a red herring and irrelevant to the issues in this appeal. He  emphasised
   that he is not saying that this is a "near miss" argument but argued that
   the more a person can  demonstrate  that  he/she  is  able  to  meet  the
   Immigration Rules, is relevant to the Article 8 proportionality exercise.

15. Part 5A only applies where the  Tribunal  considers  article  8(2)  ECHR
   directly which the Judge did in this case.  The Immigration Rules already
   contain "the public interest question".  Although case law  continues  to
   develop, the current position is perhaps best expressed in paragraph  135
   of  R(MM (Lebanon)) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985:

                     Where the relevant group of  IRs  [immigration  rules],
           upon their proper construction provide  a  "complete  code"  for
           dealing with a person's Convention rights in the  context  of  a
           particular IR or statutory provision, such as  in  the  case  of
           "foreign criminals", then the balancing exercise and the way the
           various factors are to be taken into account  in  an  individual
           case must  be  done  in  accordance  with  that  code,  although
           reference  to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in  the  code  will
           nonetheless entail  a  proportionality  exercise.   But  if  the
           relevant group of IRs is not such a  "complete  code"  then  the
           proportionality test will be more at large, albeit guided by the
           Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law."

16. The appellant's application was made primarily pursuant to Article 8  of
   the European convention on Human Rights in respect of her family life  in
   the United Kingdom. There was no dispute that the appellant did not  meet
   all the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  even  if  as  Mr  Muquit
   argues, she met some of them.




17. The Judge essentially found that that the appellant has  been  diagnosed
   with Parkinson's disease while in the United Kingdom  and  is  wheelchair
   bound and that should somehow exempt from  all  the  "requirements  of  s
   117B". Section 117B is not a list of  requirements  which  if  fulfilled,
   will entitle the appellant to live in this country but  they  are  merely
   considerations to be taken into account.



18. The Judge failed to apply the principles set out in  Akhalu  and  failed
   to treat the appellant's dependence on medical treatment  at  the  public
   expense as a factor weighing against her. At the hearing it  was  alleged
   that the appellant has paid or is going to pay the NHS  for  the  medical
   treatment received. This is one of the questions which will  have  to  be
   resolved at the rehearing.




19. Having considered the determination as  a  whole  I  conclude  that  the
   Judge erred in law in his evaluation of  the  appellant's  appeal  and  I
   therefore set aside the decision. Mr Muquit requested that in  the  event
   that I was to find an error of law I should  submit  the  appeal  to  the
   First-tier Tribunal for rehearing because findings of  fact  have  to  be
   made and potentially as to whether the appellant has been a burden on the
   public purse by utilising the NHS for her medical conditions  or  whether
   she has paid for her medical treatment in this country.



20. For the  reasons  given  above,  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal is set aside as it is infected by  material  error.  I  preserve
   none of the findings. I direct that the appeal be listed before  a  Judge
   of the  first-tier  Tribunal  other  than  Judge  Coleman  on  the  first
   available date to remake the decision.




21. I further direct that the appellant provide evidence to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal that she paid for her medical treatment from the NHS as claimed.




    DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is allowed and the appeal be  sent  back  to
the First-tier Tribunal

Signed by

Mrs S Chana
A       Deputy       Judge        of        the        Upper        Tribunal
    the 23rd day of June 2015

