
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/53681/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 January 2016                   |On 27 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          HORACE ALOYSIUS WILLIAMS
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Norman (counsel) instructed by J M Wilsons,
solicitors, LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal  but
in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  a
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Somal, promulgated  on19  August  2014
which allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on 17  December  1979  and  is  a  national  of
Jamaica.

4.    On 24 October 2013 the Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for leave to remain in  the  UK  and  made  directions  for  the
appellant's removal under s.47 of the Immigration and Asylum Act  2006.  The
refusal letter gave a number of reasons.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal  Judge  Somal  ("the  Judge")  allowed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision on article 8 ECHR grounds.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 2 February  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Lane gave permission to appeal stating

    "Whilst I agree with the observations of Judge Nicholson,  who  refused
    permission in the First-tier Tribunal, regarding MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985
    and Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT  640
    (IAC) [4-5], it is arguable that, by making no findings on  the  appeal
    under the immigration rules, the Judge did  not  establish  a  starting
    point for his analysis of article 8 ECHR outside the rules."

The Hearing

7.    Ms Johnstone, for the respondent, adopted the terms of the grounds  of
appeal, and acknowledged that, because of the passage of time, the  case-law
in relation to the approach to be taken to article 8  assessment  has  moved
on. She told me, however, that section 117 of the 2002 Act was in  force  at
the date of decision, and argued that the Judge had not  properly  addressed
section 117B considerations. She referred me to the cases of Dube  (ss.117A-
117D) [2015] UKUT 00090 (IAC) and Deelah and others (section 117B  -  ambit)
[2015] UKUT 00515 (IAC). She told me that an incorrect approach  to  section
117 of the 2002 Act had taken by the Judge. She argued that  the  Judge  was
incorrect to find that the presence  in  the  UK  of  qualifying  child  was
sufficient to tip the balance in the appellant's favour. Ms  Johnstone  told
me that it was a material error of law for the Judge to  omit  consideration
of the immigration rules (in detail) before moving on to an overall  article
8 assessment. She asked me to set the decision aside and substitute  my  own
decision on the basis of the facts as the First-tier  Judge  found  them  to
be.

8.    Ms Norman, for the appellant, told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain any errors, material or otherwise. She told me that  the  Judge  was
correct not to dwell on the immigration rules because it had never been  the
appellant's case that he could fulfil the requirements  of  either  appendix
FM or paragraph 276 ADE.  She  explained  that  the  appellant  was  granted
discretionary leave to remain in the UK  in  July  2009,  and  argued  that,
notwithstanding the date of decision, this is a case which fell to be  dealt
with under the transitional provisions, so that this case should  have  been
considered under the rules as they were before the amendment in  July  2012.
She  reminded  me  that  First-tier  Judge   Nicholson   initially   refused
permission to appeal, and referred me to the reasons for refusal set out  in
his decision dated 10 October  2014,  which  she  adopted  as  part  of  her
argument. She took me to [22] of  the  Judge's  decision,  where  the  Judge
clearly refers to section 117 of the 2002 Act, and told me that an  holistic
reading of the decision discloses that  the  Judge  found  that  there  were
compelling reasons to consider this case outside the immigration rules.  She
urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    Permission to appeal was granted in this case so on the basis that  it
was arguable that the decision contains a material error of law because  the
Judge made "... no findings on the appeal under the immigration rules."  The
grounds of appeal do not advance an argument that an incorrect  approach  to
section 117B of the 2002 Act was  taken,  yet  a  significant  part  of  the
presenting officer's submission dwelt on section 117B of the 2002 Act.

10.   In so far as it is competent to consider that submission, I find  that
it is without merit. At [22] the Judge says "I have had  regard  to  section
117 of the 2002 Act in assessing the public interest in the  proportionality
assessment." And at [19]  the  Judge  says  "there  is  no  doubt  that  the
interests of private or family life would  not  normally  prevail  over  the
interest of immigration control."

11.   In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC)  the  Tribunal  held  that
the statutory duty to consider the matters set out in s  117B  of  the  2002
Act is satisfied if the Tribunal's decision shows that it has had regard  to
such parts of it as are relevant.

12.   Between [15] and [22] the Judge  carries  out  a  balancing  exercise,
weighing the facts and circumstances of the  appellant's  case  against  the
fact that immigration control is in the public interest. The  Judge  carries
out a full, detailed and careful analysis before concluding that the  public
interest is outweighed by  the  quality  of  the  relationship  between  the
appellant and his two daughters. That was a conclusion which was  reasonably
open to the Judge to reach. It is for the Judge  to  assess  proportionality
and accord weight to the various component parts of article  8  family  life
brought out by the evidence before the  Judge.  That  is  exactly  what  the
Judge in this  case  did.  The  Judge's  conclusion  may  be  one  that  the
respondent does not like; but that does not amount to a  material  error  of
law. In reality the respondent  is  doing  no  more  than  quibble  about  a
conclusion which was well within  the  range  of  conclusions  open  to  the
Judge.

13.   In this case the Judge finds that the appellant's  two  daughters  are
qualifying children because of the provisions  of  section  117B(6)  of  the
2002 Act. The respondent argues that the Judge placed undue  weight  on  the
existence of two qualifying children. There is no merit in that  submission.
The Judge was correct to take account of the fact that  this  case  involves
two qualifying children. That finding was  one  of  the  factors  which  the
Judge found weighs in the appellant's favour in  assessing  proportionality.
For the reasons already given, that was a finding of fact which was open  to
the Judge to make.

14.   What this appeal is really about  is  the  perceived  failure  of  the
Judge to consider whether  or  not  the  appellant  can  succeed  under  the
immigration rules, before moving on to consider article 8 ECHR out-with  the
immigration rules. It is true that the Judge makes no findings  of  fact  in
relation to the immigration rules, but in the  particular  circumstances  of
this case there was no need to do so.

15.   At [5] the judge records  "the  appellant's  representative  confirmed
the appeal was under article 8 ECHR and she relied upon  section  55."  That
sentence clearly sets the scene  in  this  case.  The  reasons  for  refusal
letter  narrates  that  the  respondent  considered  both  appendix  FM  and
paragraph 296 ADE of the rules, and finds that  the  appellant  cannot  meet
them. At appeal the appellant candidly concedes that his inability  to  meet
the requirements of the immigration rules is not in dispute.

16.   In SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387  Lord  Justice  Richards
said  at  paragraph  33:  "In  our  judgment,  even   though   a   test   of
exceptionality does not apply in every case  falling  within  the  scope  of
Appendix FM, it is accurate to say that the  general  position  outside  the
sorts  of  special  contexts  referred   to   above   is   that   compelling
circumstances would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of
LTR outside  the  new  Rules  in  Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
formulation which is not  as  strict  as  a  test  of  exceptionality  or  a
requirement of "very compelling reasons" (as referred to in MF (Nigeria)  in
the context of the Rules applicable to foreign criminals), but  which  gives
appropriate weight to the focused consideration of public  interest  factors
as finds expression in the Secretary  of  State's  formulation  of  the  new
Rules in Appendix FM. It also reflects the formulation  in  Nagre  at  para.
[29], which has been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,
e.g., Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ".

17.   At [22] the  Judge  reaches  the  conclusion  of  her  proportionality
assessment and says: "... I find that there  are  exceptional  circumstances
in this case that leave should be granted outside the Rules."

18.    A  fair  reading  of  the  Judge's  decision  indicates  that  it  is
acknowledged by the Judge and the parties to this case that the  purpose  of
the appeal was not to carry out an analysis of  the  immigration  rules,  it
was to determine whether or not the  appellant's  argument  that  article  8
ECHR was engaged out-with the scope of the rules could succeed.  It  is  not
argued that the Judge's article 8 assessment out-with the rules  is  flawed.
What is argued for the respondent is that a procedural step was  omitted  in
the proportionality assessment. If the Judge had included  one  sentence  to
say that this appeal cannot succeed under the immigration rules, that  would
remove the respondent's argument.

19.   That one sentence is effectively found at [5] of the decision. In  any
event any error would only be material if there was a  possibility  that  it
could lead to a different result. In this case a specific finding  that  the
appellant cannot meet the requirements of appendix FM nor can you  meet  the
requirements of paragraph  276  ADE  of  the  rules  would  not  change  the
decision  in  the  case  because  the  Judge's  article  8   proportionality
assessment cannot be  faulted,  and  because  the  Judge  makes  a  specific
finding at [22] that ".... There are exceptional circumstances in this  case
that leave should be granted outside the rules.

20.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that the Upper Tribunal would not  normally  set  aside  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal where there has been no misdirection  of
law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised and the relevant  Country
Guidance has been taken into  account,  unless  the  conclusions  the  judge
draws from the primary data were not reasonably open to him or her.

21.   The Judge carefully considered each strand of evidence  placed  before
her. She carefully records the submissions that were made  and  then,  after
correctly directing herself in law, makes reasoned findings of  fact  before
reaching conclusions which were manifestly open to the Judge to reach.

22.   I find that the Judge's decision, when  read  as  a  whole,  sets  out
findings that are sustainable and sufficiently detailed and based on  cogent
reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

24.   The appeal is dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
stands.


Signed      Date 22 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

