
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53588/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 30th September 2015               |On 12th October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                            SUBHANULLAH AMARKHIL
                         (ANONYMITY order Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes, instructed by Messrs J R Jones
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The initial hearing of this appeal in the  Upper  Tribunal  took  place
    before me on 26th August 2015. My decision following that  hearing  was
    that there was a material error of law in the decision of the judge  at
    first instance. That initial decision was dated 2nd September 2015  and
    promulgated on 4th September 2015. It is annexed  to  and  incorporated
    into this decision.  The background to the appeal is set  out  in  that
    document and there will be no useful purpose in repeating it.

 2. At the resumed hearing before me Mr Vokes  confirmed  that  he  and  Mr
    Smart were agreed that the appeal could be decided without further oral
    evidence, on the basis of the established facts.  Mr  Smart  said  that
    the facts were that the Appellant and his step-mother (who  was  to  be
    regarded as his mother by virtue of  paragraph  6  of  the  Immigration
    Rules) had entered for settlement with one or more other children.  The
    mother had applied for indefinite leave to remain but had failed simply
    because she could  not  meet  the  language  requirement  and  she  was
    therefore given a further 30 months' leave.  Thereby she  fell  out  of
    the five year route to settlement and into  the  ten  year  route.   At
    least one other child had been granted leave in line with  the  mother.
    Considerations under paragraph 298(i)(a) of  the  Rules  could  not  be
    satisfied as the mother was not settled and was in  the  limited  leave
    area.  With  regard  to  sub-paragraph  (b)  although  the  Appellant's
    natural mother had died shortly after his  birth  his  step-mother  was
    alive.  With regard to sub-paragraph (c) it was not asserted  that  the
    father had undertaken  sole  responsibility  for  his  upbringing.   He
    accepted that the Appellant might qualify under sub-paragraph (d) which
    reads:

         "One parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom and there  are  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
         considerations which make exclusion of the  child  undesirable  and
         suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care ..."

 3. Mr Smart said the issue of the Appellant being over the age of  18  had
    already been dealt with and was not a bar to his  succeeding.   Further
    as to sub-paragraph (d) of paragraph 298(i) the Appellant was a  member
    of a family unit and  the  evidence  was  that  shortly  following  his
    mother's death his father had remarried.  There  was  no  dispute  that
    even though he was over 18 there was family life with his  parents  and
    siblings.  He was aware from Mr Vokes that it was also argued that  the
    Appellant could also rely upon Appendix FM to the Rules.

 4. Mr Vokes relied upon  his  helpful  skeleton  argument  upon  which  he
    expanded.  Appendix FM had been considered in  the  refusal  letter  of
    29th November 2013, he said.  The Appellant had been granted  leave  to
    enter as a dependent child of his father who was a UK  citizen  settled
    in this country, although his naturalisation  had  occurred  after  the
    Appellant's birth.  It was argued that paragraph E-LTRC1.2 of  Appendix
    FM applied to him which read "the applicant must be under the age of 18
    at the date of application or when first granted leave as a child under
    this route."  The applicant had been granted leave to enter with a view
    to settlement originally as a child.

 5.  He  continued  that  the  Appellant  also  met  the  other  qualifying
    requirements in paragraphs E-LTRC1.3 to 1.6 as he was not married or in
    a civil partnership, he had not formed an independent family  unit  and
    he was not leading an independent life; he lived  in  the  family  home
    dependent upon his parents and was a student.  With regard to E-LTRC1.6
    one of his parents was in the UK with leave to remain; his  step-mother
    and her partner, the Appellant's  father,  were  both  parents  of  the
    applicant.

 6. He continued that by virtue of E-LTRC1.1 the Appellant could  meet  the
    requirements referred to in the previous  paragraph  by  virtue  of  R-
    LTRC1.1(d)(ii) and that was sufficient.  It was also the case that  his
    step-mother, as the Respondent accepted was a "parent".  She  had  last
    been granted leave to remain on 20th June 2013  when  Appendix  FM  had
    been in force for some time, presumably under  paragraph  D-LTRP1.2  of
    Appendix FM.  That appeared to be the case from the document  appearing
    at page 82 of the Appellant's bundle and therefore the requirements  of
    R-LTRC1.1(d)(iii) was met and there was  no  issue  as  to  suitability
    under  R-LTRC1.1(d)(i).   He  submitted  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and the appeal should be  allowed  on  that
    basis.  As to the meaning of the phrase "under this route" he submitted
    that that meant leave to enter having been granted as a child.

 7. In the alternative he said that  the  Appellant  should  succeed  under
    paragraph 298(i)(d) and  (ii).   He  had  been  given  leave  to  enter
    presumably under paragraph 302 and if it had not been shown that he met
    the test for knowledge of the English language and life in  the  United
    Kingdom under 298(vii) he would be  entitled  to  limited  leave  under
    paragraph 298A.  With regard to "serious and compelling family or other
    considerations", as referred to in paragraph 298(i)(d),  the  Appellant
    did not have an independent existence outside of his family, his  whole
    family lived in the UK, he had no present link to Afghanistan which was
    in the throes of  a  civil  war  and  he  had  been  admitted  with  an
    expectation of settlement as a child.  The Rules as  set  out  were  in
    line with dependent family members over the age of 18  as  set  out  in
    Ghising (Family Life - Adults - Gurkha Policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC).
     It was to be noted that the current policy under paragraph FM included
    no restrictive clause with regard to "serious and compelling family  or
    other considerations."  As was well-established family life had  to  be
    considered in the round and bearing in mind the rights of other members
    of the family.

 8. Finally Mr Smart commented that it appeared from the beginning  of  the
    section on family life as a child of a person with limited leave  as  a
    partner or parent in Appendix FM  that  the  matter  could  be  decided
    either under Appendix FM or under part 8 of the Rules.  Mr  Vokes  said
    that the Appellant's step-mother was applying  for  further  leave  and
    therefore the Appellant came within this route.

 9. Having considered those detailed arguments I found  Mr  Vokes'  primary
    contention to be persuasive.

10. Although the Appellant's application had been  completed  on  the  form
    seeking indefinite leave to remain Appendix FM is expressed to apply to
    applications for leave, not merely for limited  leave.   The  Appellant
    had been granted entry clearance as a child at a time  before  Appendix
    FM was introduced and I could see no reason why  the  generic  form  of
    entry as a child should not be regarded as coming "within this  route."
    It was the case that in the refusal letter the Secretary of  State  had
    considered the various other elements of Appendix FM.   Having  reached
    that view the other elements of Mr Vokes'  argument  fall  into  place.
    The Appellant was under the age of 18 when first  granted  leave  as  a
    child as required by E-LTRC1.2.  He met the qualifying requirements  of
    E-LTRC1.3 to 1.6 and by virtue of R-LTRC1.1(d)(ii) that was  sufficient
    for him to succeed.  The Appellant is entitled to a  further  grant  of
    leave under Appendix FM.

11. With regard to the route under paragraph 298 of  the  Rules  themselves
    there was no evidence before me  that  the  Appellant  had  passed  the
    English and life in the United Kingdom  test  (although  as  he  is  at
    university he almost certainly has  the  required  level  of  English).
    Nonetheless even had he  met  the  test  of  there  being  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations making exclusion  undesirable
    in those circumstances he would not have been  entitled  to  indefinite
    leave to remain.  As I have already found that the  Appellant  succeeds
    under Appendix FM it is not necessary for me to go  on  to  decide  the
    issue although I note that there is much to be said in the  Appellant's
    favour.  He was under the  age  of  18  at  the  date  of  the  initial
    application, his family are here and he continues to have  family  life
    with them and he is about to embark on a university course.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules Appendix FM.

No anonymity order was sought and none is made.


Signed   Date 07 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have considered whether to make a fee award in favour  of  the  Appellant.
However the Appellant succeeded only on the basis of an argument  which  was
not put earlier to the Respondent  and  in  those  circumstances  I  do  not
consider that a fee award is appropriate and none is made.


Signed   Date 07 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
