

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: IA/53527/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |    Determination Promulgated|
|On 24th July 2014                             |    On 7th August 2014       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HARRIES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               MR IMRAN HOSSEN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Dey, Counsel
For the Respondent: Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Parties and Proceedings

    1. The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of State for the  Home
       Department.  The  respondent,  Mr  Imran  Hossen,  is  referred   to
       hereafter as the claimant.  He was born on 2nd March 1987 and  is  a
       citizen of Bangladesh.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       against the decision of the Secretary of State made on 28th November
       2013 to refuse his application for further leave to  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.


    2. The appeal was dismissed under the  Immigration  Rules  but  allowed
       under Article 8 of the ECHR after a hearing at Hatton Cross  on  2nd
       May 2014 before First-tier Tribunal Judge Courtney (the Judge).  The
       Secretary of State was granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
       decision of the Judge to the Upper Tribunal by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Parkes for the following reasons:


           The grounds argue that  the  Judge  erred  in  the  approach  to
           Article 8 and did not have regard to the cases of  Nagre  [2013]
           EWCH 720 (Admin) or Nasim [2014] UKUT  (IAC)  00025  restricting
           Article 8 to cases  where  the  appellant's  moral  or  physical
           integrity was in issue.


           The determination clearly set out the Judge's consideration  and
           is well reasoned until paragraph 16 at  which  point  the  Judge
           ought  to  have  had  regard  to  the  cases  mentioned  and  in
           particular Nasim.  The grounds are arguable  and  permission  to
           appeal is granted.


    3. The matter accordingly came before me  for  an  initial  hearing  to
       determine whether the making  of  the  decision  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law.


    Submissions and Findings


    4. It is not disputed by the  claimant  that  he  failed  to  meet  the
       requirements of the Immigration Rules in relation to the Maintenance
       (funds) requirements of Appendix C because he failed to  submit  the
       necessary bank statements. The Judge  rejected  the  submissions  on
       behalf of the claimant that he should succeed under paragraph  245AA
       of the Rules because the Secretary of State should have given him  a
       further opportunity to submit the missing documents before  refusing
       the application.  The Judge decided as follows at paragraph 8 of the
       determination:


         Having  regard  to  the   particular   informational   deficiencies
         identified by the Secretary of State, I do not  consider  that  the
         appellant was entitled to the  exercise  of  discretion  under  the
         terms of paragraph 245AA.


    5. The Judge went on to consider the appeal under  Article  8,  firstly
       within the Immigration Rules.  In these deliberations the Judge took
       account of the claimant's presence in the United Kingdom with  leave
       to study since January 2010; he had no family members in the  United
       Kingdom, had not lived continuously in the  United  Kingdom  for  20
       years and could not show a lack of ties to Bangladesh.  The  private
       life requirements of paragraph 276 ADE were accordingly found not to
       be met.


    6. The Judge then moved directly to a  free-standing  consideration  of
       Article 8 on the basis of  the  of  the  appellant's  private  life,
       having found the existence of no family life in the United  Kingdom.
       He took account of the 4� years for which the claimant has  been  in
       the United Kingdom and found the private  life  claim  to  be  based
       solely on student activities.  He found that there was  no  evidence
       before him of any significant social ties in the United Kingdom  and
       found that there was no evidence that the  claimant's  course  could
       not be undertaken in Bangladesh.


    7. The Judge further found that any contact between  the  claimant  and
       any UK  based  friends  could  be  maintained  by  modern  means  of
       communication such as Skype and e-mail.  The Judge directed  himself
       in accordance with the case of (CDS (PBS:  "available":  Article  8)
       Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC); he found that the claimant had at no
       time during his period of study in the United Kingdom  had  recourse
       to public funds or worked  illegally.   The  Judge  found  that  the
       Secretary of State had at no time suggested that  the  claimant  had
       not shown progress in his studies.


    8. At paragraph 19 of the determination the Judge stated  that:  "As  a
       matter of common sense, it seems to me that qualifications  obtained
       from a UK educational institution would benefit both the student and
       the reputation of UK  educational  institutions."   Without  further
       reasoning the Judge then reached his final conclusion  at  paragraph
       20 of the determination as follows:


         20. This is something of a borderline case.   However,  taking  all
         these circumstances fully into account, and adopting an even-handed
         application of the proportionality test, I find that the legitimate
         aim of maintaining economic well-being and the rights of others  by
         applying a consistent immigration  control  is  outweighed  by  the
         right of the appellant to respect for his private life in the UK on
         the basis claimed.


    9. Ms Everett submitted to me on behalf of the Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department that the Judge has materially erred  in  law  in
       two respects.  Firstly, there was no consideration of relevant  case
       law including Nagre [2013] EWCH  720  (Admin)  following  which  the
       Judge should have looked for  arguably  good  grounds  for  granting
       leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and  then   any
       compelling circumstances not recognised by the Rules.  Having  found
       that the claimant did not qualify for leave  to  remain  within  the
       Rules the Judge failed to take account of these factors  and  failed
       to recognise that a claimant could  only  succeed  under  Article  8
       outside the Rules in rare and exceptional cases. The  Judge  had  no
       regard to the case of Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC).


   10. The second error made by the Judge was submitted to lie  within  the
       proportionality  assessment  which  did  not  contain  reasoning  to
       justify the finding in favour of  the  complainant;  the  Judge  had
       misdirected himself in relation  to  private  life.  The  Article  8
       finding was submitted to  be  unsustainable  in  the  light  of  the
       evidence that the complainant's private  life  consisted  solely  of
       studies which could be undertaken in Bangladesh and the Judge failed
       to consider the claimant's moral or physical integrity. Miss Everett
       submitted that the Judge had materially misdirected himself  in  law
       by failing to make any reference to the cases of  Patel  and  others
       [2013] UKSC 72 and Nasim and others (Article 8) Pakistan [2014] UKUT
       25 (IAC).


   11. In response to these submissions Mr Dey  argued  on  behalf  of  the
       claimant that in accordance with the case of Nagre, at paragraphs 30
       and 32 in particular, the Judge had not erred in law; Nagre endorsed
       the guidance given in Izuazu and MF (Article 8 - new rules)  Nigeria
       [2012] UKUT 00393 (IAC) that judges  called  on  to  make  decisions
       about the application of Article 8 in cases to which the  new  rules
       apply, should proceed by first considering  whether  a  claimant  is
       able to benefit under the applicable provisions of  the  Immigration
       Rules designed to address Article 8 claims. If he or she does, there
       will be no need to go on to consider Article 8 generally. The appeal
       can be allowed because the decision is not in  accordance  with  the
       rules.

   12. Mr Dey submitted that paragraph 32 of Nagre affirms that the  effect
       of the new rules is not to restore an exceptional circumstances test
       equivalent to that rejected by the  House  of  Lords  in  Huang,  by
       reference to the  old  Immigration  Rules.  He  submitted  that  the
       claimant in this case can, in any event, show good grounds  for  the
       grant of leave  outside  the  Rules  and  compelling  circumstances,
       although not required in law, because he made a genuine  mistake  in
       his application; he is a genuine student with only 6 months of study
       to be completed.


   13. Mr Dey relied on the case of  (CDS  (PBS:  "available":  Article  8)
       Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC) and submitted  that  this  claimant's
       position could be distinguished on the facts from that in  Nasim  on
       the basis of post study work; this claimant has yet to complete  his
       studies.  He relied on paragraph 41 of Nasim stating that  it  would
       be wrong to say that the point has been  reached  where  an  adverse
       immigration decision in the case of a person who is here  for  study
       or  other  temporary   purposes   can   never   be   found   to   be
       disproportionate. Mr Dey submitted that although the Judge found the
       Article 8 decision for this  claimant  to  be  border  line  it  was
       nonetheless a decision he was entitled to make.

   14. Having considered all the  submissions  before  me  I  announced  my
       decision that the making of the Article 8 ECHR decision in the First-
       tier Tribunal involved the making material errors on a point of  law
       such that the decision falls to be set aside and remade. Having  set
       aside that part of the decision I heard  further  brief  submissions
       from the representatives with a view to remaking the decision. Their
       submission in relation to the error of law were  taken  forward  for
       the remaking of the decision with the additional submission from  Mr
       Dey that discretion should have been exercised by the  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department to allow the claimant leave to  remain
       until 2015 to complete his  studies.   The  failure  to  do  so  was
       submitted to amount to a decision made otherwise than in  accordance
       with the law.  I reserved my final decision and full  reasons  which
       are as follows.


   15. The Judge found that the claimant had not  submitted  the  necessary
       evidence  of  funds  for  maintenance  and  that  the  informational
       deficiencies before the  Secretary  of  State  were  such  that  the
       claimant was not entitled to the exercise of  any  discretion  under
       paragraph 245A of the Immigration  Rules;  at  paragraph  8  of  his
       determination the Judge records that Mr Dey, acting for the claimant
       in those proceedings as well,  did not rely on the case of Secretary
       of State for the Home Department v Rodriguez [2014] EWCA Civ 2. The
       Judge found no family life in existence in the  United  Kingdom  and
       made clear findings that the private life requirements were not  met
       under paragraph 276ADE of the Rules. In my judgment  these  findings
       disclose no error, but the Judge falls into error thereafter for all
       the reasons relied upon by the Secretary of State.


   16. I find that the Judge erred by failing to take account  of  relevant
       case law starting with the case of  Gulshan  which  decided  that  a
       consideration of the nature and extent of the failure  to  meet  the
       Rules must be a precursor to consideration of Article 8  within  the
       Rules and under the ECHR  and  only  if  there  are  "arguably  good
       grounds" for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  was  it
       necessary for the Tribunal for  Article  8  purposes  to  go  on  to
       consider   whether   there   are   "compelling   circumstances   not
       sufficiently recognised by the Rules".


   17. The Judge failed to consider the existence of arguably good  grounds
       outside the Rules before allowing the appeal under Article 8 and his
       findings  disclose  no  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
       recognised by the Rules.  I am satisfied  that  he  erred  in  these
       circumstances by undertaking  a  free-standing  consideration  under
       Artilce 8 of the ECHR in the first place.  I  am  further  satisfied
       that the Article 8 conclusions in favour of the complainant are  not
       internally sustainable in the light of his findings or in the  light
       of the case law that he failed to apply deciding that Article  8  is
       concerned with private or family life, not education as such.


   18. In considering paragraph 41 of Nasim, relied upon by the claimant, I
       accept the submission from Miss Everett that it is not authority  as
       such to distinguish between claimants who are post-study  and  those
       who have yet to complete studies. It simply leaves the door open  to
       Article 8 engagement by stating that there is no  justification  for
       extending the obiter findings in CDS, so as to equate a person whose
       course of study has not yet ended with a person who, having finished
       their course, is precluded by the Immigration Rules from staying  on
       to do something else.


   19. The findings in the case of Patel were  endorsed  in  Nasim  [2013],
       namely that the opportunity for a promising student to complete  his
       course in this country, however desirable in general terms,  is  not
       in itself a right protected under Article 8. In Nasim [2014] it  was
       held at paragraph 14 that:


             Whilst the concept of a "family life"  is  generally  speaking
             readily identifiable, the concept of a "private life" for  the
             purposes of Article 8 is inherently less clear.  At one end of
             the "continuum" stands  the  concept  of  moral  and  physical
             integrity  or  "physical  and  psychological  integrity"   (as
             categorised by the ECtHR in eg Pretty v United Kingdom  (2002)
             35 EHRR 1) as to which, in extreme instances, even the state's
             interest in removing foreign criminals might not constitute  a
             proportionate  response.   However,  as  one  moves  down  the
             continuum, one encounters aspects of private life which,  even
             if engaging Article 8(1) (if not alone,  then  in  combination
             with other factors) are so far  removed  from  the  "core"  of
             Article 8 as to be readily defeasible by state interests, such
             as the importance  of  maintaining  a  credible  and  coherent
             system of immigration control.


   20. I find that the appellant in this case cannot  rely  on  aspects  of
       moral and physical integrity; his situation is  not  distinguishable
       in my view from that set out in paragraph  15  of  Nasim  [2014]  as
       follows:


                  15. At this point on the continuum the essential  elements
             of the private life relied upon will normally be transposable,
             in  the  sense  of  being  capable  of  replication  in  their
             essential respects, following a person's return to their  home
             country. Thus, in headnote 3 of MM (Tier 1 PSW; Art 8; private
             life) Zimbabwe [2009] UKAIT 0037 we find that:-


                          "3. When determining the issue of  proportionality
                      ... it will  always  be  important  to  evaluate  the
                      extent  of   the   individual's   social   ties   and
                      relationships in the UK. However, a student here on a
                      temporary basis has no  expectation  of  a  right  to
                      remain  in  order   to   further   these   ties   and
                      relationships if the  criteria  of  the  points-based
                      system  are  not  met.  Also,  the  character  of  an
                      individual's "private life" relied upon is ordinarily
                      by its very nature of a  type  which  can  be  formed
                      elsewhere,  albeit  through  different  social  ties,
                      after the individual is removed from the UK."


                  16. As was stated in the earlier  case  of  MG  (assessing
             interference with private life) Serbia and  Montenegro  [2005]
             UKAIT 00113:-


                  "A person's job and precise programme of  studies  may  be
                  different in the country to which he is to be returned and
                  his network of  friendships  and  other  acquaintances  is
                  likely to be different too,  but  his  private  life  will
                  continue in respect of all its essential elements."


                  17. The difference between these types of  "private  life"
             case and a case founded on family life is instructive. As  was
             noted in MM, the relationships involved in a family  life  are
             more likely to be unique, so  as  to  be  incapable  of  being
             replicated once  an  individual  leaves  the  United  Kingdom,
             leaving behind, for example, his or her spouse or minor child.


   21. When properly weighed in the balance I find that the facts found for
       the claimant as follows do  not  outweigh  the  public  interest  in
       immigration control. His private life in the United Kingdom does not
       consist of relationships or social ties; he has at  all  times  been
       present in the United Kingdom for the temporary purpose of studying;
       his  private  life  consists  of  those  studies  which  have   been
       explicitly found to be available in Bangladesh. I accordingly remake
       the decision by dismissing the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Summary of Decisions

  22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands  in  relation  to  the
      dismissal under the Immigration Rules.


  23. The making of the First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making  of
      errors on a point of law in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR.


  24. The decision under Article 8 of the ECHR is set aside and is remade as
      follows.


  25. The claimant's appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR is dismissed.


  26. This appeal made by the Secretary  of  State  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
      succeeds.

Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


Signed:

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated: 30th July 2014


Fee Award

        The position remains that no fee award was made  in  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Signed:

J Harries

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Dated: 30th July 2014





