
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53578/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 9th January 2015                           |On 22nd January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                         Mr Paa Kwesi Baffour Davies
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana who was born on 2nd June 1974.   He
    appeals  under  the  provisions  of  Section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision of the  Respondent
    dated 5th December 2013 refusing his application for an  EEA  residence
    card as the spouse of a German national,  who  is  present  in  the  UK
    exercising treaty rights, by the name of Serwaa Akosua  Geb  Fiend.   I
    had the bundle submitted for the Appellant.

 2. The refusal notice refers to the fact that the  Appellant  underwent  a
    Ghana proxy marriage, and that there was a marriage  certificate  dated
    17th August 2012.  There was also a statutory  declaration  dated  15th
    August 2012.  There was the certification letter from the Second Deputy
    Judicial Secretary dated 14th August 2012.

 3.  Furthermore,  there  was  one  certification  letter  from  the  Legal
    Counsellor Bureau, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and  Mutual  Integration
    dated 20th September 2012.  There was a further letter from  the  Ghana
    High Commission dated 2nd October 2012.  However, the refusal letter of
    5th December 2013  stated  that  on  the  basis  of  established  legal
    authorities the Appellant could not succeed.

 4. The matter was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge G J Napthine on  28th
    July 2014.  He promulgated his determination on 6th  August  2014.   In
    the determination, he dismissed the Appellant's appeal.  The  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge found that the Appellant had a complete lack of knowledge  of
    the Sponsor's seven siblings and this "makes  his  claim  to  be  in  a
    relation with her not credible.  It is not credible that a person could
    be in a durable relationship for some two and a half  years  since  the
    marriage and for one year before the marriage without knowing  anything
    of her  seven  siblings"  (paragraph  23).   The  Appellant  could  not
    therefore succeed on the basis of a "durable relationship".

 6. With  respect  to  the  marriage  itself,  the  judge  found  that  the
    applicable authority was Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT
    24.  This was confirmed in the case of TA and Others [2014] UKUT 00316.
     The judge held that, "there is no evidence  before  me  to  show  that
    Germany  recognises  proxy  marriages.   Therefore,  I  find  that  the
    Appellant has failed to prove that he has contracted a  valid  marriage
    so he  cannot  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Regulation  7(1).   (See
    paragraph 13).

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that there  was  evidence  before  the
    judge to show that Germany recognised a marriage of this type and  that
    the judge acted unfairly in finding that there had been a sham marriage
    because that issue had never been raised.

 8. Included in the Appellant's bundle  was  a  printout,  taken  from  the
    internet, and headed "Federal Foreign  Office",  which  indicated  that
    Germany regarded a marriage entered into abroad as valid if  the  legal
    provisions relating to the marriage of  the  foreign  State  where  the
    marriage was entered into were abided by.

 9. On 19th September 2014, permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis
    that there was a difference between  a  sham  marriage  and  a  durable
    relationship.  There was nothing to show that the Respondent  Secretary
    of State had argued that the marriage was a sham marriage (provided  it
    was a valid marriage).  It was unclear whether the judge  had  actually
    raised this issue specifically with the Appellant at the hearing.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before  me  on  9th  January  2015,  the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented.  There was a letter sent  by  fax  on  the  day  of  the
    hearing from Lawrencia & Co (Solicitors) to the effect that "Our client
    and Sponsor are unable to attend because of financial reasons.  We have
    been instructed to request that the appeal should be dealt with on  the
    papers".

11. On behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, Mr Smart submitted that
    even if one applied the  laws  of  the  relevant  European  country  in
    question, there was  no  evidence  submitted  in  actual  fact  by  the
    Appellant at the hearing, that  demonstrated  that  the  laws  of  that
    particular country did allow for proxy marriages to take place.

12. On the other hand, the judge had specifically applied Kareem and  cited
    the stricture that,

         "It should  be  assumed  that,  without  independent  and  reliable
         evidence about the recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of
         the EEA country and/or the country where the marriage  took  place,
         the Tribunal is  likely  to  be  unable  to  find  that  sufficient
         evidence has been provided to discharge the burden of proof.   Mere
         production of legal materials from EEA country or country where the
         marriage took place will be insufficient evidence because they will
         rarely show how such a law  is  understood  or  applied  ..."  (see
         paragraph 11).

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  This is a case where the judge applied the applicable  legal
    authority in the form of the cases of Kareem and TA.   The  Appellant's
    appeal failed at this first hurdle.  Any alleged errors could not  have
    been material thereafter.

14. But in any event, however, the  judge  considered  the  question  that,
    "even if the appellant had contracted a valid marriage I would be bound
    to find, on the basis of the conflicts  in  the  evidence  he  and  his
    'wife' gave, that such a marriage was a marriage of  convenience"  (see
    paragraph 14).  The judge gave his reasons for this (from paragraphs 17
    to 27).

15. There was in fact, no celebration of  the  wedding  and  there  was  no
    blessing at the church  and  the  judge  observed  that  "that  is  not
    credible for committed church attendees who had had a proxy marriage in
    Ghana" (see paragraph 28).  These findings  are  plainly  open  to  the
    judge and were in no way unreasonable.



Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed        Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    21st January 2015
