
[pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53350/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 June 2014                               |On 21 October 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE SIMLER
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SAQIB EHSAN

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Jessica Pacey who allowed the appeal  of  the
    appellant, Mr Ehsan, under the Immigration Rules.  We shall continue to
    refer to Mr Ehsan as the appellant as  he  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for convenience.

 2. Before us the Secretary of State  is  represented  by  Mr  Duffy.   The
    appellant has chosen not to attend this hearing or  to  give  evidence.
    Instead he has put forward a Rule 24 notice  together  with  a  witness
    statement signed with a statement of truth dated 3 March 2014.  We will
    return to that in due course.

 3. The appellant was granted leave to enter as a Tier 4 (General)  Student
    valid until 6 August 2012 and came to this country to study  at  London
    Waltham College under that visa.  On 3 August 2012 he applied to extend
    his Tier 4 visa by an application under the points-based system.   That
    application was supported originally by a  Confirmation  of  Acceptance
    for Studies ("CAS") certificate in  respect  of  Waltham  College,  his
    sponsor, with a CAS number E4G92KIC10F019 given.

 4. By a letter dated 27 June 2013 from the Secretary of State to him,  the
    Secretary of State informed him that the  sponsor  status  for  Waltham
    College had been revoked.   He  was  given  60  days  within  which  to
    identify and provide a  new  Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    certificate in respect of an alternative college.  He responded to that
    invitation and provided confirmation that he had been  accepted  by  St
    Andrew's College London  and  he  provided  a  CAS  certificate  number
    E4G7UU5D140ODX.

 5. By a decision dated 27 November  2013  his  application  for  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 4 student under the points-based system  was  refused.
    The reason for that refusal was that the Secretary  of  State  was  not
    satisfied that he had a valid Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    certificate because that certificate or sponsorship had been  withdrawn
    by the sponsor.  The Secretary of State made clear that this was not  a
    situation where the Secretary of State had revoked the sponsorship, but
    the  application  had  been  withdrawn  by  the  sponsor  and  the  CAS
    certificate number associated  with  St  Andrew's  College  London  was
    given.

 6. The appellant gave notice of appeal on 13 December  2013  against  that
    decision and that appeal was dealt with on the papers by the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Tribunal Judge dealt with the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof at paragraph 3 and directed herself that she was only to consider
    evidence submitted in  support  of  and  at  the  time  of  making  the
    application.  She then went on at paragraphs 7 to 10 of the decision to
    set out the evidence that she had considered and  said the following:-

         "8.  The CAS I have in the respondent's bundle states  at  the  top
             'CAS withdrawn'.  The  sponsor  is  stated  to  be  London  St
             Andrew's College.  The date the CAS was assigned was  21.8.13.
             The CAS in the appellant's  bundle,  referring  to  London  St
             Andrew's College, also stated that the  CAS  was  assigned  on
             21.8.13.  On both it is recorded that he could  not  study  at
             London Waltham College because the college 'had been revoked'.

         9.   I note that in his witness statement the appellant  said  that
             his college's licence had been revoked whilst his  application
             was pending.

         10.  I note that the respondent took over a year to  determine  the
             appellant's application, a full  academic  year  and  more  in
             fact.  Further, the respondent has not seen fit to state  when
             London Waltham College had been removed or when the  reference
             number had been  revoked.   There  is  nothing  before  me  to
             indicate that in August  2012  when  the  appellant  made  his
             application there was no valid CAS number.

         11.  I therefore allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules."

 7. The Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  that
    decision on the basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  materially
    misdirected itself in law in  concluding  that  there  was  nothing  to
    indicate that in August 2012 when the appellant  made  his  application
    there was no valid CAS number and permission to appeal was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen on 1 May 2014.

 8. As we have indicated the appellant has not attended but has  sought  to
    make submissions seeking to support the First-tier Tribunal's decision.
     We deal first with the question whether or not there was an  error  of
    law in the decision.

 9. Paragraph 245ZXC  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  paragraph  116C  of
    Appendix A make clear that a Confirmation  of  Acceptance  for  Studies
    will only be considered to be valid if the sponsor  has  not  withdrawn
    the offer since the CAS was issued.  The proper approach accordingly is
    to consider the position as at the date of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision, either granting or refusing the application, and  not  as  at
    the date of the application as the Judge directed herself at  paragraph
    3.

10. Moreover, we are quite satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    materially misdirected herself as to the evidence by referring  to  the
    wrong college and the wrong CAS in reaching her determination  so  that
    the determination was made on what was in  fact  a  false  basis.   Her
    determination was made by reference to  the  validity  of  the  CAS  in
    respect of London Waltham College; but both the Secretary of State  and
    the appellant agree that that college's  sponsorship  status  had  been
    revoked and the appellant had been provided  with  the  opportunity  in
    accordance  with  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy,  to  provide  an
    alternative college and  sponsorship  certificate.   We  are  therefore
    satisfied that the decision was wrong in law and should be  set  aside.
    We should accordingly make the decision afresh and  we  proceed  to  do
    that.

11. We have already summarised the essential facts.

12. The sponsorship status of St Andrew's College  London  has  never  been
    revoked and there is nothing in the material provided by the  appellant
    to challenge that. What happened was that between  the  date  when  the
    appellant provided a new  CAS  certificate  number  in  respect  of  St
    Andrew's College and the date of the Secretary of State's  decision  of
    27 November 2013, the college withdrew its acceptance of the appellant.
     We do not have any independent evidence as to why the college withdrew
    its acceptance of the  appellant.   However,  the  appellant's  witness
    statement  confirms that he provided details of  the  new  sponsor,  St
    Andrew's College, and then goes on in the following terms at paragraphs
    6 to 9:-

         "6.  I confirm that after having sought admission and CAS  from  my
             Tier sponsor, initially I was advised by the  college  not  to
             take the classes until I was granted with my  requested  leave
             to remain by the respondent/Home  Office,  and  following  the
             advice of the college staff I reconfirmed by the  Home  Office
             by making a phone call and Home Office to advise me  the  same
             as college did, but later I was directed to attend the college
             as per the given schedule.

         7.   I confirm that the alleged deficiency/issue in  my  attendance
             if there was any was due to the advice of  the  college  staff
             which was later resolved through college committee  concerned,
             and I continue to take classes as per the given  timetable  by
             the college.

         8.   I confirm that after the issue  having  been  resolved  on  16
             October 2013 I was advised to get my formal registration  with
             the awarding body of my undertaken courses as to appear in the
             coming exams.

         9.   I confirm that since 16  October  2013  I  was  regularly  and
             effectively   following   my   course   and    following    my
             timetable/schedule and I have never been told or notified with
             any of such decision by the college to withdraw my CAS."

13. The appellant has of course not attended to give that evidence or to be
    cross-examined.  Had he done so, no doubt the nature of the  advice  he
    was given and who he was given it by and precisely  what  he  was  told
    would have been explored, but in any event, it is clear  from  his  own
    witness statement that  having  originally  been  told  not  to  attend
    classes he was  directed  to  attend  the  college  as  per  the  given
    schedule, as he indicates at paragraph 6.

14. We do not know why the college subsequently withdrew  his  certificate.
    He has not provided evidence to us about that.   We  cannot  go  behind
    this.  The fact of the matter is that as at the date of  the  Secretary
    of State's decision of 27 November 2013, his CAS certificate  had  been
    withdrawn and was not a valid certificate within the Immigration Rules.
     He could not therefore be accorded the 30 points in  respect  of  that
    certificate or the 10 points in respect of maintenance funds associated
    with that course.  We cannot see any other conclusion in light  of  the
    evidence that is available today and nothing  that  the  appellant  has
    provided by way of written submissions  or  evidence  contradicts  that
    position.

15. In those circumstances  we  are  driven  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's appeal against the decision of 27  November  2013  must  be
    dismissed.  The application was not made on the basis of  a  valid  CAS
    certificate at the time it was determined.  There was no unfairness  by
    the Secretary of State.  The withdrawal of the certificate  was  not  a
    withdrawal by the Secretary of State.  Nor can we see  that  there  was
    any breach of any policy by the Secretary of State in that regard.

16. Accordingly, for the reasons just given we set aside  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal as in error of law.  We  re-make  the  decision
    and dismiss the appellant's appeal.






Signed                                  Date


Mrs Justice Simler                           16 October 2014

