
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: IA/53196/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 September 2014                           |On 10 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                              MR STEVEN NAKOKO
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr Lay of Consel
For the respondent:    Mr Kandola, Senior Presenting Officer



1. The appellant is the Secretary of State for the Home Department  and  the
   respondent is a national of Uganda born on  18  February  1978.  I  shall
   however for the sake of convenience, refer to the Secretary of  State  as
   the appellant and Mr Nakoko as the appellant which are  the  designations
   that the parties had in the First-tier Tribunal.


2. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal against the determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson dated 27 June 2014 allowing  the
   appellant's appeal pursuant to Article 8  against  the  decision  of  the
   respondent refusing him leave to  remain  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
   citizen pursuant to paragraph 276 ADE and Appendix FM of the  Immigration
   Rules.


3. Permission to appeal was granted by the First-Tier Judge PJG White  dated
   16 July 2014 stating that it was arguable that the Judge gave  inadequate
   reasons  for  his  finding  that  there  were  insurmountable   obstacles
   preventing the appellant and the sponsor relocating to Uganda to continue
   family life in that country.


4. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings in his  determination
   which I summarise.


   i. It is common ground that the appellant and the sponsor have a  genuine
      and subsistent marital relationship. There is also no challenge to the
      evidence in  terms  of  the  sponsor's  pregnancy,  diabetes  and  the
      antenatal  treatment  which  she  is  receiving  in  relation  to  her
      pregnancy. There is no challenge to the evidence of the appellant, the
      sponsor and the sponsor's parents, Mr and Mrs Mitchell with  reference
      to Mr and Mrs Mitchell's medical conditions and the  assistance  which
      the sponsor and the appellant provide to them. There is  a  wealth  of
      independent  documentation  with  regard  to   the   various   medical
      conditions of the sponsor and the parents, the  authenticity  and  the
      veracity of which is not the subject of challenge.






  ii. Mr Kandola on behalf of  the  respondent  stated  that  there  was  no
      medical report available that the sponsor could not relocate to Uganda
      and no evidence available which establishes that requisite  medication
      was unavailable to  the  sponsor  in  Uganda,  which  submissions  are
      entirely factually correct. Mr Kandola also noted that there was some,
      albeit I consider  slight,  discrepancy  in  terms  of  the  level  of
      assistance  which  the  sponsor's  older  sister,  Nichola   currently
      provides to Mr and Mrs Mitchell and in any event, the  sponsor's  oral
      evidence was to the effect that, if Nicola was asked to  help  Mr  and
      Mrs Mitchell more, she probably would provide such help.




 iii. However, the multiple  facets  and  extensive  arguments  advanced  on
      behalf of  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  as  to  why  there  are
      insurmountable obstacles to the sponsor relocating to Uganda  to  live
      with the appellant. Not the least of which obstacle is the  fact  that
      the sponsor is  well  advanced  in  pregnancy  and  is  clearly  being
      specifically and carefully  monitored  because  of  the  complications
      arising from her diabetes. Additionally there is no challenge  to  the
      evidence that the sponsor and the appellant have a close  relationship
      with the sponsor's parents who  suffer  from  medical  conditions  and
      there is a material level of dependency of Mr and  Mrs  Mitchell  upon
      the sponsor, who is their primary carer. The appellant sponsor's  ties
      to her parents, Mr and Mrs Mitchell are over and above the normal ties
      with subsist between adult children and their parents.




  iv. The evidence satisfies that the sponsor does indeed provide support to
      her father, Mr Mitchell who suffers from certain mobility problems and
      also has type II diabetes, these conditions also  been  documented  by
      independent and unchallenged evidence within the  appellant's  bundle.
      Neither  parent  of  the  sponsor,   in   the   circumstances,   could
      realistically be expected to move to Uganda.




   v. The case law of LM (Democratic Republic of the Congo) v SS  HD  [2008]
      EWCA Civ 325 (Sedley LJ's orbiter comments), Gulshan, MF  (Nigeria)  v
      SS HD [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 has been taken into  account  in  assessing
      whether there are insurmountable obstacles to the  appellant  and  the
      sponsor conducted their family life in Nigeria and taking into account
      the unborn child being a British citizen.




  vi. The sponsor would also have to relinquish a  long-standing  employment
      with no certain prospects of finding alternative parliament in Uganda.
      This move would also involve the sponsor relinquishing her role as the
      main carer for her mother, who not only has type II diabetes, but  has
      been diagnosed with leukaemia.




 vii. The combination of relevant factors set  out  above  result  in  there
      being insurmountable obstacles to family life  between  the  appellant
      and the sponsor continuing outside the United Kingdom.  It  is  common
      ground that the sponsor is  a  British  citizen  born  in  the  United
      Kingdom.




viii. The decision of the respondent was not in accordance with the law  and
      the relevant Immigration Rules and the appeal must be allowed pursuant
      to paragraph EX1 (b) of appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.


   The grounds of appeal


5. The grounds of appeal stated the following which I summarise. Ground  one
   is that the Judge made a material misdirection of  law  by  finding  that
   there are insurmountable obstacles to family life continuing outside  the
   United Kingdom.  The  Tribunal  has  materially  misdirected  as  to  the
   interpretation of "insurmountable obstacles".  in  the  case  of  Gulshan
   (Article 8-new Rules-.correct approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) where the
   upper Tribunal expressed that insurmountable  obstacles  as  being  those
   circumstances   that   would   render   relocation    impractical.    The
   insurmountable  obstacles  highlighted  in  case  law  would   be   those
   circumstances that constitute serious difficulties (or impracticalities')
   in the appellant's ability to enjoy a family life outside of  the  United
   Kingdom. This would entail something that could  not  be  overcome,  even
   with a degree of hardship, and is  not  merely  what  may  be  considered
   undesirable by the appellant or the Tribunal.


6. The Judge refers to the sponsor performing a significant carer  role  for
   her parents and it is clear from the  determination  that  the  sponsor's
   sister, Nicola is able to provide assistance to the sponsor's parents  if
   required. Therefore the needs of the sponsor's parents do not  amount  to
   insurmountable obstacles.


7. The Judge referred to the sponsor's medical requirements.  There  was  no
   medical evidence available showing that the sponsor could not relocate to
   Uganda because of her parents' medical needs. The Judge therefore has  no
   basis  upon  which  to  find  that  the  appellants  and  the   sponsor's
   circumstances amount to insurmountable obstacles.


8. The Judge refers to the sponsor's long-standing employment in the  United
   Kingdom. The Judge therefore had no basis upon which  to  find  that  the
   circumstances amount to insurmountable obstacles.  The  decision  of  the
   Secretary of  State  is  proportionate  and  does  not  amount  to  being
   unjustifiably harsh.


   The hearing

9. Mr Kandola in his submissions at the hearing said that he relies  on  the
   Secretary of State's grounds of appeal. He stated that the definition  of
   insurmountable obstacles must be that  the  appellant  circumstances  are
   such that they  cannot  be  overcome  and  not  simply  undesirable.  The
   determination at paragraph 7 states that the sponsor sister was  able  to
   provide assistance to the sponsor's parents. The long-standing employment
   of the sponsor does not amount to an insurmountable obstacle because  she
   could find a job in Uganda. The Judge has materially erred  and  made  an
   unsustainable decision.

10. Mr Lay on behalf of the appellant stated that the  grant  of  permission
   was whether the  facts  amounted  to  insurmountable  obstacles  for  the
   appellant and his sponsor to relocate to  Uganda.  The  determination  at
   paragraph 29, 31, 34, 36 and 37 made  crystal  clear  findings  that  the
   appellant was seven and a half months pregnant with type II diabetes  and
   that was found to be insurmountable obstacles  for  her  to  relocate  to
   Uganda with the appellant. He further submitted that the  sponsor's  care
   of  her  parents  with  their   medical   conditions   also   constituted
   insurmountable obstacles. He submitted that there was no error of law  in
   the determination.

11. Mr Kandola in reply stated that there was no evidence that  the  sponsor
   could not receive prenatal care in Uganda.







   Decision on the error of law

12. The only issue in the appeal before the First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
   whether the appellant and his sponsor can relocate to Uganda  or  whether
   there were insurmountable obstacles in them doing so.

13.  The  Judge  found  on  the  evidence  that  there  were  insurmountable
   obstacles for the appellant and  her  sponsor  relocating  to  Uganda  to
   continue family life in that  country.  The  Judge  considered  that  the
   obstacles consisted of the sponsor's pregnancy  which  required  constant
   monitoring because of her type II diabetes and  her  being  her  parents'
   main carer who have medical conditions.

14. The Judge refers to the case of Gulshan, which demonstrates that he  was
   aware of the criteria  to  apply  as  to  the  factors  which  should  be
   considered to be insurmountable that would render relocation impractical.
   He found that  the  appellants  and  sponsor's  circumstances  constitute
   serious difficulties (or impracticalities') in the sponsor's  ability  to
   relocate to Nigeria with the appellant.

15. The Judge found that the appellant had  demonstrated  that  the  sponsor
   could not relocate to Uganda when she was in her third trimester  of  her
   pregnancy with type II diabetes which required appropriate treatment  and
   regular monitoring. The Judge in the circumstances, was entitled to  find
   on the evidence that the sponsor was  in  the  high-risk  category  as  a
   mother and relocation to Uganda in such circumstances, would put her  and
   her unborn child (a potential British citizen) at risk. (At the  hearing,
   the six-week baby was in court) I  find  there  is  nothing  perverse  or
   irrational in the Judge's evaluation of the facts and the conclusion that
   he reached upon them. I also find that the Judge give sufficient  reasons
   for his findings.

16. I find that a material error of law has  not  been  established  in  the
   determination. In the circumstances the respondent's appeal must fail.


DECISION

The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed





Signed by



Ms S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal              Dated  this  10th  day  of
    September 2014
