
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/53272/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:    Field House               |Determination Promulgated |
|On:              21 November 2014      |On:  27 November 2014     |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                           ANGELLA MAUREEN SIMPSON
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr M Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel by J F Law
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Respondent against the determination of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Khawar in  which  he  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant, a citizen of Jamaica, against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse to leave to remain on human  rights  grounds  as  the  unmarried
    partner of a British Citizen.

 2. The application under appeal was made on 27 May 2011 and was refused by
    reference to paragraph 276ADE and Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules
    (HC395) on 26 November 2013.  The  Appellant  exercised  her  right  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal. This is the appeal which came before
    Judge Khawar on 31 July 2014 and was allowed the Judge finding that the
    Respondent's decision was in breach of the Appellant's protected rights
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The Respondent applied for permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.
    The application  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  P  J  M
    Hollingworth on 9 October 2014 in the following terms


          1. An arguable  error  of  law  has  arisen  in  relation  to  the
             application of Section 117B in respect  of  the  weight  to  be
             attached to the forming of a  relationship  whilst  immigration
             status was precarious. The Judge referred at  paragraph  27  to
             bearing in mind the fact that the  Appellant  appears  to  have
             remained unlawfully and without leave for a substantial  number
             of years and appears to have attempted  deception  by  claiming
             that she had indefinite leave to remain as set out at paragraph
             23 of the refusal letter. In  addition,  the  Judge  continued,
             plainly she has worked in the  United  Kingdom  without  lawful
             authority.


          2. At paragraph 28 the Judge states that furthermore I have  taken
             into account the provisions of Section 117B of the  Immigration
             Act 2014 in my considerations in  this  case.  The  Judge  then
             refers to the criteria as to  whether  English  is  spoken  and
             whether integration had taken place together with the  question
             of whether the Appellant has been a burden on the tax payer.

          3. At paragraph 29 the  Judge  then  continues  to  refer  to  the
             decision in Beoku- Betts. In the light of the wording  employed
             by the Judge at paragraphs 27, 28 and 29 the arguable error  of
             law to which I refer has arisen.



 4. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by the  Mr  Ume-
    Ezeoke and Mr Tufan appeared to represent the Respondent.


Submissions

 5. On behalf the Respondent Mr Tufan relied on the grounds  of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  He  said  that  the  Judge  had  made  a  material
    misdirection  in  finding  that  the  Appellant's   circumstances   are
    'compelling'. The Judge had failed to take account of  the  requirement
    in section 117B Nationality Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  to  give
    little weight to the family life and private life of the  Appellant  as
    it had been established at a  time  when  her  immigration  status  was
    precarious. The Judge had failed  to  take  account  of  the  fact  the
    Appellant  could  return  to  Jamaica  and  make  an  entry   clearance
    application. The Judge failed to factor into the balance the fact  that
    the Appellant has worked illegally in the United Kingdom.

 6. For the Appellant  Mr  Ume-Ezeoke  referred  to  paragraph  27  of  the
    determination  and  said  that  the  Judge  did  indeed   balance   his
    consideration taking all relevant matters into account. The  Judge  had
    correctly considered  the  positions  of  two  'innocent'  people,  the
    Appellant's partner and the Appellant's mother. Section  117B  requires
    little weight to be given to family life established  at  a  time  when
    status is unlawful or precarious, not no  weight.  The  Judge  properly
    balances the positive and the negative.

 7. I said that in my judgment  the  determination  contained  no  material
    error of law and I reserved by written decision which I now  give  with
    reasons.


Decision

 8. The Appellant is a 48 year old national of  Jamaica  who  came  to  the
    United Kingdom visit her  British  citizen  mother.  The  date  of  her
    arrival is incorrectly stated in both the Respondent's  refusal  letter
    and the First-tier Tribunal determination as 27 March 2001. This  is  a
    simple mistake as both go on to record that  she  made  an  in  country
    application for further leave to remain on 26 March 2001 which would of
    course have been the day  before  her  arrival.  The  correct  date  of
    arrival appears to be September 2000. In any event the  Appellant  made
    an in time application to extend leave to remain on 26 March  2001  and
    this application was refused  on  16  November  2001.  The  Appellant's
    evidence to the First-tier Tribunal was that she did not  receive  this
    notice of refusal having been let down by her legal representatives. It
    does not appear however that she made any concerted efforts to chase  a
    response. The Appellant carried on living with her mother; she went  to
    college and obtained various part time jobs.  In  2002  she  met  Alvin
    Dixon and eventually developed a relationship with him.  The  Appellant
    moved in with Mr Dixon in 2009 and has been with  him  ever  since.  Mr
    Dixon is a British citizen of Jamaican origin.  He  has  lived  in  the
    United Kingdom since 1959 and has never been back to Jamaica. He is now
    82 years old and suffers from  various,  mostly  age  related,  medical
    conditions. The Appellant was encountered working illegally as a  carer
    on 11 June 2010. At the time of her arrest she provided a false  letter
    purporting to show that she held indefinite leave to remain. On 23  May
    2011 the Appellant submitted an application for leave to remain  as  an
    unmarried partner. This is the application that was eventually  refused
    on 26 November 2013.

 9. When the appeal came for hearing before the First-tier Tribunal it does
    not appear that there were significant differences between the  parties
    so far as the facts were concerned. The Respondent  accepted  that  the
    Appellant and Mr Dixon  were  in  a  subsisting  relationship  akin  to
    marriage that had subsisted for more than two years and that  Mr  Dixon
    was an elderly man settled in the United Kingdom  since  1959.  It  was
    also accepted that the Appellant's mother is a British  citizen  living
    in  the  United  Kingdom  who  also  had  various  age  related  health
    conditions and received assistance in this respect from the  Appellant.
    It was accepted on the Appellant's behalf that she could not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules because she  was  in  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of immigration law.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal  reveals  that  the  Judge
    correctly identified  anomalies  in  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter
    including the fact that the Respondent on the one  hand  accepted  that
    the  Appellant  and  Mr  Dixon  were  in  a  subsisting   and   genuine
    relationship whilst on the other stating that the  Appellant  does  not
    have any family life in the  United  Kingdom.  The  Judge  goes  on  to
    consider by reference to Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) whether there are arguably good grounds
    for allowing leave to remain outside the Immigration  Rules  and  finds
    that there are arguable and compelling circumstances for doing so.  The
    Judge  explains  his  reasoning  in  paragraphs  19  to   28   of   his
    determination, makes reference to section 117B of the 2002 Act and goes
    on to conclude in paragraph 29 that the  Respondent's  decision  was  a
    disproportionate  response  to  the  need  maintain  firm   immigration
    control. As a result he allows the appeal.

11. The Respondent's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal maintained  by
    Mr Tufan on oral submissions argue that the Judge  misdirected  himself
    firstly  in  finding  compelling  circumstances  to  go   outside   the
    Immigration Rules and secondly in respect of section 117B in failing to
    ascribe 'little weight' to her  relationship  with  Mr  Dixon  and  not
    giving sufficient weight to the negative factors of  working  illegally
    and claiming on arrest  that  she  had  lawful  status  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

12. In my judgment neither of these  grounds  has  merit.  The  Judge  very
    carefully considers whether there are  arguable  grounds  for  granting
    leave to remain outside the Immigration rules and finds that compelling
    circumstances exist. He  directs  himself  properly  and  carefully  by
    reference to Gulshan. The Respondent's grounds in this respect  are  no
    more than a disagreement with the Judge's conclusion.  In  my  judgment
    the Judge was fully entitled to reach the conclusion that  he  did  and
    indeed, given the Respondent's acceptance that the relationship between
    the Appellant and Mr Dixon was genuine  and  subsisting  and  given  Mr
    Dixon's advanced age and age related medical conditions including early
    onset dementia, it is difficult to see that the  Judge  could  properly
    have reached any other conclusion.

13. So far as section 117B of the 2002 Act (section 19 of the 2014 Act)  is
    concerned the Respondent notes that the Appellant  meets  some  of  the
    positive requirements of the required  public  interest  considerations
    including the  ability  to  speak  English,  integration  into  British
    society and the fact that she is not a burden on taxpayers. It  is  the
    Respondent's assertion that the Judge misdirected himself by not taking
    proper account of the negative factors  in  the  balance.  Firstly  the
    Respondent asserts that the Judge failed to give 'little weight' to the
    relationship due to it having been  established  at  a  time  when  the
    Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom was unlawful.  Secondly  the
    Respondent asserts that the  Appellant's  illegal  residence,  unlawful
    employment and attempted deception should have weighed against  her  in
    the balance.

14. Again there is in my judgment no material misdirection. The Judge takes
    account of what is an accepted and genuine relationship. He clearly and
    understandably finds it to be a relationship where, due to the age  and
    medical condition of Mr Dixon it would not be reasonable to expect  him
    to relocate to Jamaica and where Mr Dixon's interests are  best  served
    by the Appellant's presence and care. The Judge does not make the point
    but it is obvious that Mr Dixon would be put at great  disadvantage  if
    the Appellant alone travelled to Jamaica to  make  an  entry  clearance
    application to return. It is clear that he needs her presence on a  day
    to day basis not only as a partner but also as a carer. There is in  my
    judgment no error in the weight  given  to  the  relationship  in  this
    respect. Section 117B requires 'little weight'  to  be  given.  Clearly
    'little weight' is not 'no weight'. It is impossible to say in  general
    terms whether 'little weight' is a positive or a negative.  Clearly  it
    is less weight than that which would otherwise  be  given  but  in  the
    context of this appeal where the relationship is accepted and  is  more
    than a simply spousal relationship but a caring  relationship  as  well
    there is in my judgment no  indication  that  the  Judge  gave  to  the
    relationship too much weight in the balance.

15. So far as the Appellant's illegal working and attempted  deception  are
    concerned these are not matters that are referred to in section 117B so
    there is no statutory duty imposed to consider them. That does  not  of
    course mean that the Judge should not consider them, section 117B  does
    not purport to give an exhaustive  list  of  positives  and  negatives.
    These are factors that needed to be considered. The Judge  was  clearly
    aware of these matters and specifically  bears  them  in  mind  in  the
    proportionality  balance  (paragraph  27).  There  is  no  misdirection
    revealed.

16. There is in my judgment no error of law material  to  the  decision  to
    allow the appeal and the Respondent's appeal is therefore dismissed.


  Summary

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law.



Signed:     Date: 26 November 2014

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
