
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53202/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th January 2015                           |On 19th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                               muhammad zaheer
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs B Smith, Counsel, instructed by Rana & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs S Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Mensah
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 24th March 2014.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2 November 1980.

 3. On 19th August 2013 he was granted indefinite leave to  remain  on  the
    basis of his marriage to a British national.  On 13th December 2013  he
    sought readmission but was  refused  under  paragraph  320(7B)  of  the
    Immigration Rules  on  the  grounds  that  he  had  obtained  leave  by
    deception, having admitted to the interviewing officer that he had only
    lived with his wife for a few days since arriving in the UK in 2011 and
    had no contact with her.  She had only  supported  the  application  so
    that he could  remain in the UK.

 4.  The  judge  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  refusal  under   the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. The appellant appealed against her decision and,  on  17th  June  2014,
    permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge had failed
    to deal with his Article 8 rights even though they had been  raised  in
    the grounds of appeal.

 6. This matter first came before my colleague Mr C N  Lane  on  31st  July
    2014.  Mrs Pettersen informed me that on that occasion he set aside the
    decision of Judge Mensah with respect to Article 8  but  preserved  the
    findings made under the Immigration Rules.

 7. Clearly the matter should have come back before Mr  Lane,  but  he  was
    unavailable, and accordingly I obtained a transfer order so  that   the
    appeal could  proceed today.

 8. I heard brief oral evidence from the appellant.  He told me that he had
    been working in the UK for three years as a kitchen assistant until his
    leave had been  revoked.  He has a sister and brother-in-law, a British
    citizen, who live  in  Bradford  and  another  brother-in-law,  also  a
    British  citizen,  who  is  sponsoring  another  sister  to  come  from
    Pakistan.  The remainder of his  family,  including  his  mother,  live
    there.  He has a number of close friends in Bradford, six of whom  have
    come to support him in his appeal today.

 9. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the  appellant  plainly  cannot  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, and there is no evidence that he
    would suffer any hardship on return  to Pakistan where the majority  of
    his family live.

10. Mr Smith accepted that the Rules could not be met  but  said  that  the
    appellant had established a substantial private life in the UK, with  a
    strong social  network.   He  has  learned  the  English  language  and
    integrated well.

Findings and Conclusions

11. The judge did not deal with a ground of appeal which was pleaded before
    her and to that extent erred in law. The decision has  been  set  aside
    and must be remade.

12. The starting point is the Immigration Rules. The appellant plainly does
    not meet the private life requirements as set out in paragraph  276ADE.
    He does not enjoy family life here with his spouse.

13. Whilst removal would interfere with the friendships  he  has  developed
    here, he has no basis of stay in the UK and indeed has been  guilty  of
    using deception in the past. His closest family, aside from one sister,
    live in Pakistan.  Any social network  which he  has  established  here
    could be continued from there by electronic means  but  in  any  event,
    clearly are not of such a strength as to demonstrate that removal would
    be proportionate.

Decision

14. The original judge erred in law and her decision has been   set  aside.
    It is remade as follows.  The Appellant's appeal is dismissed under the
    Immigration Rules and with respect to Article 8.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

.






