
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53415/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 16 July 2014                               |On 29th July 2014            |
|Delivered Orally                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              Mr Douglas Owusu

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Awuah, Solicitor of Danbar Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, hereinafter  called  the  Secretary
    of State, against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 29 April 2014 allowed on  the  papers  the
    appeal of the Respondent (hereinafter called the claimant),  a  citizen
    of Ghana born on 2 February 1979 against the decision of the  Secretary
    of State dated 2 December 2013 refusing to him the grant of a residence
    card as confirmation of right of residence as a family member of an EEA
    national, on the ground that he had failed to prove that he  was  in  a
    durable relationship with an EEA national in accordance with Regulation
    8(5) of the 2006 Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations.

2.    In  fact  the  claimant  had  applied  for  a  residence  card  as   a
    confirmation of a right to reside in the United Kingdom as  the  spouse
    of a French  national  in  relation  to  which  Regulation  7(1)(a)  is
    relevant in that it recognises that the spouse of a qualified person as
    defined in Regulation 6 shall be treated as a  family  member  of  that
    person.

3.   The  claimant's  grounds  of  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    maintain that he had married his French national Sponsor by  way  of  a
    Ghanaian customary marriage on 23 October 2012.  He maintained that his
    wife was a qualified person exercising  treaty  rights  in  the  United
    Kingdom currently working here.

4.   The claimant contended that the Secretary  of  State  was  required  to
    recognise the validity of the proxy marriage for  immigration  purposes
    "provided that proxy marriage is legal in that country"  and  that  his
    proxy marriage was valid in Ghana and he asked the Secretary  of  State
    to accept its validity.

5.   The claimant submitted that he considered  he  met  all  the  necessary
    prerequisites for a proxy marriage to be accepted in the  UK  in  that:
    the marriage was recognised in Ghana, the country in which the marriage
    took place; it was properly executed and satisfied the requirements  of
    the laws of Ghana; and that there was "nothing in  the  law  of  either
    party's country of domicile that restricts the freedom  to  enter  into
    the marriage".

6.   In addition  the  claimant  maintained  he  had  fully  discharged  his
    obligation to prove that the marriage was valid in that he had provided
    the marriage certificate, a statutory declaration and a letter from the
    Ghana High Commission confirming that the relevant persons  had  signed
    the marriage registration documents.

7.   The claimant did not choose to avail  himself  of  the  opportunity  to
    have an oral hearing at which he and  his  claimed  spouse  could  have
    given evidence in support of his appeal and  therefore  the  First-tier
    Judge proceeded to determine the appeal on the papers before him.

8.   In allowing the appeal (occasionally confusing the  respective  genders
    of the claimant and his Sponsor) the First-tier  Judge  relied  on  the
    guidance of the Tribunal  in  NA  (Customary  marriage  and  divorce  -
    evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 0009 and concluded that he  was  satisfied
    in the light of that guidance, that the claimant was  Ghanaian  because
    he held a Ghanaian passport his  entitlement  to  which  had  not  been
    challenged by the Respondent.  The Sponsor  had  produced  an  identity
    card showing that she was a French national.

9.   Further and in reliance on the guidance in McCabe  v  McCabe  [1994]  1
    FLR 410, the Judge could find "no  evidence  that  both  parties  to  a
    Ghanaian customary marriage must be Ghanaian".

10.  The Judge continued at paragraphs 11 and 12  of  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "11. I find that the marriage has been registered and a certificate
             of registration  issued,  although  this  step  is  no  longer
             essential to its validity.  I note that the witnesses who have
             signed the certificate are the Appellant's and  the  Sponsor's
             fathers. Their statutory declaration, taken  before  a  Notary
             Public and duly  notarised  and  legalised,  states  that  the
             ceremony was attended by members of the families of  both  the
             Appellant  and  the  Sponsor.   Although  the  names  of   the
             Appellant and Sponsor appear on  the  certificate,  I  do  not
             believe that they signed the certificate at the  time  of  its
             issue, since they were not in Ghana; the proxies  have  signed
             to show they were there.


         12.  It is for the Appellant to prove that the marriage is  legally
             valid in Ghana before it can be recognised as such in the  UK.
             I find that he has done so.  I find that he is entitled  to  a
             Residence Card as the spouse of the Sponsor."

11.   The  grounds  in  support  of  the  Secretary  of  State's  successful
    application for permission to appeal that decision, pointed  out  inter
    alia, that in reaching his findings, the Judge failed to have regard to
    the reported decision and guidance of the  Tribunal  in  Kareem  (Proxy
    marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC) in relation  to  which
    would be as well to note in  particular  that  in  head  note  (e)  the
    Tribunal were clear that in considering  cases  of  marriage  by  proxy
    conducted in a non-EEA state where the Sponsor was an EEA national

         "the starting point will  be  to  decide  whether  a  marriage  was
         contracted between the Appellant and the qualified person according
         to the national law of the EEA country of  the  qualified  person's
         nationality."

12.  Further, at head note (g) the Tribunal were equally clear inter alia

         "that,  without  independent  and  reliable  evidence   about   the
         recognition of the marriage under  the  laws  of  the  EEA  country
         and/or the country where the marriage took place, the  Tribunal  is
         likely to be unable to  find  that  sufficient  evidence  has  been
         provided to discharge the burden of proof."

13.  This decision has since recently been reinforced by the Tribunal in  TA
    and Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC) in which  the
    head note states as follows:

         "Following the decision in Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]
         UKUT  24,  the  determination  of  whether  there  is   a   marital
         relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of  the
         Member State from which the Union citizen obtains nationality."

14.  I note that in fact Mr Kandola, who appeared before me,  also  appeared
    for the Secretary of State in that case.

15.  In her grounds the Secretary of State further inter alia  pointed  out,
    that in determining the validity of this  claimed  marriage  the  Judge
    should have firstly, but failed, to establish whether it was recognised
    in the Sponsor's EEA state, namely France.  Indeed references were made
    to paragraph 16 of Kareem that inter alia

         "a lack of evidence of relevant foreign law will normally mean that
         the party with the burden of proving it will fail."

16.  The grounds contended that in that regard and in terms of  the  present
    case, Article 146-1 of the French Civil Code clearly stated that  proxy
    marriages were in fact incompatible with the code.

17.  The Secretary of State thus submitted that  as  the  claimant  did  not
    satisfy those requirements, it inevitably followed that  he  failed  to
    satisfy  the  requirements  of  Regulation  7(1)(a)  of  the  EEA  2006
    Regulations and the First-tier Judge should  thus  have  dismissed  the
    appeal.

18.  Thus the appeal came before me on 16 July 2014 when my first  task  was
    to  determine  whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier   Judge
    contained an error or errors on a point of law that may have materially
    affected the outcome of the appeal.

19.  Mr Kandola relied on the Secretary of  State's  grounds,  pointing  out
    that the guidance in Kareem had now been adopted in TA.  He referred me
    to paragraph 6 of TA in which the following was stated:

         "6.  The Secretary of State sought,  and  obtained,  permission  to
             appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it being said  that  the  First-
             tier Tribunal had erred in law in failing to take into account
             and apply the recent reported decision of the  Upper  Tribunal
             of Kareem ...; this being relevant because neither  the  first
             claimant, nor EKT [the Sponsor], had been present in Ghana  at
             the time their marriage was contracted.


         "7.  It is not in dispute that the  First-tier  Tribunal  ought  to
             have, but failed to, consider the decision in Kareem, although
             the Judge was not helped in this regard by the failure of both
             parties to draw her attention to it."

20.  Mr Kandola submitted that such a  situation  was  in  common  with  the
    present case, in that the Judge had simply failed to  take  account  of
    the guidance in Kareem and, on the evidence before him, had he done  so
    he would have had no alternative but to dismiss the appeal.

21.  He further pointed out that the evidence showed in any event  that  the
    French Civil Code  did  not  recognise  proxy  marriages.   Matters  of
    foreign law were matters of fact.

22.  Mr Awuah, whilst accepting that the  First-tier  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider the guidance in Kareem, maintained that in any  event  it  was
    not material to the outcome of the appeal.  He  pointed  out  that  the
    decision in Kareem was not referred to  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Letter of Refusal.

23.  The Secretary of State had not  challenged  the  fact  that  the  proxy
    marriage was solemnised by a competent authority in Ghana  and  further
    that at paragraph 11  of  the  First-tier  Judge's  determination  (see
    above) the Judge made that clear.  He was satisfied by reference to the
    decisions of the afore-named.

24.  Further, the Judge was satisfied that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    having made reference to and followed the guidance in NA and in  McCabe
    in relation to which  he  referred  to  paragraphs  9  and  10  of  the
    determination.

25.  Mr Kandola in response pointed out that these were the  same  arguments
    raised in TA and rejected.  In this regard he referred me to paragraphs
    9 to 12 of that decision in which the following was stated:

         "9.  Mr Akohene submits that it is clear that there is a  two-stage
             process in the determination of  whether  a  marriage  can  be
             considered  to  be  valid  for  the  purposes  of   the   2006
             Regulations.  Where a marriage certificate has been issued  by
             a  competent  authority,  this  would  usually  be  enough  to
             demonstrate the  validity  of  the  marriage  under  the  2006
             Regulations [paragraph 68(b) of Kareem].  In the instant  case
             it is accepted that the competent authority  in  Ghana  issued
             the marriage certificate and, consequently, the first claimant
             has demonstrated that she is married for the purposes  of  the
             2006 EEA Regulations.  It is not necessary to move on  to  the
             second stage of the  consideration,  which  is  relevant  only
             where there  is  doubt  about  whether  a  marriage  has  been
             lawfully contracted [paragraph 68(d) of Kareem].  Where  there
             is  doubt  as  to  whether  a  marriage  has   been   lawfully
             contracted, for example because there is doubt  about  whether
             the marriage  certificate  has  been  issued  by  a  competent
             authority,  the  starting  point  is  to  decide  whether  the
             marriage has been contracted in accordance with  the  national
             law  of  the  EEA  country  of   the   Sponsor's   nationality
             [paragraphs 68(d) and 68(e) of Kareem, when read together].


         10.  This submission, it is said, is  supported  by  the  terms  of
             paragraph 68(g) of  Kareem,  which  contains  the  conjunctive
             'and/or'.  Accordingly, it is said, if there is clear evidence
             from the country in which the marriage  took  place  that  the
             marriage  was   lawfully   contracted,   an   applicant   need
             demonstrate no more.


         11.  In response Mr  Kandola  submits  that  the  determination  in
             Kareem makes clear that a consideration of whether a  person's
             marriage is valid always has to be undertaken in  the  context
             of the national legislation of the EEA  Sponsor's  country  of
             nationality; in this case the Netherlands.


         12.   I  have  no  hesitation  in  agreeing   with   Mr   Kandola's
             submission."



Assessment

26.  Despite Mr Awuah's valiant efforts on the  claimant's  behalf,  I  have
    had no difficulty in concluding that the determination  of  the  First-
    tier Judge disclosed errors of law that materially affected the outcome
    of the appeal.

27.  Whilst it was perfectly understandable  as  to  why  the  Secretary  of
    State's Letter of Refusal made no reference to the position  in  Kareem
    (above) because its promulgation  on  16  January  2014  postdated  her
    letter, the same regrettably cannot be said for  the  First-tier  Judge
    who  determined  the  present  appeal  some  three  months  after   its
    promulgation.

28.  Judges interpret existing  legal  principles.   They  reveal  the  law.
    They do not do so prospectively.  Therefore, if for example the  First-
    tier Judge misunderstood those legal  principles  then  notwithstanding
    that a leading case on the issue postdated the determination  it  would
    still amount to a material error of law.

29.  However, in this case the relevant Tribunal guidance did  not  postdate
    the Judge's determination.

30.  Further, whilst I recognise  that  cases  emanating  whether  from  the
    former Immigration Appeal Tribunal or from the Upper Tribunal  are  not
    binding  upon  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  significant  weight   should
    nonetheless be attached to the Tribunal's important guidance.

31.  In such circumstances I consider it to  have  been  highly  regrettable
    that the First-tier Judge should have failed to heed  the  guidance  of
    the Upper  Tribunal  in  Kareem.   As  the  former  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal (IAT) made clear in the past, it was always unfortunate  where
    an Immigration Judge appeared to operate in a  vacuum  as  if  reported
    decisions of the Tribunal did not exist for guidance and consideration.

32.   For  the  reasons  that   I   have   identified   and   indeed   those
    comprehensively reasoned within the grounds in support of the Secretary
    of State's successful application for permission to appeal, I am wholly
    satisfied that the First-tier Judge materially erred in law and that in
    consequence his decision should be set aside.

33.  Quite apart from the matters that I have identified above, there  would
    appear for example to have been no or no satisfactory  evidence  before
    him that the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights.

34.  I further note that the refusal letter was clear  that  the  claimant's
    application  had  also  been  considered  in  the   alternative   under
    Regulation 8(5) which refers to durable partners  (unmarried  partners)
    of EEA nationals who apply for residence cards to regularise their stay
    in the United Kingdom.

35.  As the Secretary of State pointed out, a claim from  somebody  who  had
    stated that they were a durable partner would be considered in terms of
    evidence  submitted  to  show  that  the  couple  were  in  a   durable
    relationship.  In that regard the First-tier Judge failed  to  consider
    this aspect in the refusal because he concluded that  the  couple  were
    lawfully married and the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  was  in  the
    alternative and a consideration  in  compliance  with  this  Regulation
    would not have applied  if  the  claimant  had  demonstrated  that  his
    marriage took place in accordance with the law.

36.  It is as well for the sake of completeness that I point  out,  that  in
    terms of whether the couple's relationship was durable,  there  appears
    to have been no evidence that the couple had been living  together  for
    at least two years.  It is right to say that most  helpfully  Mr  Awuah
    accepted that this was the case.

Decision

37.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

38.  I set aside the decision.

39.  I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed                                  Date 28 July 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

