
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53534/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 6 May 2015                       |On: 1 June 2015                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER


                                   Between

                           Elsie Ogechukwu Arinzeh
                         no anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     No representative; no attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals  with  leave  from  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hussain who dismissed the appellant's appeal brought  on
    Human Rights grounds against the decision of the respondent  to  refuse
    to vary her leave to remain in the UK.

 2. On 23 March 2015 the appellant was sent a notice of hearing setting out
    the date, time and place. The notice was sent to her address on record.



 3. The matter was stood down until 3.15pm. There was no representative for
    the appellant on record.

 4. I am satisfied that the appellant has been  properly  notified  of  the
    hearing. I also consider that it is in  the  interests  of  justice  to
    proceed with the hearing.

 5. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 22 July 1978. She has a
    daughter, Destiny Nmachi Arinzeh, also a Nigerian national, born on  25
    January 2012.

 6. Originally there were two appeals before the First-tier Tribunal.   One
    related to the appellant's  daughter.   Although  the  application  had
    originally been made on behalf of her  daughter,  Judge  Hussain  found
    that she had no right  of  appeal  as  she  was  born  in  the  UK  and
    consequently had no leave to vary [2]. The appeal before the first tier
    Tribunal accordingly proceeded with regard to the appellant,  Ms  Elsie
    Ogechukwu Arinzeh.

 7. On 27  February  2015,  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Zucker
    granted the appellant permission to appeal on the basis that  there  is
    some evidence that the children (the appellant has more than one child)
    are to be admitted to the  United  States  of  America  to  join  their
    biological father; it  is  arguable  that  it  would  be  in  the  best
    interests of the children  to  be  allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  to
    facilitate any further enquiries which may be required  by  the  United
    States authorities rather than remove the appellant  and  her  children
    which may cause disproportionate delay.

 8. In his determination Judge Hussain set out the  appellant's  case.  She
    claimed to have no connection with Nigeria. He  referred  to  a  letter
    dated 25 February 2013 to the effect that she feared that  if  returned
    to Nigeria, her only daughter would be forced to undergo female genital
    mutilation (FGM) against her will and she would be  unable  to  protect
    her.

 9. The appellant attended the hearing before the first-tier tribunal.  She
    gave evidence, adopting a witness statement as her evidence  in  chief.
    She contended that she entered the UK as a student in October 2009. She
    claimed she had remained here and had established a connection with the
    UK. She has immediate and extended family members who reside here.  She
    has lost her connections with Nigeria.  She  has  developed  a  strong,
    irrevocable private life in the UK [6].

10. Her close family members are in the UK and are close to each other. She
    has been a valuable asset to the Church and to the community  generally
    [7].

11. Her children do not speak "her language." She also fears  FGM  for  her
    daughter. Nor can she prevent them from being bitten by mosquitoes. She
    said that the father of her children is in America [8].

12. The appellant was cross-examined. She had returned to Nigeria  in  2011
    as her father died. She stayed in her village house. Her mother is  old
    and lives in the village, as does a sibling [11].

13. She said that the father of her children is in America.  He  has  filed
    papers for them to go to America. They are waiting  for  an  interview.
    There was no statement from the father, however, and  the  Judge  noted
    that she did not explain his absence [12].  The  Judge  had  regard  to
    other witnesses whose evidence he summarised at [14-16].

14. Judge Hussain accepted that she had family life with her two  daughters
    in the UK [25]. He "got the impression" that the father of the children
    is an American citizen who lives there. The  appellant's  evidence  was
    that he had filed papers for her  and  the  children  to  join  him  in
    America.

15. None of the children is a British citizen. He found that there would be
    no interference with the appellant's family life  if  she  were  to  be
    removed from the UK. Although she had established private life  in  the
    UK, he found that there were no obstacles to  her  resuming  ties  with
    others in similar situations if returned to Nigeria. The claim  to  FGM
    was an afterthought [26]. In the original January representations there
    had been no reference to FGM, nor was it contained in  the  appellant's
    written statement that she made.

16.  In  the  event,  Judge  Hussain  found  that  there  was  no  coherent
    explanation as to why her daughter would be forced to  go  through  the
    procedure. She had not asserted that either her mother  or  brother  in
    Nigeria would force her daughter to go through that procedure. The idea
    that people in the village would take it upon themselves to  force  her
    to undergo the procedure was "wholly implausible." [27]

17. In the application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  the
    appellant presented a narrative statement containing her submissions.

18. As part of the application to appeal,  she  sought  to  adduce  further
    evidence that she married an American citizen, Mr Chukwuemeka  Frederic
    Ukonne in a ceremony held on 1 May 2014 at the Newham  Registry  Office
    in the UK.

19. Their two children were born in the UK.

20. She produced a document from the Department of Homeland Security,  USA,
    to the effect that on 5 June 2014, Mr Ukonne filed a petition for  them
    to join him in the US. The reference number relating to the petition is
    set out. She asserts that the petition was approved on 15 October  2014
    "giving clearance for his children and wife's US residence visa  to  be
    granted from the US Embassy  in  UK."  She  stated  that  she  and  her
    children are waiting for an interview at  the  US  Embassy  in  the  UK
    relating to the grant of their residence visas.

21. She thus contended in the grounds seeking permission to appeal that the
    Tribunal should grant her a period of between 12-18 months to await the
    appointment of the US  Embassy  in  the  UK  in  order  to  attend  the
    interview.

22. The appellant has, as noted, also adduced three Department of  Homeland
    Security, USA "Approval Notices." It is stated that  the  petitions  in
    respect of the petitioner's wife and children "have been approved." The
    beneficiaries will  in  due  course  be  contacted  concerning  further
    immigrant visa processing steps.

23. It is stated in the Notices that the approval  of  this  visa  petition
    does not in itself grant any immigration status and does not  guarantee
    that the alien beneficiary will subsequently be found  to  be  eligible
    for a visa for admission to the USA. It is emphasised in bold that  the
    form is not a visa, nor may be used in place of a visa.

24. Although Judge Hussain heard the appeal on 23 July  2014,  he  did  not
    promulgate his decision until 28 November 2014. It is evident from  the
    Department of Homeland Security, USA "approval notice" that the 'notice
    date' was 15 October 2014. There had been no attempt however  to  bring
    the notices to the attention of the Tribunal.

25. Instead, the appellant's solicitors wrote to the  Tribunal  on  several
    occasions in November 2014 asking about the position of the appellant's
    appeal as they had heard nothing from the Tribunal since the hearing on
    23 July 2014. The clerk to the Tribunal contacted the Judge, who stated
    that he would promulgate the decision as soon as possible. The date  of
    the clerk's letter to the solicitors was 26 November 2014. The decision
    was promulgated two days later.

26. On 4 December 2014, the appellant's husband wrote  to  the  "First-tier
    Tribunal" asking for "an extension of  time  to  allow  his  family  to
    process the approved immigration visas to  join  him  in  America".  As
    already noted, the forms referred to expressly state that they are  not
    visas.

27. The appellant was sent directions by the Upper Tribunal  in  which  the
    parties, including  the  appellant,  were  directed  to  serve  on  the
    Tribunal and the other party 21 days after the directions were sent all
    the documentary evidence upon which it is intended to rely pursuant  to
    Rule 15(2A) of the Rules and whether it  is  intended  to  develop  the
    grounds of appeal. In  addition,  it  was  directed  that  any  further
    evidence including supplementary oral evidence that the Upper  Tribunal
    may need to consider if a decision is made to re-make the decision, can
    be so considered at the hearing.

28. However, no further evidence has been sent.

29. The parties were informed that a failure to serve evidence as  required
    by these directions and/or Rule 15(2A) might lead the Upper Tribunal to
    refuse to admit that evidence.

    Assessment

30. There has been no application to adduce the "approval notices" to which
    I have referred. Nor has any supplementary evidence been filed  by  the
    appellant.

31. In granting permission, Judge Zucker stated  that  on  the  basis  that
    there is some evidence that the children are  to  be  admitted  to  the
    United States to join their father, it is arguable that it would be  in
    their best interests to be allowed to remain in the  UK  to  facilitate
    any further enquiries.

32. Apart from the fact that no application under the rules  to  admit  the
    further evidence has been filed, there is no explanation as to why this
    evidence could not have been produced to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    and the respondent prior to the promulgation of the decision.

33. As at the date of Judge Hussain's decision, however,  he  properly  had
    regard to the evidence before him. It was asserted that the  father  of
    the appellant's children is in America [8]. It is also asserted that he
    has filed papers for them to go to America and that  they  are  waiting
    for an interview. However, there was no statement from the  father  and
    no documentation was filed supporting the appellant's assertion.

34. The Judge noted that the appellant's evidence was that  the  children's
    father had filed papers for her and the children to join him in America
    [24]. He noted that in none of the written representations nor  in  the
    witness statement was "any clue" given as to the paternity of  the  two
    children. The Judge stated that he got the impression from the  hearing
    that the father of the children is an American citizen who lives there.

35. That was the sum total of the evidence before the Judge.

36. The Judge had regard to the appellant's claims with regard to paragraph
    276ADE (vi) of the Rules. He did not accept that the appellant had lost
    all ties with Nigeria [21].  He  has  set  out  his  reasons  for  that
    conclusion. That finding is not challenged by the appellant.

37. Nor is there any separate ground  of  appeal  challenging  the  Judge's
    findings with regard to the daughter being forced to undergo FGM, which
    he found not to be plausible or supported with any  objective  evidence
    [21]. He noted that there was no supporting statement from the  alleged
    father of the children [24].

38. He accepted that the appellant has family life with her  two  daughters
    in the UK. There was nothing preventing the enjoyment  of  family  life
    with them wherever it is that she is to be removed. The  children  were
    not  British  citizens.  There  would  be  no  interference  with   the
    appellant's family life if removed from the UK.

39. In assessing the proportionality of her proposed removal, he found that
    there were no obstacles to the appellant resuming ties with  others  in
    similar situations if removed to Nigeria. Her children  are  young  and
    capable of adapting to life in the home country  [26].  He  found  that
    there was no real risk of her daughter  being  forced  to  undergo  FGM
    [28].

40. There was however no evidence before Judge Hussain  that  the  children
    "are to be admitted into the US to join their father."

41. I accordingly find that the Judge has given proper  reasons,  based  on
    the evidence before him, for refusing the appellant's appeal.

42. The respondent will no doubt have regard to the Notices  produced  from
    the Department of Homeland Security, USA, referred  to  above,  pending
    any decision to effect her removal.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of any error on a point of law and shall accordingly stand.

    The appellant's appeal is dismissed

    No anonymity direction is made.






    Signed   Date 29/5/2015
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
