
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/53213/2013
                                                               IA/53216/2013
                                                               IA/53235/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 5th August 2014                              |On 18th August 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal Judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    lomassdeo sohodeb (first respondent)
                  devikka ranni sohodeb (second respondent)
                     vashish sohodeb (third respondent)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Jack, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Bhatt of Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, allowing  the  appeals
    of the three Respondents against a decision to  refuse  to  vary  their
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and to  remove  them  by  way  of
    directions.

 2. For the purposes of this determination I shall refer to  the  Secretary
    of State as "the Respondent" and to the three Respondents as the first,
    second and third Appellants respectively, reflecting their position  as
    they were, in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellants are citizens of Mauritius born respectively on 18th July
    1960, 22nd August 1965 and 15th December 1994.

 4. The first Appellant entered the  United  Kingdom  in  2004  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor but was granted leave to remain as a student and
    then as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  His most recent grant of leave  to
    remain was made on 12th June 2012, valid until  20th  July  2014.   The
    second and third Appellants entered the UK in 2007 as dependents of the
    first Appellant and were granted leave to remain in line with him.

 5. On 21st November 2012 the  Respondent  decided  to  curtail  the  first
    Appellant's leave to remain, that leave to expire on 20th January 2013.
    The leave of his two dependents was  similarly  curtailed.  However  on
    14th December 2012, before the expiry date of their  leave,  the  three
    Appellants made application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    on the basis of their private and family life  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    Those applications were duly considered and refused by a decision dated
    5th  December  2013.  In  addition  t  the  Respondent  issued  removal
    directions under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and  Nationality
    Act 2006.  The applications were refused because  the  Appellants  were
    unable to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules nor could they
    meet the family and  private  life  requirements  in  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules.

    (Insofar as it is relevant, the first Appellant was  found  not  to  be
    able to meet the requirements of ELTRP 1.1 because  he  only  ever  had
    limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom; likewise the second  and
    third Appellants held discretionary leave only as his dependants.)

 6. The Respondent refused the applications in  accordance  with  paragraph
    276ADE because she was not satisfied that the first Appellant had  been
    in the UK for a continuous period of twenty  years,  nor  could  it  be
    shown, considering he had lived in his own country of Mauritius for  43
    years, that he had lost all ties with his home country.  The second and
    third Appellants' applications were refused in line with that.

 7. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  claiming  that  it
    would be unreasonable to expect them to return to Mauritius  since  the
    third Appellant had lived here for six years, been  educated  here  and
    was unfamiliar with the culture in Mauritius.  It should be noted  that
    when the  applications  for  leave  to  remain  were  made,  the  third
    Appellant was aged 17 years 11 months.   He  had  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since the age of  12  years,  had  attended  school  here,  had
    completed his A levels and had  an  offer  of  a  university  place  at
    Middlesex University.

 8. Their appeals were heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 1st May 2014, by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd.  The First-tier Judge  acknowledged  in
    his determination at  [8]  that  it  was  conceded  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants that they could not meet the requirements of Article 8 under
    Appendix FM.  He  noted  that  this  was  "an  appeal  in  relation  to
    paragraph 276ADE and thereafter to  establish  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules".

 9. It was said at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,  that  the  first  and
    second Appellants would not be able to gain  employment  in  Mauritius,
    whereas the second Appellant was in gainful employment in the UK.   The
    third Appellant (who by the time of the hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was over 18 years of age) was now working at a  doctor's
    surgery for fifteen hours a week. He wanted to attend university in the
    UK to follow a biomedical science  course.  The  particular  course  he
    wished to follow was not available in Mauritius.  If he had  to  return
    there it would set him back a year  or  two  and  in  addition  he  has
    friends here and has grown up in the UK.

10. In coming to his findings the First-tier Tribunal Judge said at [22],

         "In essence, this is a case related primarily to the  private  life
         of the three Appellants.  The first Appellant  entered  the  United
         Kingdom on 8th March 2004.  He has now been in the  United  Kingdom
         for ten years.  Whilst I cannot take  into  account  the  ten  year
         residence Rule, I cannot ignore the fact that the  first  Appellant
         has been living in the United Kingdom for ten years  though,  since
         August 2012, he has neither worked  nor  attended  any  college  or
         university.  He then brought the second  and  third  Appellants  to
         join him in the United Kingdom.  They entered the United Kingdom on
         4th February 2007.  At that time the second Appellant was 41  years
         old (she will be 50 in August next  year).   The  first  Appellant,
         when he came to the United Kingdom, was age 43.   Tellingly  though
         the third Appellant, when he came to the  United  Kingdom,  was  12
         years of age.  Since then he has  spent  now  seven  years  in  the
         United Kingdom.  He has grown from a young boy to an adult.  He  is
         integrated into this  country.   He  has  been  educated  here  and
         substantial amounts of educational documents have been  lodged  for
         him.  He has friends here.  It appears to me that although  he  did
         not have the seven years' residence as a  child  (by  the  time  he
         turned  18  he  had  been  here  for  six  years  and  nine  months
         approximately), he is  extremely  well-established  in  the  United
         Kingdom and sees himself as  part  of  this  country.   The  United
         Kingdom is his home.  It appears to me that as a young single adult
         male who looked upon his future as being in the United  Kingdom  as
         that is how he had been brought up, it would be extremely difficult
         for him to return to Mauritius, a country which he knew only  as  a
         boy".

    The Judge then went on and allowed the appeal of all  three  Appellants
    under Article 8 ECHR.

11. The Respondent sought and was  granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    grounds that the First-tier Tribunal had erred by failing to  take  the
    correct approach in considering cases that engage Article 8 as set  out
    in Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC) and for failing to give  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that
    removal  of  the   three   Appellants   to   Mauritius   would   be   a
    disproportionate consequence.

Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

12. The appeal came before me  on  5th  August  2014  I  heard  submissions
    initially on the error of law application.  Mr Jack submitted that  the
    Judge had plainly erred in his approach in that he had failed to  adopt
    the proper approach as set out in Gulshan when considering the issue of
    whether there were arguably good grounds for granting leave  to  remain
    outside the Rules.  He  had  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised by the Rules.

13. Further the Judge had failed to recognise that if  the  appeals  failed
    under the Immigration Rules (as these ones did)  only  then  should  he
    have gone on to consider whether the Appellants had  demonstrated  that
    there were exceptional or compelling circumstances not covered  by  the
    Rules, rather than engaging in a freewheeling Article 8 exercise.   All
    told the Judge's consideration  and  findings  amounted  to  one  short
    paragraph which said

         "Due to the length of time for which all three Appellants have been
         in  the  United  Kingdom  together,  taking  into   account   their
         integration into this country, and their son's education here, I am
         satisfied that there is a  good  arguable  case  to  consider  this
         matter outwith the Rules."

14. Mr Jack submitted that  there  was  a  wholly  inadequate  analysis  of
    reasoning here and this amounted to legal error.  The  decision  needed
    to be set aside and remade dismissing all three appeals.

15. Ms Bhatt  sought  to  argue  that  the  Judge  had  considered  whether
    compelling or unusual circumstances were present in these appeals.  She
    suggested that the Judge's findings at [24] showed  his  reasoning  for
    considering  that  the  Appellants'  circumstances  fell  outwith   the
    Immigration Rules.  That reasoning was further fortified by the unusual
    circumstances of the third Appellant who had  been  educated  here  and
    lived here since the age of 12 years and therefore had fully integrated
    into this country. The Judge  had,  therefore,  considered  exceptional
    circumstances, namely the circumstances of the family as  a  whole  and
    the position of the third Appellant who had lived in the United Kingdom
    for almost seven years, before his 18th birthday.

Consideration and Findings

Error of Law

16. In my judgment the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision  plainly  shows
    that in reaching that decision he erred in law.   He seems to have been
    unaware of the decision in Gulshan, since he makes no mention of it  in
    the body of the determination.  That being so the Judge appears to have
    set out on a freewheeling assessment of Article 8  outside  the  Rules.
    The Appellants did not meet the Immigration Rules (which now provide  a
    complete code as regards Article 8 - see MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192).  The first Appellant had not lived continuously  in  the  United
    Kingdom for at least twenty years.   There  is  no  suggestion  in  the
    determination that the  Judge  has  considered  whether  compelling  or
    unusual  circumstances  were  present  in  this  case;  he  has  simply
    dismissed the Immigration Rules appeal and has then, acting  as  if  he
    were required to do so, considered the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds
    outside the Rules.  The consequence of his adopting  this  approach  is
    that he has ignored  the  failure  of  the  Appellant  to  satisfy  the
    Immigration Rules and has not taken that failure (and the  reasons  for
    it) as a starting point for deciding  whether  to  consider  Article  8
    outside the Rules at all.  Other than the Appellants' stated preference
    to remain in the United Kingdom, the Judge identified  no  grounds  for
    concluding that there were any practical or other  problems  preventing
    the Appellants from returning to Mauritius.  By  failing  to  undertake
    any proper assessment of such factors the Judge plainly fell into legal
    error and his findings on the impact  of  the  Appellants'  removal  on
    their family or private life are accordingly unsustainable.

17. The Judge's findings completely ignore the  approach  to  be  taken  in
    circumstances where the Immigration Rules could not be met, as set  out
    in particular in the cases of Nagre, MF Nigeria and Gulshan.

18. The correct approach has most  recently  been  set  out  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Shahzad (Article 8: legitimate aim)  Pakistan  [2014]  UKUT
    85.  That case endorsed the principles in earlier cases.  It  is  plain
    that no consideration was given  to  the  existence  of  arguably  good
    grounds for granting leave so  as  to  justify  going  on  to  consider
    Article 8 in a wider context and neither was any consideration given to
    whether compelling circumstances existed  that  were  not  sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules.

19. In these circumstances I find that the Judge's decision has to  be  set
    aside for reason of error in law and remade.

Remaking the Decision

20. Whilst Mr Jack submitted that the decision could simply  be  remade  on
    the evidence already available, it was  Ms  Bhatt's  request  that  the
    appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order for there to  be
    further oral evidence.  When I  enquired  what  further  oral  evidence
    would be brought forward to justify returning the matter to the  First-
    tier Tribunal, she was unable to indicate any other than handing in  an
    English Language test certificate for the first Appellant.   There  was
    no suggestion that the family's circumstances had changed substantially
    since the appeals were heard at the First-tier tribunal.  Accordingly I
    considered there to be no reason why I should not proceed to remake the
    decision myself.

21. For the same reasons as given above for finding the Judge to have erred
    in law, I consider that the Appellants' appeals have to  fail.   It  is
    not disputed that they cannot meet the requirements of Appendix FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.  In terms of the  principles
    in Nagre, Gulshan and Shahzad there are no arguably  good  grounds  for
    granting leave to remain outside the Rule and thus it is not  necessary
    to go on to consider Article 8 in any wider context.  However,  and  in
    any event, the Appellants have failed to establish that there  are  any
    compelling circumstances in their case.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    properly considered the issue of family life and concluded that removal
    meant that the family would  be  returned  to  Mauritius  together  and
    therefore removal would not interfere with family life.

22. The Judge also properly considered whether there was  any  evidence  to
    suggest that the Appellants had lost all contact  with  family  members
    and friends in Mauritius but gave sustainable reasons for finding  that
    this was not the case.

23. As the grounds granting permission indicate, it is clear that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was more concerned with the facts as they  affected
    the third Appellant who was 18 years old the day after the applications
    were lodged.  This allowed the Judge to find that  the  extent  of  the
    third Appellant's private life which had been  acquired  in  the  seven
    years since he had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  and  which  included
    successfully completing his secondary education and gaining  A  levels,
    outweighed the Respondent's entitlement to control immigration.

24. It can only be assumed that the Judge proceeded from his  dismissal  of
    the Immigration Rules appeal to considering Article 8 outside the  Rule
    because the third Appellant happens to have completed his education  in
    the United Kingdom, gained his A levels and  wishes  to  continue  with
    that education by going to university here.  Can that properly be  said
    to be circumstances not anticipated by the Immigration Rules?  I  think
    not.  Those  circumstances  are  hardly  unusual  or  compelling.   The
    Appellants would be returned to Mauritius as a  family  and  there  was
    nothing to prevent the third Appellant from applying to return  to  the
    UK as a foreign student and making that application through the  proper
    channels.  The  circumstances  of  the  three  Appellants  are  neither
    unusual nor compelling nor  can  they  be  said  to  fall  outside  the
    detailed provisions of the Immigration Rules.

Decision

25. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    19th May 2014 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.   The  appeals
    of the three Appellants are dismissed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts

