
IAC-FH-NL-V3
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53825/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 November 2014                           |On 31 December 2014          |
|Prepared 19 November 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                              ms margaret wobil
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Mensons &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Ms S Vidyadharan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Ghana,  date  of  birth  16  April  1965,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision to refuse a  residence  card
    as confirmation of a right of residence as the family member of an  EEA
    national on 5 December 2013.

2.    No  decision  was  made  to  make  removal  directions.   The  reasons
    contained within the Notice of Immigration Decision indicated  that  if
    the Appellant did not voluntarily remove then in due course steps would
    be taken to enforce removal which would require a further decision with
    associated appeal rights to be notified separately.

3.   The grounds  of  appeal,  dated  11  December  2013,  identified  three
    issues: Was there a  proxy  marriage  between  the  Appellant  and  EEA
    national  and  was  that  proxy  marriage  valid?   Secondly,  did  the
    Appellant  satisfy  the  durable  relationship  requirement  to  be  an
    extended family member under Regulation 8 of the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  2006  Regulations)?   Was  the
    Respondent's decision in breach of Article 8 ECHR rights?

4.   The appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Thanki (the judge) who on 8 September 2014 dismissed the  appeal  under
    the 2006 EEA Regulations.

5.   The judge did not hear any submissions made on Article  8  ECHR,  noted
    that no paid application  had  been  made  to  the  Respondent  and  no
    submissions were made from  the  Appellant's  Counsel  at  the  hearing
    before the judge to assert that Article 8 should be considered.

6.   No submissions were made under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

7.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge C  Andrew
    on 17 October 2014.  The grounds seeking  permission  had  argued  that
    there was sufficient evidence to conclude  that  there  was  a  genuine
    proxy marriage carried out in Ghana: secondly, under the law of the EEA
    national (Belgium) there was a valid marriage but if there was not then
    the evidence showed a durable relationship.  Further, it  was  accepted
    that whilst there were no Article 8 submissions to the judge, a general
    ground of appeal had been relied upon in the original  grounds  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

8.   On 17 November 2014 Mr Karim sought to  sidestep  the  effects  of  the
    cases of Kareem (Proxy marriages - EU law) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 24 (IAC)
    and TA & Others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT  00316  (IAC)  and
    argue that the UK should apply its domestic law, not be concerned about
    what if any other EEA state recognised such a marriage to be  and  that
    Kareem and TA are wrongly decided.

9.   Having considered the factual circumstances it is plain that the  judge
    did not accept that there was a  valid  customary  marriage  by  proxy.
    Further the judge rejected an opinion  provided  by  a  Belgian  lawyer
    concerning the validity of  the  marriage  in  Ghana  as  well  as  the
    validity of a marriage being recognised in Belgium.

10.  The judge properly gave reasons  with  reference  to  the  report,  its
    format and the lack of qualification of the  writer  as  an  expert  or
    experience in the field of overseas marriages or indeed specialising in
    such matters as proxy marriages.  It was extremely difficult to see  on
    what basis the expert could factually sustain the opinion he held or to
    what extent the opinion he held was that consistent with  the  view  of
    other lawyers on such marriages under Belgian law.

11.  It is clear that in Kareem  the  Tribunal  did  not  seek  to  set  the
    parameters  upon  the  evidence  or  the  sources  to  deal  with   the
    recognition of marriage under the laws of an  EEA  country  and/or  the
    country where the marriage took place.

12.  The judge was therefore perfectly entitled, for the reasons  given,  to
    give little weight, as he did, to the lawyer's report.  He was entitled
    to take the view that the evidence had not  shown  there  was  a  valid
    marriage to a Belgian national.

13.  I find that  Kareem  and  TA  are  good  law.   The  evidence  did  not
    establish on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  there  was  a  valid
    marriage.  Accordingly, the evidence did not show the Appellant was the
    spouse of the Belgian national Sponsor.

14.  It is clear the judge went on to consider whether there was  a  durable
    relationship under Regulation 8(5) of the 2006  regulations.   Contrary
    to the submissions, the judge was not defining a  durable  relationship
    by reference to a length of two years and that anything  short  of  two
    years could not be a  durable  relationship.   Rather,  the  judge  was
    addressing the evidence that was provided and, at paragraph 46  of  the
    determination  (D  &  R),  the  judge  listed  a  number   of   factual
    differences.  I went through paragraph 46 with Mr Karim  who  confirmed
    the factual matters recited by the judge therein  and  particularly  in
    relation to asserted differences.  In the circumstances, the judge  was
    aware of differences in the evidence, between the Appellant and Sponsor
    and the limited nature of external evidence to show that  relationship.
    In part much of the evidence could at best be ambiguous to establish co-
    habitation or co-living as opposed to identifying the potential  source
    of the Appellant's residence.

15.  I concluded that if the Appellant failed over the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship and its durability it was extremely hard  to  see  how  an
    Article 8 claim based on family life or  the  role  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor play in  each  other's  private  lives  could  be  sustainable.
    Although Mr Karim did not concede the point, it seemed to  me  that  if
    the  claim  failed  in  relation  to  the  marriage  or   the   durable
    relationship then that was effectively the end of the Article 8  claim.
    In addition, there simply was not evidence in the papers either  before
    the judge or shown to me to show the impact on private life  issues  or
    matters which might  represent  the  core  values  that  form  part  of
    protected private life rights.

16.  In the circumstances other than the fact that the  Appellant  has  been
    in the United Kingdom for a relatively short  period  of  time,  it  is
    extremely difficult to see even the vestiges of evidence  to  establish
    any particular exercise of  private  life  rights  or  any  effects  of
    interference in such private life.

17.  Accordingly I did not see there was any proper basis for the first  two
    questions raised in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  being  answered  in  the
    affirmative.  I have considered the case of JM  (Liberia)  [2006]  EWCA
    1429 which I raised with  the  parties.   I  concluded  that  where  no
    removal directions are set, the Appellant is not under  any  threat  of
    immediate removal and that the Respondent  has  indicated  a  fresh  or
    further decision will be made to which an appeal may be made.  This was
    not a case where Article 8 needed to be considered even though  it  was
    raised in the most general sense in the original grounds of  appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

18.  The appeal under the 2006 EEA Regulations is dismissed.
     The appeal under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.
     The appeal based on Article 8 ECHR grounds is dismissed.

Anonymity Order
No anonymity order was made and none appears to be necessary.



Signed        Date 30 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed therefore no fee award is appropriate.



Signed        Date 30 December 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
