
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: IA/53764/2013
     IA/53775/2013
     IA/53779/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th September 2014                          |On 1st October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                        (1) Ms Jaswinder Kaur Sekhon
                        (2) Mr Ravinder Singh Grewal
                         (3) Ms Prabheet Kaur Grewal
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This was an appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Blandy, promulgated on 12th June 2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Hatton Cross  on  4th  June  2014.   In  the  determination  the  judge
    dismissed the appeals of Ms Jaswinder Kaur Sekhon,  Mr  Ravinder  Singh
    Grewal, and Ms Prabheet Kaur Grewal, who subsequently applied for,  and
    were granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a family of wife, husband, and their daughter.   All
    are citizens of India.  The wife, the first Appellant, was born on 13th
    November 1988.  The husband, the second Appellant,  was  born  on  27th
    October 1987.  The daughter, the third Appellant, was born on 1st March
    2013.  All appeal against the decision of the Respondent to refuse  the
    application of the first Appellant for leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant.

The Judge's Findings

 3. At the hearing before  the  judge  on  4th  June  2014,  there  was  no
    appearance by any of the Appellants, as  indeed  there  has  been  none
    today before this Tribunal.  Today, there has been a  letter  from  the
    Appellants'  legal  representatives  to  the  effect  that   they   are
    instructed that this appeal proceed "on papers",  and  they  have  been
    informed by a letter from HM Courts and Tribunals  Service  dated  24th
    September 2014, that although this will be a paper  hearing,  the  Home
    Office representative may make oral  submissions,  which  he  has  done
    today.

 4. Judge Blandy on 4th June 2014 had before him  a  document  verification
    report with respect to which he recorded that it "makes it  plain  that
    the actual documents were submitted to the  ICICI  Bank  ...  and  were
    found to be false" (paragraph 9), when the Appellants set out  to  show
    that they could meet living costs and course fees because of  proof  of
    finances provided by way of ICICI Bank  statement  (see  paragraph  2),
    which were confirmed as false.  The use of deception was such that  the
    application fell to  be  determined  under  paragraph  322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules (see paragraph 2).

 5. Judge Blandy then went on to  consider  whether  the  Appellants  could
    succeed under paragraph 276ADE in relation to their  private  life  and
    concluded, "there is no reason why they cannot all be returned to India
    as a family and there is no evidence that they meet the requirements of
    Appendix FM with regard to family life" and there  were  no  compelling
    reasons why  their  human  rights  should  be  considered  outside  the
    Immigration Rules either (see paragraph 12).

Grounds of Application

 6. In the grounds of application, which were submitted late,  it  is  said
    that the judge accepted the document verification report at face  value
    without supporting evidence and took no account of a later letter  from
    the ICICI Bank.





 7. On 4th July 2014 permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the
    document verification report had not been attached.

 8. At the hearing before me on 25th September 2014 the  Appellants,  as  I
    have  indicated  already,  were  not  in  attendance,  and   were   not
    represented.  Mr Smart, appearing on behalf of the  Respondent,  stated
    that the judge correctly referred to the relevant case law at paragraph
    10 of the determination given the citation of AA (Nigeria) [2010]  EWCA
    Civ 773 and Shen [2014] UKUT 00236.  The judge also properly considered
    the information relied upon to confirm that  the  bank  documents  were
    false.

 9. Mr Smart now submitted before me the document verification report which
    had been verified by Jayne Spencer on 21st October 2013.   Attached  to
    this is a letter which refers to the account  number  in  the  name  of
    Jaswinder Kaur and goes on to say that,

         "the address on our records now is different to the  one  mentioned
         in the documents attached.  As  for  a  bank  record  there  is  no
         customer induced transaction in this account for  the  period  20th
         May 2013 to  23rd  July  2013.   Further  client  ID  mentioned  on
         attached statement belongs to a different customer.  It seems  that
         the attached statement is manipulated".

    Mr Smart submitted that nothing could be clearer than this.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision.   There  is  one
    very simple reason for this.  Paragraph 9 of the judge's  determination
    is in the following terms:

         "It is mentioned that checks with the  issuing  body  (ICICI  Bank)
         confirmed  that  the  documents  were   false   and   third   party
         confirmation of that fact was received on 11th October 2013.   Thus
         it is quite plain that the Respondent did not simply check  against
         the wrong number, as speculated  by  the  first  Appellant  in  her
         statement.  The first Appellant, having chosen an oral hearing, did
         not appear before the Tribunal to give evidence and did not  submit
         any further documentation from ICICI Bank to the  effect  that  the
         conclusion of  the  document  verification  report  was  erroneous"
         (paragraph 9).

11. Needless  to  say,  in  the  appeal  before  this  Tribunal  today  the
    Appellants have yet again not appeared, despite  this  having  been  an
    oral hearing  as  originally  listed.   It  is  for  the  Appellant  to
    discharge the burden of proof that  is  upon  her.   She  has  signally
    failed to do so.  This entire application is completely hopeless.   The
    application was properly refused under paragraph 322(1A) of HC 395.





Decision

12. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

13. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 1st October 2014

