
st
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53820/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 7th April 2015                    |on 16th April 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                              MR TEMITOPE ARIYO
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Nwaehwu, of Moorehouse Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I refer to the parties as they were in the First tier  tribunal  though
    it is the respondent who is appealing in the present proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria, born on 2nd May 1989.  He  came
    to the United Kingdom as a student on 25 March 2011. He had leave until
    28 January 2013.

 3. He lives with his wife who is also from  Nigeria.  She  has  indefinite
    leave to remain. The file indicates that  her  mother  is  also  living
    here. They have a young child, born in the United Kingdom on  12  April
    2013. At hearing I was presented with a certificate confirming that she
    has been recognised as a British citizen.

 4. He made an in time application for further leave to  remain  so  as  to
    pursue other studies. This application was refused on 13 December 2013.

 5. He appealed successfully to the First-tier tribunal consisting of First
    tier Judges Kamara and Shiner. Their Determination concluded  that  the
    appellant did not meet the requirements of paragraph 247 ZX(c)  or  (d)
    of the rules. This deals with the requirements for leave to remain as a
    student. However, at the appeal stage Article 8 became  an  issue.  The
    tribunal considered this under Appendix FM of  the  immigration  rules.
    The appeal was allowed on the basis of family life  and  that  EX.1  of
    Appendix FM applied.

    The permission to appeal raised a number of grounds. At the hearing the
    parties were in agreement that there was only one  issue,  namely,  the
    way EX.1 in Appendix FM was dealt  with.   EX.1  allows  exceptions  to
    certain eligibility requirements for leave to remain as  a  partner  or
    parent.  It applies if:

         (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen, settled  in  the
         UK or in the UK with refugee leave or humanitarian protection,  and
         there are insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
         continuing outside the UK.

    EX.2. states:

         For the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable  obstacles"
         means the very significant difficulties which would be faced by the
         applicant or their partner in continuing their family life together
         outside the UK and which could not be overcome or would entail very
         serious hardship for the applicant or their partner.

 6. The determination at paragraph 21 sets  out  the  appellant's  domestic
    circumstances. The conclusion was that  there  would  be  very  serious
    hardship, particularly for his wife, in attempting  to  relocate.  This
    would include abandoning her own degree studies.  There  was  also  the
    fact they had modest resources and cared for their 18-month-old child.

 7. In challenging the  decision  Mr  Duffy  submitted  that  there  is  no
    appraisal of the likely life that that would face in Nigeria.  Instead,
    the focus has been upon their life in the United Kingdom. Mr Duffy  was
    unaware of any reported decisions which  would  assist  in  considering
    what was involved in the planning the exception.

 8. Mr S.  Nwaehwu  in  response  said  that  the  respondent's  contention
    amounted to no more than a disagreement with the judges'  findings  and
    was an attempt to re-argue the appeal.

Consideration

 9. Considering the determination overall it is clear that the judges  have
    conscientiously  applied   themselves   to   the   appeal   and   their
    determination is well presented and clear.

10. EX1 refers to insurmountable obstacles to family life with that partner
    continuing  outside  the  UK.  EX2  seeks  to  define   "insurmountable
    obstacles" as very significant difficulties faced by the  applicant  or
    their partner continuing their family life together outside the UK  and
    which could not be overcome or would entail very serious  hardship  for
    the applicant or their partner. The Court of  Appeal  in  MR  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192 considered insurmountable obstacles in the context
    of para 398  and  deportation.  The  Master  of  the  Rolls  stated  at
    paragraph 49:

         We would observe that, if "insurmountable" obstacles are  literally
         obstacles which it is impossible to surmount, their scope  is  very
         limited indeed. We  shall  confine  ourselves  to  saying  that  we
         incline to the view that, for the reasons stated in detail  by  the
         UT in Izuazu at paras 53 to 59, such a stringent approach would  be
         contrary to Article 8.

11. It is true that the determination would have been strengthened by  some
    reference to the likely situation facing the  appellant's  in  Nigeria.
    What amounts to significant  difficulties  must  involve  an  objective
    assessment. The wording of EX (1) indicates that there must at least be
    some focus upon the situation in the appellant's home country, in  this
    case,  Nigeria.  However,  Mr  Justice  Sales  in  Nagre,  R  (on   the
    application of) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWHC 720 (Admin) at paragraph 33 stated :

         In  relation  to  Section  EX.1(b),  for  example,  there  may   be
         individual cases in which, for some reason, there are  particularly
         compelling reasons arising  from  the  specific  circumstances  why
         leave to remain should be granted  under  Article  8,  even  though
         there may not be insurmountable barriers to family life  continuing
         outside the United Kingdom, in the applicant's country of origin;

12. The focus in paragraph 22 is upon the situation of  the  appellant  and
    his wife in this country. The point in the paragraph is that the couple
    have a young child and modest resources and they would  have  to  start
    afresh. Paragraph 22 refers to their way of life in the United  Kingdom
    and highlights the fact that the appellant's wife is halfway through  a
    degree course.

13. Paragraph 22 of the determination shows an assessment was made  of  the
    family circumstances and the impact on them of relocation. Impliedly, a
    move  to  Nigeria  at  this  stage  would  cause  of  them  significant
    difficulties. In considering whether there is an error of law the issue
    is not whether I would have  reached  a  different  conclusion  in  the
    application of  EX1.  Whilst  the  assessment  could  be  considered  a
    generous one it was one open to the judges. Whilst  specific  reference
    to Nigeria should have been  made  I  do  not  find  it  fatal  to  the
    assessment. The appellant had spent time with his  child  so  that  his
    wife could study. As I read the determination the judges  are  implying
    that if they return to Nigeria, they would have to start  afresh;  they
    do not have the cushion of substantial savings and have to care  for  a
    young child. If they return to Nigeria his wife's studies would have to
    end. Having put paragraph 22 in the context of the entire determination
    and the facts not in dispute a material  error  of  law  has  not  been
    demonstrated. Consequently, the decision shall stand.


FJ Farrelly
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
