
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53131/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 8 January 2014                             |On 16 January 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          ABU ZAFAR MOHAMMED TAREK
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr M Haque of MQ Hassan, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Respondent

 1. The Respondent to whom I shall refer as the Applicant is a  citizen  of
    Bangladesh born on 17 September 1987.  On 27 February 2008  he  entered
    the United Kingdom as a student.  His leave was extended as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student and expired on 30 November 2012.  On  the  same  date
    and so in time he made an application for further  leave  in  the  same
    capacity.

 2. On 28 November 2013 the Appellant (the SSHD)  refused  his  application
    and decided under Section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality
    Act 2006 to give directions for his removal to Bangladesh.

 3. The Respondent refused the application under paragraph 322(1A)  of  the
    Immigration Rules because the Applicant had submitted a  letter  and  a
    statement from the City Bank Limited which  the  SSHD  considered  were
    false because the bank had informed the SSHD that the account  did  not
    exist.  Additionally, the  SSHD  found  the  Applicant  had  not  shown
    evidence that sufficient  funds  available  to  him  because  the  bank
    statements he had provided were false and so the application under  the
    Points Based System was refused under paragraphs 245ZX(a) and  245ZX(c)
    of the Immigration Rules.

 4. Between the Applicant's application and the SSHD's decision  to  refuse
    it, the applicant married on 13 May 2013 Nusrat Johan Yasmire Mudsbbir,
    a British citizen of Bangladeshi descent born on 18 October 1992.

 5. On 13 December 2013 the applicant lodged Notice of Appeal under Section
    82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended.  The
    grounds were generic and asserted disagreement with the Respondent  and
    that the bank statements submitted were genuine.  By way of a Statement
    of Additional Grounds  the  Applicant  referred  to  his  marriage  and
    submitted that his application should  be  decided  "on  the  ten  year
    family route of Appendix FM: family members as he  is  a  spouse  of  a
    British citizen."

The First-tier Tribunal Determination

 6. By a determination promulgated on 19 September 2014 Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Thanki found the Applicant had submitted false  documents
    in support of his application for further leave as a student under  the
    Points-Based System and dismissed his appeal  under  paragraph  322(1A)
    and also under paragraph 245ZX of the Immigration Rules.

 7. The Judge then assessed the  Appellant's  claim  in  his  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds based on his marriage to a British citizen.  On  the
    basis of the Applicant's marriage certificate he accepted the Applicant
    was genuinely married.  He stated  the  SSHD  had  not  questioned  the
    availability of suitable accommodation or the Applicant's  facility  in
    English language.  He found the Applicant's wife spoke  only  a  little
    Bengali,  had  no  relatives  in  Bangladesh  and  that  it  would   be
    unreasonable to expect her to re-locate to Bangladesh.   He  found  the
    Applicant and his wife met the requirements of Appendix FM and went  on
    to allow the appeal on the basis of  the  Applicant's  marriage  "under
    Appendix FM under the Immigration Rules."

 8. The SSHD sought permission to appeal on the ground that the  Judge  had
    made a material misdirection of law. The  first  ground  was  that  the
    Applicant had not sought to vary his application for further  leave  on
    the basis of his marriage and that the Judge should have directed  that
    he submit the appropriate application to the  SSHD  rather  than  apply
    directly to the Tribunal by way of a Statement of Additional Grounds so
    as to make the First-tier Tribunal the  primary  decision  maker.   The
    second ground was that the Judge had erred in not  considering  whether
    the Applicant was a suitable person because his original entry  to  the
    United Kingdom had not been for the purpose of marrying  his  wife  and
    secondly because he had submitted false documents.   Additionally,  the
    SSHD also relied on a third ground that the Judge had  failed  to  take
    into account the provisions of  Section  117A-B  of  the  2002  Act  as
    amended by Section 14/19 of the Immigration Act 2014.

 9. The other grounds were that the Judge erred in law by failing  to  take
    account of the jurisprudence in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC)  and  R
    (oao Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

10. On 7 November 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Simpson granted the
    SSHD permission to appeal on all grounds.

11. The Applicant did not file any cross-appeal or any response under  Rule
    24 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as amended.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

12. The Applicant and his wife who is pregnant attended the hearing.

13. At the outset I noted that since there had been no cross-appeal and  no
    Procedure Rule 24 response, the findings of the Judge  in  relation  to
    the appeal against refusal of further  leave  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student Migrant were  considered  as  unchallenged.   Consequently  the
    appeal focussed on the  admissibility  of  the  Applicant's  claim  for
    further leave based on his marriage to a British citizen.   I  referred
    to the judgments in AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ.  1076  and
    AQ (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ. 833 and noted that the  Applicant
    had married subsequent to his application leading to the decision under
    appeal and had not notified the SSHD of the marriage  until  after  the
    decision giving rise  to  the  appeal.   Mr  Haque  requested  time  to
    consider the two Court of Appeal judgments.  I  adjourned  the  hearing
    until he had had an opportunity to consider the two judgments  and  the
    hearing resumed after some 40 minutes.

14. For the SSHD Mr Melvin relied on the Grounds for Appeal especially  the
    first two grounds. The determination should be set aside and the  Upper
    Tribunal immediately proceed to  a  substantive  consideration  of  the
    appeal and dismiss it.

15. Mr Haque submitted the SSHD had not referred to the judgments in AS and
    AQ in the Grounds for Appeal.   I  accepted  that  they  had  not  been
    expressly mentioned but pointed out that the  substance  of  the  first
    Ground of Appeal depended on the jurisprudence enunciated in these  two
    judgments.

16. He continued that at the date of his marriage the Applicant  had  leave
    only by virtue of Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 as amended and
    the One-Stop  Notice/Statement  of  Additional  Grounds  procedure  was
    designed to enable an applicant with only Section 3C leave  to  make  a
    further application.   The  Applicant  had  now  in  his  Statement  of
    Additional Grounds made an application based on his marriage. I pointed
    out that the marriage application effectively engaged paragraph 284  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Mr Haque continued that the SSHD was  wrong  to
    continue to query the Applicant's  suitability  on  the  basis  of  his
    submission of false documents in support of his PBS claim  because  the
    documents were not applicable in relation to his different claim  based
    entirely on his marriage.

17. The Ground for Appeal that the Judge had erred by  failing  to  address
    the provisions of Section 117A-D of the 2002 Act had no weight  because
    the Judge had dealt with the claim  for  further  leave  based  on  the
    Applicant's marriage entirely within the Immigration Rules and Appendix
    FM including paragraph EX of Appendix  FM  which  applied  because  the
    Applicant's wife was pregnant.  Therefore, he submitted, there  was  no
    need for the Judge to  have  considered  the  application  outside  the
    Immigration  Rules.   He  had  not  made  any  error  of  law  and  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be upheld.

18. He added that the judgment  in  AQ  (Pakistan)  related  to  an  appeal
    against a refusal of further leave under the  Points-Based  System  and
    the Applicant's substantive application was based on his marriage to  a
    British citizen and so the  jurisprudence  in  AQ  (Pakistan)  was  not
    applicable.  If I were to disagree with him  on  this  point  then  the
    appropriate course would be either to allow the appeal outright  or  to
    remit it to the First-tier Tribunal or to the SSHD.

19. In  response  Mr  Melvin  for  the  SSHD  noted  that  the  Applicant's
    relationship with his wife began after he had submitted his application
    for further leave as a student.  The Applicant had failed  to  seek  to
    vary his application. Consequently there was no application for further
    leave based on his marriage before the SSHD.

20. He continued that the Judge's consideration of  the  Applicant's  claim
    under the Immigration Rules based on his marriage to a British  citizen
    was incomplete because the Judge had not considered all the documentary
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE.  These were errors of law and  although
    the determination should be set aside, I should immediately proceed  to
    a substantive consideration of the Applicant's appeal and  dismiss  it.
    What the Applicant needed to do was to make a fresh application to  the
    SSHD based on his marriage.

21. Mr Haque sought to make a further submission referring to  the  wording
    contained in the SSHD's form of notice under Section 120  of  the  2002
    Act.  The section headed "One-Stop Warning -  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds" referred in the first bullet point to  "any  reasons  why  you
    think you should be allowed to stay in  this  country."   He  submitted
    that if the wording referred to any reason then there was no reason why
    the Applicant should need to make a fresh application.   Mr  Melvin  in
    response stated that the requirements of Appendix FM had to be  met  in
    full and in order for this to be ascertained, it was necessary for  the
    application to be considered by the SSHD.  No valid  application  based
    on the Applicant's marriage had been  made  and  therefore  the  appeal
    based on the marriage had to fail.  In addition, there was  the  aspect
    of suitability in that the Applicant had submitted false  documents  in
    support of his student application.

Findings and Consideration

22. The issue in  this  appeal  is  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    jurisdiction to entertain the Applicant's claim for further leave based
    on his marriage and first disclosed  in  the  Statement  of  Additional
    Grounds incorporated into his Grounds  of  Appeal  against  the  SSHD's
    decision to refuse him further leave as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
    Migrant.

23. The Applicant did not seek to vary his application for further leave as
    a student under the Points-Based System at any point  until  he  lodged
    Grounds of Appeal under Section 82 of the 2002 Act.  It is  instructive
    to note the chronology:-

    30 Nov 2012.  The Applicant's leave as a student  expires  and  on  the
                  same  day  he  applies  for  further  leave  in  the  same
                  capacity.

    13 May 2013.  The Applicant marries a British citizen at a time when he
                  has leave by reason of Section 3(C) of the Immigration Act
                  1971 as amended.  He does not notify the SSHD or  seek  to
                  vary his existing application for further student leave.

    28 Nov 2013.  The SSHD refused the application for further leave  as  a
                  student.

    13 Dec 2013.  The Applicant seeks  to  rely  on  his  marriage  in  his
                  Statement  of  Additional  Grounds  forming  part  of  the
                  Grounds for Appeal under Section 82 of the 2002 Act.

24. The judgment in AS (Afghanistan) related to circumstances  referred  to
    in the Statement of Additional Grounds which existed at the date of the
    applications for further leave and which could  then  have  formed  the
    basis for an application for leave in  a  slightly  different  category
    under  the  Points-Based  System:  see  paragraphs  70  and  73  of  AS
    (Afghanistan) and paragraph 26 of AQ (Pakistan).

25. The circumstances of the appellant in AQ (Pakistan) related to  matters
    which had arisen subsequent to the SSHD's decision then  under  appeal:
    see paras.6 and 26 of AQ (Pakistan).

26. In the present appeal  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to  the  claim
    comprised in the additional grounds occurred between the  date  of  the
    Applicant's application for further leave as a student  under  the  PBS
    system and before the SSHD's decision to refuse  the  PBS  application.
    Crucially, the Applicant failed to notify the SSHD of the change in his
    circumstances and there was no explanation to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    or the Upper Tribunal why he had failed to notify the SSHD or failed to
    seek to vary his application for leave before the SSHD had decided  it.



27. At paragraph 24 of AQ  (Pakistan)  the  Court  of  Appeal  referred  to
    paragraph 49 of MS (AS and NV Considered.)  Pakistan  [2010]  UKUT  117
    where Senior Immigration Judge Allen had said:-

         I consider that the Court  of  Appeal  limited  the  ambit  of  its
         decision to cases where a fresh ground is raised in respect of  the
         particular immigration decision made, rather than the making  at  a
         later date of  an  application  based  on  fresh  evidence  ...   I
         consider that the purpose of the procedural scheme  established  by
         Section 120 is to encourage an applicant to provide all the reasons
         he or she has for appealing against a particular decision (e.g.  to
         refuse or vary leave to remain), rather than permitting  the  later
         submission of evidence relating to subsequent  circumstances  in  a
         case such as this where the Rule  in  question  specifies  a  fixed
         historic time-line.

28.  At  paragraph  41  of  AQ  (Pakistan)  Sullivan  LJ  noted   that   AS
    (Afghanistan) was not concerned with PBS  decisions.   The  Applicant's
    original application led to a PBS decision and at paragraph 38 Pill  LJ
    said:-

         I see no inconsistency between the intention in Section 120 and  an
         intention  by  which  the  determination  by  the  Tribunal  is  by
         reference to the decision being appealed, that is the  decision  of
         the Secretary of State.  Section 3C of  the  Immigration  Act  1971
         provides for continuation of leave to remain  pending  a  variation
         decision on leave.  It applied in the present case  to  extend  the
         Appellant's leave to remain until his  appeal  against  refusal  is
         determined (Section 3C(2)).

         Sub-section (4) provides:

             A person may not make an  application  for  variation  of  his
             leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  while  that
             leave is extended by virtue of this Section.

         That  limitation  appears  to  me  to  be  inconsistent  with   the
         Appellant's submissions.  These would have the effect of permitting
         a fresh application to the Tribunal,  as  primary  decision  maker,
         based on events occurring while the  leave  has  been  extended  by
         virtue of the Section.

29. The Applicant married while his leave had been extended  by  virtue  of
    Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 and I find paragraph  38  of  AQ
    (Pakistan)  is  immediately  applicable  to  his   circumstances.   The
    consequence of this is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  determination
    contained an error of law when it sought  to  address  the  Applicant's
    claim for further leave based  on  his  marriage.   This  part  of  the
    determination must therefore be set aside.

Consideration of the Substantive Appeal

30. At the hearing I informed the parties I  intended  to  dispose  of  the
    substantive appeal in the light of my error of law  finding  without  a
    further hearing.  Both parties had no objection and had nothing further
    to add.

31. For the reasons for which I have found the Judge have erred in  law  in
    his determination, I find that the part of  the  determination  dealing
    with the Applicant's claim based on his marriage  must  be  set  aside.
    The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to entertain such  a  claim
    and to that extent the SSHD's appeal against  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination is allowed.  It is for the Applicant to  take  advice  on
    his legal position, as I indicated to him at the end of the hearing.

Anonymity

32.  There was no request for  an  anonymity  order  and  having  heard  the
    appeal I find none is warranted.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law
    in its treatment of the Applicant's claim based on his  marriage  to  a
    British citizen.  The  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    Applicant's appeal against  refusal  of  further  leave  as  a  Tier  4
    (General)  Student  Migrant  is  upheld.   The  following  decision  is
    substituted for the decision on the Applicant's marriage claim:-


    The appeal of the SSHD against the First-tier Tribunal's  determination
    allowing the Applicant's appeal  based  on  his  marriage  is  allowed.
    Consequently the Applicant's claim based on his marriage is  dismissed.





Signed/Official Crest  Date 15. i. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal of the  Applicant  for  further  leave  as  a  student  has  been
dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal and his appeal based  on  his  marriage
has been dismissed by the Upper Tribunal.  Consequently no fee award may  be
made.



Signed/Official Crest  Date 15. i. 2015

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

