
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/53106/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 July 2014                               |On 18 July 2014              |
|Delivered Orally                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              HANIFUNNISA BEGUM

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Khan, Counsel, instructed by KTS Legal Limited


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant hereinafter,  called  the  Secretary
    of State, against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  in  a
    determination promulgated on 29 April 2014 allowed the  appeal  of  the
    Respondent (hereafter called the claimant) a citizen of India  born  on
    30 June 1981 against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated  16
    November 2013 refusing her application for indefinite leave  to  remain
    in the UK as the spouse of a person present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom.

2.   The claimant's immigration history as succinctly set out by the  First-
    tier Judge at paragraph 8 of his determination, is  that  the  claimant
    entered the UK as the spouse of Mr Ibrahim Jamal Mohammed on  15  April
    2008 and as at the date  of  the  application  (1  February  2013)  the
    claimant had been residing with him continuously for four years and ten
    months.  On 25 November 2009 the claimant was granted leave as  a  work
    permit dependant of her husband and this was valid until 15 April 2010.
      It is clear  from  the  judge's  determination  that  the  claimant's
    representative at the hearing before him,  Mr  Khan  (who  indeed  also
    appeared before me) accepted that she could not meet  the  requirements
    of the new Immigration Rules under paragraph 276ADE.

3.   The judge found the claimant "to be entirely credible in  her  evidence
    and I have no concerns about the accuracy of her account".  Nonetheless
    the judge concluded that the Appellant did not meet the requirements of
    the new Rules "in relation to  rights  to  private  and  family  life".
    Further, he considered the claimant's private life  outside  the  Rules
    finding that it was only of a short duration and that "as  against  her
    life in the UK she was born in India, educated in India and has spent a
    large part of her life in  India".   The  claimant  was  thus  able  to
    resettle in India.  The judge also found the claimant's family life was
    very limited in the UK, recognising that  the  claimant  was  separated
    from her husband.

4.   Applying the guidance in Gulshan (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), he was satisfied that the  facts  of
    the  claimant's  case  did  not  meet  the  exceptional   circumstances
    enunciated in the Home Office Guidance at paragraph 3.2.8  on  the  new
    Rules so as to enable the Secretary of State to exercise her discretion
    outside of the Immigration Rules.  The judge found that on the facts of
    the case "there will be no unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    (claimant) in refusing her Article 8 claim (private  and  family  life)
    which would make the refusal disproportionate."

5.   However the nub of the matter before me is that over paragraphs  22  to
    25 of the determination the judge had this to say:

         "22.   The  refusal  letter  did  not  deal  with  the  Appellant's
             application under the Tribunal old  Rules  (Part  8  paragraph
             391E) (as it should have done)  but  went  onto  consider  her
             application under paragraph  276ADE  of  the  new  Immigration
             Rules.


         23.  Applying the Rules in  Part  8,  paragraph  399E  of  the  old
             Immigration Rules and  the  Home  Office  Guidance  on  family
             members of points-based system migrants (A1, pp 31 and 34)  it
             is  clear  that  the  Appellant  should  have   been   granted
             indefinite leave to remain because  she  has  previously  been
             granted leave as the partner of a PBS migrant under the  Rules
             in place before 9 July 2012, paragraph 319E.  I therefore find
             that the refusal decision was therefore not in accordance with
             the law.


         24.   Notwithstanding  that  I  allow  the  appeal  under  the  Old
             Immigration Rules, as this appeal has been brought also  under
             the right to private life (and family life) Article 8  of  the
             ECHR, I deal with this ground of appeal in the alternative.


         25.  The Appellant did not meet the new Rules in  relation  to  her
             right to private and family life.  This was  accepted  by  the
             Appellant and the SSHD's reasons for refusal stand  under  the
             Rules."

6.   It is apparent to me that the judge did indeed materially  err  in  law
    by allowing the claimants appeal under paragraph 319E of the old Rules.
     I have to say that, most fairly and  realistically,  Mr  Khan  at  the
    outset of the hearing conceded this to be the case and I am grateful to
    him for his helpful intervention in that regard.

7.   As the grounds rightly point out, even under  the  old  Rules  for  the
    reasons stated in the Secretary of State's grounds, the claimant  could
    not have met the requirements, but the point  is  that  the  claimant's
    application was dated 28 January 2013, thus after the  new  Rules  came
    into effect on 9 July 2012.  To reinforce the point, the Administrative
     Court has recently in Shahbaz [2014] EWHC 2038 (Admin) held  that  the
    relevant time for judging whether the requirements in  the  Rules  have
    been complied with, is the time of the decision and not the time of the
    original making of the  application.

Conclusion

8.   The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal under paragraph 319E of  the  Immigration  Rules  did
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.

9.   I set aside that decision.

10.  I remake that decision in the appeal by dismissing it.


Signed                                  Date 16 July 2014




Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

