

                                              [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: IA/53135/2013


                                       THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination promulgated|
|On August 21, 2014              |On August 26, 2014       |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MR FAHIM MEA

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Lane, Counsel, instructed by Khan & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, born October 21, 1996, is a citizen of South Africa.  On
    October 9, 2013 the appellant applied for leave to remain as a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.

 3. The respondent refused his application on  November  18,  2013  on  the
    basis she was not satisfied the  appellant  satisfied  the  Immigration
    Rules and at the same time she also made a decision to  remove  him  by
    way of directions from the United Kingdom by way  of  directions  under
    section 47 of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2006.

 4. On December 11, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. He submitted the decision
    was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules and breached article 8
    ECHR.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Levin
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on April  23,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on May 9, 2014 he dismissed the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules but allowed the appellant's appeal under  article
    8 ECHR.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on May 19,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Osborne on  June
    25, 2014. She found the FtTJ may have erred by failing to  have  regard
    to the cases of FK and OK (Botswana) [2013] EWCA Civ  238  and  Shahzad
    [2014] UKUT 85 by failing  to  take  into  account  the  issue  of  the
    legitimate  aim  being  pursued  by  the  respondent  in  refusing  the
    application under article 8.

 7. The appellant was in attendance  but  was  not  required  to  give  any
    evidence.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 8. Mr McVeety relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted the FtTJ erred
    as follows:-


     a. This was an application to remain as a student and the Rules were a
        complete code. The FtTJ's approach to article 8 was  wrong  because
        he approached the appeal on the basis this was a near miss and  the
        FtTJ was wrong to use article 8 ECHR  to  allow  the  appellant  to
        remain in circumstances where the  appellant  failed  to  meet  the
        Rules. The FtTJ erred by finding compelling reasons to consider the
        appeal outside of the Rules.


     b. The decision in MM and others [2014] EWCA Civ 985 did not  overrule
        the decision in Gulshan  (Article  8-new  rules)-correct  approach)
        [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC). The Court of  Appeal  made  clear  that  the
        Tribunal should only go onto consider article 8 ECHR if  the  Rules
        did not provide a complete code. The FtTJ erred by falling into the
        trap of considering this appeal outside of the Rules when the Rules
        were a complete code.


     c. The only reason given by the FtTJ for  finding  there  was  private
        life was because of the appellant's studies  but  the  Tribunal  in
        Nasim and others (Article 8) [2014] UKUT 25 (IAC) and  other  cases
        made clear mere studies do not create private life.


 9. Mr Lane submitted that this was not a case where the FtTJ  allowed  the
    appeal as a "near miss" and the respondent was wrong to try  and  raise
    this as a ground at this stage. The FtTJ's finding that article  8  was
    engaged was a finding that was open to him. He gave cogent reasons  for
    considering the case outside of the Rules and allowed the appeal having
    carried out a full proportionality assessment. The  FtTJ  followed  the
    procedure set out in Gulshan and the respondent's submission is a  mere
    disagreement. The Court of Appeal in MM made  it  clear  there  was  no
    intermediary test.  The FtTJ did not just allow this  appeal  based  on
    his wish to study but he had regard to immigration history and the fact
    that he chose to remain here during the school  holidays  and  continue
    his studies and he had been here for over  five  years.  The  FtTJ  had
    regard to the  legitimate  aim  because  this  was  a  case  where  the
    appellant demonstrated at the date of hearing he met the Rules and  the
    only reason he failed was because he did not have the English  language
    certificate at the date of decision. There was nothing  in  the  public
    interest that would outweigh his right to remain. The Supreme Court  in
    Patel and others v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72 confirmed it is the private life
    built up during his period of study that engaged in article 8 ECHR.


10. Mr McVeety responded to these submissions and stated  that  the  FtTJ's
    reason for allowing the appeal was because a refusal meant he would  be
    unable to complete his course. There was no right to study  unless  the
    Rules were met and his proportionality assessment was flawed. Paragraph
    [57] in Patel makes it clear that "... The opportunity for a  promising
    student to complete his course in this country,  however  desirable  in
    general terms, is not itself a right protected under article 8."


    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


11. This was a finely  balanced  argument  especially  with  regard  to  Mr
    McVeety's third ground of appeal. The  first  two  grounds  related  to
    whether the FtTJ should have considered article  8.  The  third  ground
    related to his proportionality assessment.

12. The FtTJ considered the evidence in some detail in paragraphs  [13]  to
    [21] of his determination and then having rejected his appeal under the
    Immigration Rules he found, for the reasons set out in paragraph  [25],
    that this was a case, which could properly be considered outside of the
    Rules. The FtTJ did consider the test that is set out  in  Gulshan  and
    whilst I may not necessarily have reached the  same  conclusion  as  to
    whether the claim should be considered outside of the Rules that is  of
    course not the test that I am applying at this point. I agree with  the
    judge who gave permission that the first two grounds are not  made  out
    as the FtTJ considered the  evidence  and  then  gave  his  reason  for
    reaching his decision.

13. The third ground argued by Mr McVeety is the strongest  ground  because
    this centres on the FtTJ's proportionality assessment. Whilst the  FtTJ
    has properly set the law out in paragraphs [31] and [32] I am persuaded
    by Mr McVeety that his proportionality assessment is unbalanced because
    the FtTJ's reason for allowing this appeal under article 8 is based  on
    two factors namely the fact it was not his  fault  he  had  no  English
    language certificate and the fact he had studied  throughout  his  time
    here. At paragraph [36] the FtTJ  gave  his  reason  for  allowing  the
    appeal. This was-

         "I find the respondent's (appellant  is  meant)  removal  to  South
         Africa will clearly have serious implications for him in  that  not
         only will it disrupt his degree studies in the UK but also  it  may
         cause  serious  problems  for  any  future  application  that   the
         appellant  makes  for  leave  to  enter  the  UK  from  abroad   in
         circumstances where he has previously been removed from the UK...."

14. I am satisfied that this is an error in law because wishing to continue
    studies is not a reason to allow an appeal under article 8 and there is
    no evidence to support  the  finding  that  the  appellant  would  face
    difficulties in being admitted if he left the UK as he would not be  an
    overstayer.


15. I indicated to both representatives that I was satisfied that the issue
    could be dealt by way of submissions and Mr Lane confirmed he  did  not
    intend to call any additional evidence. There was no challenge  to  the
    FtTJ's finding that it was necessarily not the appellant's  fault  that
    he did not have the correct English language certificate.








    SUBMISSIONS


16. Mr McVeety reminded me that the Immigration Act  2014  now  applied  to
    this appeal and in particular section 19 that introduced  Section  117B
    into the 2002 Act. The only evidence of private life  was  his  studies
    and this on its own was  insufficient  to  engage  private  life  under
    article 8 ECHR. Whilst he had been here for sometime he was  only  here
    as a student and as such his leave was temporary and conditional on him
    meeting the Rules. There were no significant obstacles or safety issues
    facing him in South Africa and he could not meet  paragraph  276ADE  HC
    395. He submitted there was nothing to engage article 8  ECHR.  In  any
    event, the appellant could re-apply before his leave expired.


17. Mr Lane relied on his skeleton argument from paragraph [9] onwards.  He
    argued that the appellant had established a private life as he had been
    here since he was a minor at boarding school. He came  as  a  child  to
    live and study at a boarding school. He remained at the  school  during
    the holiday and he had created for himself  an  intense  education  and
    private life. He was in the middle of a six-year course  and  following
    the guidance in CDS (PBS: "available": article 8) (Brazil) [2010]  UKUT
    00305 (IAC) he should be allowed leave to remain  under  article  8  to
    complete his studies. In balancing proportionality there was no  public
    interest in maintaining immigration control because he has demonstrated
    that he has the necessary English language skills  and  maintenance  is
    not an issue. There was therefore no economic interest in removing him.
    Finally, he submitted that the fact he may now met the Rules was not  a
    reason to refuse his article 8 submission.

18. I reserved my decision.


    CONSIDERATION OF SUBSTANTIVE APPEAL

19. The only issue for  me  to  consider  was  whether  the  appellant  had
    established private life and if he had was removal disproportionate.

20. The appellant had been unable to meet the Immigration Rules because  he
    did not have an English language certificate as  at  the  date  of  his
    application but the FtTJ concluded  this  was  a  case  that  could  be
    considered outside of the Rules.  I have already addressed  this  issue
    earlier in my determination and I accepted there was no error in law in
    the way the FtTJ dealt with this issue because  of  the  facts  of  the
    case.



21. The Court in MM (Lebanon) & Ors, R (on the application of) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department & Anor [2014] EWCA Civ 985  considered
    the approaches in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC
    720 Admin and confirmed the approach to be taken.

  22. The Court of Appeal in MM examined numerous authorities and stated:


         "128. ... In Nagre the new  rules  were  themselves  attempting  to
         cover, generally,  circumstances  where  an  individual  should  be
         allowed to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds... Nagre does  not
         add anything to the debate,  save  for  the  statement  that  if  a
         particular person is outside the rule then he has  to  demonstrate,
         as a preliminary to a consideration outside the rule, that  he  has
         an arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting  leave
         to remain outside  the  rules.    I  cannot  see  much  utility  in
         imposing this  further,  intermediary,  test.    If  the  applicant
         cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or  there  is  not  a
         further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be  determined  by  the
         relevant decision-maker.


         134. Where the relevant group  of  Immigration  Rules,  upon  their
         proper construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing  with  a
         person's Convention rights in the context of  a  particular  IR  or
         statutory provision, such as in the case  of  "foreign  criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with that  code,  although  references  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality  exercise.    But  if   the   relevant   group   of
         Immigration  Rules  is  not  such  a  "complete  code"   then   the
         proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.


         159. ... It seems clear from the statement of Lord Dyson MR  in  MF
         (Nigeria) and Sales J in Nagre that a court would have to  consider
         first whether the  new  MIR  and  the  "Exceptional  circumstances"
         created a "complete code" and,  if  they  did,  precisely  how  the
         "proportionality test"  would  be  applied  by  reference  to  that
         "code".


         162. ... Firstly, paragraph GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM states that  the
         provision of the family route  "takes  into  account  the  need  to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of children  in  the  UK",  which
         indicates that the  Secretary  of  State  has  had  regard  to  the
         statutory duty.   Secondly, there is no legal requirement that  the
         Immigration Rules should provide that the  best  interests  of  the
         child should be determinative.   Section 55 is not a  "trump  card"
         to be played whenever the interests of a child arise..."


  23. I have to consider whether a refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably
      harsh consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  refusal  of  the
      application would not be proportionate.


  24.  The  respondent  accepted  the  appellant  had  been  here   lawfully
      throughout his stay here and that he had come here as a minor  in  May
      2009 pursuant to a Tier 4 student  visa.  This  visa  enabled  him  to
      remain here until October  31,  2013.  Having  completed  his  initial
      studies the appellant applied to remain so that he could start an NQF7
      on November 1, 2013. This course runs until July 10, 2017.

  25. The refusal letter set out reasons for the refusal and  at  section  C
      explained what help and advice on returning to South Africa there  was
      for him. Section D reminded him that he also had the option to  submit
      a fresh application  and  if  he  did  this  he  should  include  full
      supporting evidence and the appropriate fee. The letter concluded that
      an application should be made before his current leave expired.

  26. I have considered his witness statement dated February  13,  2014  and
      the only part that addresses his private life is  paragraph  [10].  He
      stated that he was halfway through his theology course and had  worked
      extremely hard and spent substantial sums of money in respect  of  his
      studies.  He  indicated  he  had  integrated  into  the  community  of
      Blackburn and established social ties  through  his  studies  and  the
      school. He stressed his intention is to return to South Africa and  to
      provide his services to his local community in South Africa. There was
      also a letter from the college confirming his progress.

  27. There was no other evidence  of  his  private  life  save  Mr  Ahmed's
      evidence,  the  college  UKBA  liaison  officer,  that  the  error  in
      submitting documentation was theirs and not his.

  28. Mr McVeety referred me to paragraph [57] of Patel in which the Supreme
      Court held-

         "It is important to remember  that  article  8  is  not  a  general
         dispensing power. It is to be distinguished from the  Secretary  of
         State's discretion to allow leave  to  remain  outside  the  rules,
         which may be unrelated to any protected human right. The merits  of
         a decision not to depart from  the  rules  are  not  reviewable  on
         appeal: section 86(6). One may sympathise with Sedley LJ's call  in
         Pankina for 'common sense' in  the  application  of  the  rules  to
         graduates who have been studying in  the  UK  for  some  years  ...
         However, such considerations do not by themselves  provide  grounds
         of appeal under article 8,  which  is  concerned  with  private  or
         family life, not education as such. The opportunity for a promising
         student to complete his course in this country,  however  desirable
         in general terms, is not in itself a right protected under  article
         8."

  29. The Tribunal in Nasim considered  a  variety  of  possible  article  8
      scenarios including article 8 in the context of work and  studies.  At
      paragraph [12] of Nasim the Court considered the above  paragraph  and
      stated-


         "...We regard the passage, however, as having a  wider  import,  in
         seeking to re-focus attention upon the core purposes of Article 8."

  30. The Court continued at paragraph [20] in Nasim-


         "We therefore agree with Mr Jarvis that [57] of Patel and Others is
         a significant  exhortation  from  the  Supreme  Court  to  re-focus
         attention  on  the  nature  and  purpose  of  Article  8  and,   in
         particular, to recognise its limited utility to an individual where
         one has moved along the continuum, from that Article's core area of
         operation towards what might be described as  its  fuzzy  penumbra.
         The limitation arises, both from what will at that  point  normally
         be  the  tangential  effect  on  the  individual  of  the  proposed
         interference and from the fact that, unless  there  are  particular
         reasons to reduce the  public  interest  of  enforcing  immigration
         controls, that interest will consequently prevail in  striking  the
         proportionality balance (even assuming that stage is reached)."


  31. Turning to the facts of this appeal  whilst  I  accept  the  appellant
      wishes to complete his studies he had nevertheless reached a point  in
      his studies where he was about to  start  on  a  new  course.  He  had
      finished the course he originally came to study so this is not a  case
      where removal would mean he would be halfway or  even  three  quarters
      through the course he began in 2009.


  32. It appears this appellant lives  for  his  studies  because  no  other
      evidence of any private life has been adduced. The court made clear in
      Patel that merely being good student is not sufficient.

  33. Mr Lane argues there is no purpose in removal as he now has he correct
      English language certificate and he is financially supported. However,
      immigration control includes a requirement that a person must meet the
      Rules for either entry clearance or  leave  to  remain.  Although  the
      fault was not necessarily his, the FtTJ rejected his appeal under  the
      Rules and he was also unable to satisfy paragraph 276ADE HC 395.

  34. Following the  decision  in  Shahzad  I  am  satisfied  there  are  no
      compelling reasons that would justify allowing this appeal outside  of
      the Rules. In FK and OK the Court found in paragraph [11]-

         "That the individuals concerned in the present case are law-abiding
         (other than in respect of immigration controls)  does  not  detract
         from the fact  that  the  maintenance  of  a  generally  applicable
         immigration policy is, albeit indirectly, a legitimate aim for  the
         purposes of article 8.2."

  35. I am satisfied that removal would not mean this appellant  was  unable
      to continue his studies as long as he satisfied the Rules and  whether
      he applies here (as provided for in his refusal letter) or from  South
      Africa Mr McVeety's submission is correct. Refusing this appeal is not
      disproportionate because private life is encompassed in the Rules  and
      the fact the appellant has not submitted any evidence  other  than  an
      interest in study has drawn me to the conclusion that private life has
      not been established outside of the Rules and refusing his application
      would not be unjustifiably harsh.

    DECISION


36. There is a material error of law and I set aside the original  decision
    in respect of article 8 ECHR.


37. I have remade the article 8 decision and I  dismiss  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

38. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award, as the appeal did not succeed.

Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
