

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  IA/53361/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On: 18th November 2014               |On: 13th January 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Patience Agyeman Prempeh
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Garrod,  Counsel instructed by Justice and Law
                    Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Respondent is a national of Ghana date of birth 21st May  1973.
         On the 6th May 2014 the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Ross)  allowed
         her appeal against a decision to refuse to issue her with a card to
         confirm her right of residence as the spouse/  partner  of  an  EEA
         national exercising his treaty rights in the UK. The  Secretary  of
         State now has permission to appeal against that decision.


      2. The matter in issue was whether Mrs  Prempeh's  marriage  to  Dutch
         national Mr Dwuma was a valid one. It had been conducted  by  proxy
         in accordance with Ghanaian customary norms,  whilst  both  parties
         were in the UK.


      3. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal was satisfied that this  marriage
         had complied with all the relevant  requirements  of  Ghanaian  law
         relating to customary marriages. The Tribunal accepted as genuine a
         marriage certificate issued by the relevant  authorities.  On  that
         basis it was found that the marriage would be considered  valid  in
         the UK. The appeal was allowed.


      4. The Secretary of State obtained permission to appeal that  decision
         on the ground that the First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a  material
         misdirection in law in finding that the only matter  in  issue  was
         whether this was a marriage recognised by the Ghanaian authorities.
         The Secretary of State submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  was
         bound to consider whether the marriage would be recognised  by  the
         Dutch  authorities,  following  the  authority  of  Kareem   (Proxy
         Marriages - EU law) [2014] UKUT 00024  (IAC).  The  ratio  of  that
         decision is that  where  free  movement  rights  are  claimed,  the
         entitlement to those rights must be proven according to the law  of
         the relevant member state.


    Error of Law


      5. On the 25th July 2014 I heard submissions on whether  the  decision
         contained an error of law as alleged in the grounds of appeal.  The
         Secretary of State relied on  Kareem  and  further  on  TA  (Kareem
         explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 316 (IAC). Mr Garrod for  Mrs  Prempeh
         submitted that TA  was  wrongly  decided.  He  submitted  that  the
         Tribunal only need look to Dutch law  where  there  is  some  doubt
         about the validity of the marriage in Ghana. Since  the  First-tier
         Tribunal here accepted that the  marriage  was  recognised  by  the
         Ghanaian authorities there was no need to go any further: Mr Garrod
         submitted this was not a case where confirmation of the  marriage's
         validity in Dutch law was required. I rejected those arguments.  TA
         is a reported decision and I am bound by it. As it makes  clear  in
         its headnote "the determination  of  whether  there  is  a  marital
         relationship for the purposes of the Immigration (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 must always be examined in accordance with  the  laws  of  the
         Member State from which the  Union  citizen  obtains  nationality".
         This was not done in this case and it  follows  that  the  decision
         contains an error such that it must be set aside and remade.


    The Re-making


      6. The findings of  fact  were  all  preserved.   I  was  not  however
         prepared to go ahead to re-make the decision. That was because  Mrs
         Prempeh had not had an opportunity to provide  any  evidence  about
         the status of her marriage according to Dutch law. The hearing  was
         reconvened in October 2014 in order to hear submissions on that and
         live evidence about whether, in the alternative, the couple are  in
         a 'durable relationship'.  Unfortunately the hearing was  not  able
         to proceed that day because the requested Twi interpreter  had  not
         been booked.


      7. By the time that the matter came back before the  Tribunal  on  the
         18th November  2014  Mrs  Prempeh  had  been  able  to  obtain  the
         following evidence:


           . Case law from the Supreme Court of the Netherlands (Hoge  Raad
             NJ 2004 nr.4). The case concerned an action by the parents  of
             a child born in the Netherlands who had not had  the  name  of
             his father recorded on his birth certificate. The parents  had
             been married  according  to  Ghanaian  custom  and  the  Civil
             Registrar of Amsterdam had declined to record them as married.
             The Hoge Raad  held  that  there  was  nothing  in  Dutch  law
             preventing  the  marriage  being  recognised  as  valid.   The
             Registrar was accordingly free to recognise it and record  the
             same on the child's birth certificate.


           . Email correspondence between Justice and  Law  Solicitors  and
             the Dutch Embassy in Accra. This includes an email dated  12th
             November 2014 from the Consular  Section  which  advises  that
             unless a specific application -such as for  a  passport  -  is
             made the embassy will not be making  comment  on  validity  of
             marriages according to Dutch law, other than to point out that
             "the provisions of Dutch  law  governing  the  recognition  of
             marriages contracted outside the  Netherlands  are  listed  in
             paragraphs 27 and 28 of the Upper Tribunals' determination  in
             the case of Kareem (Proxy marriages  -  EU  law)  [2014]  UKUT
             00024 (IAC)"


           . Legal opinion from Hagg & Van Koesveld  Advocaten  dated  25th
             September 2014 which reiterates  the  provisions  set  out  in
             Kareem and certifies that they do apply: "Dutch law recognises
             foreign  (customary)  marriages   provided   that   they   are
             registered according to the  Customary  Marriage  and  Divorce
             Registration Law of 1985".  The marriage in the  instant  case
             has been so registered in Ghana. If the parties wish  to  have
             it  registered  in  the  Netherlands  they  must  present  the
             certificate to the Dutch Embassy for 'legalisation'.


           . Letter dated 11th November 2014 from  Mr  Mareel  Mungroop  of
             Mungroop Advocatuur  confirming  that  he  has  made,  on  the
             parties behalf, a request for the registration of the Ghanaian
             marriage in the Netherlands, but that this process can take 3-
             4 months.


      8. Although the material had been served on the Secretary of State  it
         had not been passed to Mrs Kenny and so she was not in  a  position
         to deal with it without taking instructions. I therefore  indicated
         that I would delay promulgation of my determination until Mrs Kenny
         had been able to make written submissions. Mrs Kenny did  that  and
         on her written submissions arrived with me  on  the  10th  December
         2014.  My findings are as follows.


      9. Neither Kareem  nor  TA  is  authority  for  the  proposition  that
         Ghanaian customary marriages are not recognised according to  Dutch
         law. In fact neither Tribunal considered itself to have  sufficient
         evidence on the point.  The extracts  from  the  Dutch  Civil  Code
         cited in Kareem were unsupported by caselaw or legal opinion as  to
         their application, and in those circumstances the Tribunal was left
         in the dark as to their meaning.  In  this  case  Mrs  Prempeh  has
         provided a decision of the Supreme Court  of  the  Netherlands  (in
         translation), an email from  the  embassy  and  the  opinion  of  a
         practising lawyer all of which confirm that Code is applied so that
         Ghanaian customary marriages are recognised in the Netherlands.  In
         those circumstances I do not consider it necessary to wait for  the
         formal process of registration  discussed  by  Mr  Mungroop  to  be
         completed. All of the evidence before me indicates that Mr  Dwuma's
         marriage to Mrs Prempeh is recognised according to the law  of  The
         Netherlands: she has discharged the burden of proof.


      Decisions


     10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does contain an  error
         of law and it is set aside.


     11. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:


         "the appeal is allowed".








                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce


                                                            8th January 2015
