
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: ia/53637/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29 September 2014                            |On 3 October 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                            mr david asare kumah
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     none
For the Respondent:    Ms Alex Everett, Specialist Appeals Team


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Watters sitting at Glasgow  on  12  February
    2014) dismissing his paper appeal against the decision by the  SSHD  to
    refuse to issue him with a residence card as confirmation of his  right
    to reside in the United Kingdom  as  the  spouse  of  an  EEA  national
    exercising treaty rights here.

 2. The appellant is a Ghanaian national, and his sponsor  is  a  Hungarian
    national. As evidence that he was married to the sponsor, the appellant
    relied on a marriage certificate  showing  that  he  had  contracted  a
    customary marriage with the sponsor in Accra on 10 February  2013.  The
    certificate purported to bear the signature or thumb-print of the bride
    and the bridegroom.

 3. A statutory declaration made on 30 April 2013 conveyed the  information
    that it had been a customary marriage by proxy. It did not state  where
    the bride and groom were residing at the date of the marriage.

 4. The SSHD gave lengthy reasons for refusing the claimant's  application.
    The burden was on him to prove that his asserted customary marriage was
    valid, and he had not discharged this burden. He had not shown that all
    the requirements for a valid customary marriage, including the  payment
    of a dowry, which had been identified by the expert  in  NA  (Customary
    marriage and divorce - evidence) Ghana [2009] UKAIT 0009 had been  met,
    in particular the requirement that both parties to the marriage were of
    Ghanaian descent. He had also not shown  that  the  marriage  had  been
    validly registered in accordance with Ghanaian law. The application for
    the registration of the marriage had to be accompanied by  a  statutory
    declaration which stated, among other things, the places  of  residence
    of the parties at the time of the marriage. This had not been done.

 5. The Ghana COI report of 11 May 2012 highlighted  problems  with  forged
    and  fraudulently  obtained   official   documents,   such   as   birth
    certificates. The signatures  of  husband  and  wife  on  the  marriage
    certificate did not match those on their passports.

 6. The SSHD went on to consider in the alternative whether  the  appellant
    could be considered as an unmarried partner under Regulation  8(5).  To
    assess whether their relationship was durable, she would expect to  see
    evidence of cohabitation for at least two years. No evidence  had  been
    provided that they had resided together as a couple prior to the  issue
    of their marriage certificate, or even that they knew other or had  met
    prior to the issue of the certificate.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 7. Judge Watters quoted extensively from the refusal letter.  He  said  he
    had taken into account the appellant's bundle running to 70 pages,  but
    the appellant had not  discharged  the  burden  of  proof,  and  so  he
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds raised.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

 8. On 22 August 2014 Judge Osborne granted  the  appellant  permission  to
    appeal. It was arguable  that  in  an  otherwise  concise  and  focused
    determination the judge had paid insufficient regard to the documentary
    evidence in the appellant's bundle. There appeared to be no  allegation
    of fraud and the appellant appeared to be in possession  of  a  genuine
    entry in the marriage register. It was further arguable that the  judge
    had failed to consider the appeal adequately under Article 8.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 9. At the hearing before me, there was no appearance by the  appellant.  I
    was satisfied that notice of the hearing had been sent to  him  at  his
    last  known  address,  which  is  the  address  given  by  him  in  his
    application for permission to appeal. So I proceeded in his absence.

10. Ms Everett submitted that the appeal was always doomed to fail,  citing
    TA and others (Kareem explained) Ghana [2014] UKUT 00316  (IAC),  which
    was heard at Field House on 10 June 2014.

Discussion

11. The judge found, following NA, that a Ghanaian customary  marriage  can
    only be contracted between Ghanaians.  Although this was  the  evidence
    given by the expert in NA, there is other evidence and  judicial  dicta
    which supports a less restrictive view.

12. But the judge also  specifically  relied  on  the  objection  that  the
    statutory declaration did not comply with the  Customary  Marriage  and
    Divorce (Registration) Law 1985. I do not consider that  the  documents
    in the appellant's bundle engage with this  objection,  or  provide  an
    adequate answer to it.

13. There is also no satisfactory answer given to the simple point made  in
    the refusal letter about the marriage certificate.  It  is  a  document
    which tells  a  lie  about  itself  (i.e.  a  false  document)  as  the
    signatures which appear on it are not those of the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor (as they were not in the country to sign  the  register).   But
    the message given to the reader of the document is that the  signatures
    in question are the genuine signatures of the couple. This  is  not  an
    objection specifically relied on by the judge, but it is relied  on  in
    the refusal letter - and so it enables the judge not to  take  at  face
    value the documentary evidence cited by Judge Osborne in his  grant  of
    permission.

14. The appeal against the refusal to  recognise  him  as  a  spouse  under
    Regulation 7 was bound to fail in any event, as the appellant  had  not
    brought forward any evidence  to  show  that  the  purported  customary
    marriage by proxy was recognised in Hungary, the sponsor's  country  of
    nationality.

15. In TA UT Judge O'Connor gave detailed reasons for concluding that it is
    always necessary to undertake an examination of  the  validity  of  the
    disputed marriage in the context of the national legislation of the EEA
    sponsor's country of nationality. He accepted that  paragraph  [68]  of
    Kareem (proxy marriages - EU law) [2014]  UKUT  24  read  in  isolation
    appeared to provide support for the two stage approach  (i.e.  only  to
    look at the national  legislation  of  the  EEA  sponsor's  country  of
    nationality if there was a doubt over recognition in the country  where
    the marriage took place) but he referred to earlier passages in  Kareem
    which refuted such an approach. For instance,  at  paragraph  [17]  the
    panel held:

         In light of the connection between the rights of free movement  and
         residence and  the  nationality  laws  of  the  Member  States,  we
         conclude that, in a situation where  the  marital  relationship  is
         disputed (my emphasis), the question of whether there is a  marital
         relationship is to be examined in accordance with the laws  of  the
         Member State from which the Union citizen obtains  nationality  and
         from which therefore that citizen derives free movement rights.

16. The appellant's bundle contains an earlier unreported  decision  of  UT
    Judge Rintoul which supports the two stage approach. But I  prefer  the
    reasoning of Judge O'Connor, and in any  event  his  decision  has  the
    imprimatur of being a reported decision of the UT,  and  thus  it  will
    have been approved by an editorial panel of the UT as representing good
    law.

17. There is no error of law challenge to  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant has failed to show that he is in a durable relationship  with
    the sponsor, and hence that he has failed to show that he qualifies  as
    an extended family member under Regulation 8(5).

18. It was open to the judge to find that  there  was  little  evidence  of
    private life, and to hold that the Article 8 claim did not get off  the
    ground as there was not a valid marriage and a durable relationship had
    not been proved.  In the circumstances, it was not an error of law  for
    the judge not to apply the Razgar test; and it was not an error of  law
    for  the  judge  not  to  consider   whether   the   interference   was
    disproportionate. Following Gulshan, the judge did not have to consider
    an Article 8 claim outside  the  rules  unless  there  were  compelling
    circumstances disclosed by the evidence  which  were  not  sufficiently
    recognised under the Rules.  It is not  suggested  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal that there are any compelling or compassionate circumstances.

Decision

I dismiss this appeal.


Anonymity


The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
