
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
       (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
                                                               IA/53083/2013
                                                               IA/53084/2013
                                                               IA/53085/2013
                                                               IA/53086/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Field House                      |Decision Promulgated        |
|On 14 January 2014                        |On 19 January 2015          |
|                                          |  .                         |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                 KOJO ASANTE
                          DIANA KONAD OPOKU ASANTE
                      CHARAS MAAME YAA ADJEPONG ASANTE
                     EMMANUELLA NANA AKUA ODRUAA ASANTE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Richard Singer counsel instructed by Paul John & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr P Duffy Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of these Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Blake promulgated  on  3  October
   2014  which  allowed  the  Appellants'  appeal  and  held  that  it   was
   disproportionate and unlawful under Article 8 of the European  Convention
   on Human Rights to remove them to Ghana.
Background
3. The Appellants are a husband and wife and their two children born  on  26
   March  1983,  10  July  1983,  2  December  2010  and  15   August   2012
   respectively. They are all citizens of Ghana.
4. On 18 June 2013 the Appellants applied for leave to remain in the  United
   Kingdom on the basis of Article 8 ECHR.
5.  On  22  July  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The decision was challenged by way  of  judicial  review  in
   essence contending that the refusal to grant further discretionary  leave
   was harsh and unfair and not within the  range  of  reasonable  responses
   open to the Secretary of State because it did not take into  account  the
   first Appellant's army service and the ill treatment he received, as well
   as the breaches of his Article 8 rights. The Secretary of State  did  not
   resist the judicial review and withdrew the decision of 22 July 2013  and
   agreed to reconsider the applications. A fresh decision was  made  on  26
   November 2013 which was the subject of the appeal in this case.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Blake ("the Judge") allowed the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision under Article 8. The Judge found that the first Appellant was an
   honest and credible witness; he took into account that the Respondent had
   conceded that there was a change in the  Appellants  circumstances  since
   the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Talbot  who  had  dismissed  an
   appeal against a refusal of further leave to remain after a hearing on  2
   March 2012; he found that but for the actions and negligence of HM Forces
   the first Appellant would have gone on to complete his  army  career  and
   achieved indefinite leave to remain; that  the  first  Appellant  had  no
   family in Ghana although his wife did; the fourth Appellant had been born
   since the decision of  Judge  Talbot  and  the  third  Appellant  was  in
   education;  that given his treatment by the army  and  its  repercussions
   the first Appellant was the victim of an historic injustice which had not
   been fully taken  into  account;  he  carried  out  a  Razgar  Article  8
   assessment against  the  full  factual  background  and  found  that  the
   decision  to  remove  was  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aim  of
   immigration control.
7. Grounds of  appeal  were  lodged  and  on  18  November  2014  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Foudy gave  permission  to  appeal  stating  that  it  was
   arguable that the Judge should have remitted the  decision  back  to  the
   Respondent having found the decision was not in accordance with the  law;
   that the judge erred in his assessment under Article 8 and  he  erred  in
   his consideration of the 2012 and 2013 determinations.

8. At the hearing I heard  submissions  from  Mr  Duffy  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

   (a)He relied on the grounds of appeal which raised only two issues as  he
   conceded that the Respondent conceded that the Judge that the  Judge  had
   properly directed himself in respect of the previous  determinations  but
   was entitled to consider a new factual matrix.

   (b)In relation to Ground 1 he suggested that there was a tension  between
   paragraph 108 and 112 in that paragraph 108 appeared to suggest that  the
   decision was not in accordance with the law and therefore it should  have
   been remitted and paragraph 112 which stated that  the  decision  was  in
   accordance with the law.

   (c) In relation to Ground 2 he suggested that too much  weight  had  been
   given to one factor, that of the first Appellant's army service.

9. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Singer submitted that :

   a) The Judge set out his Article 8 determination by reference  to  Razgar
      and accepted that the decision was in accordance with the law.

   b) In respect of Ground 2 this challenge largely raised matters of weight
      which is not an error of law.

   c) The Judge carried out an assessment and took all relevant factors into
      account coming to a conclusion that was open to him.

   d) The Appellants had never based their case on 'legitimate  expectation'
      but had argued that the  historic  injustice  suffered  by  the  first
      Appellant was a sufficiently compelling circumstances  to  enable  the
      Judge to arrive at the decision he made.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. This appeal arose out of an application made  by  these  Appellants  for
   further leave to remain on the basis of Article 8 it being conceded  that
   the Appellants could not meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules.
   The Appellants had made previous applications for leave relying  heavily,
   although not solely , on the fact that the  Appellant's  service  in  the
   British Army which he expected to lead to a grant of indefinite leave had
   been cut short because he sustained an injury  for  which  the  Army  had
   accepted liability. His application in 2008 was refused  but  his  appeal
   was allowed under Article 8 and led to a grant of 3  years  discretionary
   leave. His application in 2011 was refused and his  appeal  dismissed  in
   2012.

12. In relation to Ground 1 the Respondent argues that the Judge found  that
   the refusal decision of 26 November 2013 was not in accordance  with  the
   law in paragraph 108 of his decision and therefore should  have  remitted
   the case back to the Secretary of State. I am satisfied that  this  is  a
   misreading  of  what  the  Judge  has  written  in  that  he  was  simply
   summarising that the decision was unsustainable because it failed to take
   into account relevant facts. It  is  clear  that  the  Judge,  against  a
   background that he has set out in detail, then made a structured  Article
   8 assessment at paragraphs 111- 119 addressing the questions set  out  in
   Razgar . He states clearly and  explicitly  at  paragraph  112  that  the
   decision was in accordance with the law.

13. The challenge raised in Ground 2 is I am satisfied  merely  a  challenge
   as to the weight the Judge gave to the facts underpinning the  Article  8
   claim. There is no suggestion that the Judge failed to take any  relevant
   factors into account and indeed such a challenge would be doomed to  fail
   as the Judges careful analysis of the factual background  to  the  appeal
   was accurate, detailed and fair. There is no suggestion that  the  Judges
   findings were irrational or perverse. The argument is that in essence the
   judge gave too much weight  to  what  was  categorised  as  the  historic
   injustice, his unexpected discharge from the army as a  result  of  their
   negligence. I am satisfied that it is not an arguable error of law for an
   Immigration Judge to give too little weight  or  too  much  weight  to  a
   factor, unless irrationality is alleged which as I have  made  clear  was
   not argued in this case. Moreover I am satisfied  that  the  judge  while
   giving considerable weight to what he described as  a  compelling  factor
   (paragraph 102) also took into account in his detailed analysis a  number
   of other matters which led to the decision to allow the appeal  including
   that the Appellant and his family had laid down deep roots in the  United
   Kingdom after the grant of leave in 2008; that they were fully integrated
   into United Kingdom society; that he had a strong relationship  with  his
   mother and sisters who lived in the UK. Taking all of those factors  into
   account I am satisfied that it was open to the Judge  to  find  that  the
   Respondent's decision was not proportionate and allow  the  appeal  under
   Article 8.

14. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

15. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

16. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date
14.1.2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
