
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: IA/74729/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 January 2016                   |On 25 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             TOMMY ROLAND GAYLE
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J. Rothwell, counsel, instructed by Fisher Jones
                    Greenwood     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

History of Appeal

 1. The Appellant, who was born on 9 July 1979, is a citizen of Jamaica. He
    first arrived in the United Kingdom on 24 January 2002.  He applied for
    asylum but his application was refused. On 23 December 2002 he  married
    Michelle Gayle, who is a British citizen, and they had a son,  who  was
    born on 19 January 2004. The Appellant's  relationship  with  his  wife
    broke down and he started a relationship with Danielle Peak  and  their
    son was born on 1 September 2004.  The  Appellant's  relationship  with
    this partner also broke down and he returned to Jamaica in August 2007.

 2. He married Jessica Gayle, who is also a British citizen, in Jamaica  on
    18 September 2007 and he was eventually granted entry clearance as  her
    husband on 27 February 2009. Their son was born on 17  July  2010.  The
    Appellant separated from this second wife at the end of 2011.

 3. Meanwhile, the Appellant was refused indefinite leave to remain in July
    2011 but was granted discretionary leave to remain until 10  July  2014
    on the basis of his contact with his children. He was  refused  further
    leave to remain on 11 November 2014. The Respondent noted that  he  had
    had further convictions on 14 September 2014 and 30 November  2014  and
    concluded that it would be undesirable to permit him to remain  in  the
    United Kingdom as he was a persistent offender. She also asserted  that
    there was insufficient  evidence  to  show  that  you  are  maintaining
    regular contact with you children. He appealed against this decision on
    24 November 2014. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart dismissed  his
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 14  July  2015  and  the  Appellant
    appealed against this decision on 27  July  2015.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Nicholson granted him permission to appeal on 29 October 2015

Error of Law Hearing

 4. Counsel for the Appellant relied on the fact that paragraph 10  of  the
    IDI on Discretionary  Leave  that  individuals  who  had  been  granted
    discretionary leave  to  remain  before  9  July  2012  would  normally
    continue to be dealt with under that Policy through to settlement.  She
    also noted that this paragraph went on to state that  consideration  of
    all further leave applications would be subject to a criminality  check
    and the application of  criminality  thresholds.   Paragraph  2.5  then
    stated that a person will normally be granted six months  discretionary
    leave to remain where he or she cannot be removed because of the United
    Kingdom's obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights and
    do not fall within the Restrictive Leave policy.

 5. When the Respondent did undertake a criminality check  in  relation  to
    his latest application for leave to remain she would have become  aware
    that on 30 November 2011 he had been convicted on possessing  cannabis,
    producing a controlled drug and driving whilst disqualified and without
    insurance and had been sentenced to  a  suspended  16  week  period  of
    imprisonment.

 6. At paragraph 23 of her decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bart-Stewart
    accepted that the transitional arrangements  in  the  IDI  applied  but
    found that the Appellant "fell foul" of the criminality threshold.  The
    Home Office Presenting Office relied on the fact that Schedule 1 to the
    Serious Crimes Act 2007  referred  to  the  unlawful  production  of  a
    controlled drug as being a serious crime. However, the  Judge  did  not
    refer to this Act and she did not explain how he "fell  foul"  of  this
    threshold or why, even if he did, he should not have been entitled to a
    further six months of discretionary leave to remain if his relationship
    with his children still subsisted.

 7. Any such finding was also dependent upon her  finding  of  whether  the
    Appellant's wider circumstances had not changed because he was still in
    contact with his children and, therefore,  it  would  be  a  breach  of
    Article 8 of the ECHR for him to be removed to Jamaica.

 8. The evidence before First-tier Tribunal Bart-Stewart indicated that  he
    had no on-going contact with his older child, who had been  taken  into
    care. It also indicated that he had  little  contact  with  his  second
    child. However, there was a letter from his  youngest  child's  mother,
    dated 21 October 2014, at page 234 of  the  Appellant's  Bundle,  which
    confirmed that the Appellant had regular contact with  their  son.  She
    also said that "it would be very detrimental to [her son's]  upbringing
    and development if he  didn't  have  regular  contact  and  a  positive
    relationship with his father" and that they had "a solid bond and  love
    spending time together". In a further letter, dated 1  June  2015,  she
    said that the Appellant saw her son every few Sundays and that  it  was
    "important for him to have a male role model in his life and  to  learn
    about his background and his culture" and that it enabled  her  son  to
    have a relationship with his paternal grandmother.

 9. There were also letters from the Appellant's current partner  and  also
    his mother which confirmed that the  Appellant  had  contact  with  his
    youngest child every other Sunday. They also confirmed  this  in  their
    oral evidence at the hearing. However, when First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Bart-Stewart reviewed the evidence in  paragraphs  23  and  24  of  her
    decision she did not refer to this further evidence or make any finding
    that these witnesses had not given credible evidence.

10. Instead she focused on the fact that Jessica Gayle had not attended the
    hearing. The Appellant had explained in his oral evidence that she  was
    not able to do so as she had to attend a  tutorial  at  university.  In
    response First-tier Tribunal Judge said that "had  she  considered  the
    Appellant's presence in the United Kingdom and  active  involvement  in
    her son's life to be as important as claimed, I consider that she would
    have taken time to attend the hearing".  In  doing  so  she  failed  to
    consider the totality of the evidence before her.

11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart then found in paragraph 24  that
    the Appellant's relationship with  his  son  was  one  which  could  be
    maintained without him living in the United Kingdom. This  appeared  to
    part of her consideration of the Appellant's article 8 rights but  this
    was not totally clear from her decision as she did not  remind  herself
    of the criteria which needed to be taken into account when  considering
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

12. In paragraph 26 of her decision she referred in part by rehearsing  the
    head note to AM (Section 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260  (IAC)  but  then
    failed to apply section 117B to the facts of the Appellant's  case.  In
    particular, she did not remind herself that section 117B(6) states that
    "in the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the  public
    interest does not required the person's removal where- (a)  the  person
    is in a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with a  qualifying
    child, and (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to  leave
    the United Kingdom.

13. Therefore, she should have considered whether the Appellant did have  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his  youngest  child,
    who is a British citizen and, as a consequence, a qualifying child. She
    also failed to consider whether it would be reasonable  to  expect  his
    son to leave the United Kingdom.

14. The Home Office Presenting Officer referred to paragraph 63  of  Damion
    Harrison (Jamaica) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1736 but in my view the Judge in that case was  addressing  EU
    law not Article 8 of the ECHR. The Home Office Presenting Officer  also
    argued that the Appellant did not have parental responsibility for  his
    son. However, as he was married to his son's mother, he clearly did.

15. For all of these reasons I find that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart did make material errors of law in her decision.

Decision

16. I set aside First-tier Tribunal Judge Bart-Stewart's decision.

17. I remit the Appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Bart-Stewart. .


Date: 18 January 2016

    Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

