

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/674/2021.


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







            The Queen on the application of Kamran Jhangir Kayani
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Z Raza, instructed by Kaizen Law  Solicitors,
on behalf of the Applicant and Ms M Bayoumi, instructed  by  the  Government
Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field  House,
London on 7 October 2021.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

(1)   For the reasons set out in the judgment, I  order  that  the  judicial
review application be dismissed.

Order


(2)     I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review  application   be
      dismissed.









Costs

(3)   The Respondent is awarded her reasonable costs, to be assessed if  not
agreed.










                                                David Allen
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




        Dated:    22nd October 2021










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 22 October 2021
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

IAC-AH-SAR/FH-CK-V2

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   HEARING
                             via Microsoft Teams

                                                                 JR/674/2021

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                              7 October 2021


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                            KAMRAN JHANGIR KAYANI
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Z Raza, instructed by Kaizen Law Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Ms M Bayoumi, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE ALLEN: The applicant is a national of Pakistan  who  has  applied
    for judicial review of four decisions of the respondent.  The first  of
    these is a decision of 14 February 2021 cancelling his indefinite leave
    to remain and refusing him leave to  enter  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    second decision challenged is that of 4 March 2021 rejecting a  request
    for administrative review of the decision of  14  February  2021.   The
    third challenge is to a decision of 21 April 2021 certifying an Article
    8 family and private life claim.  The fourth challenge is to a decision
    of 4 May 2021 setting directions for the applicant's removal  from  the
    United Kingdom on 20 May 2021.

2.    I take the chronology from  the  detailed  grounds  of  defence.   The
    applicant was granted indefinite leave to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on 14 January 2003 as the spouse of a settled person.  He and his  wife
    divorced in 2006, having had two children.  He married his second  wife
    in Pakistan in 2010 and subsequently sponsored her to join him  in  the
    United Kingdom.  They divorced in  2016,  having  had  three  children.
    Following the divorce the applicant  returned  to  Pakistan.   He  then
    entered the United Kingdom next  in  December  2016  and  stayed  until
    January 2017 when he returned  to  Pakistan.   He  visited  the  United
    Kingdom next in December 2018 and remained until March 2019.

3.    It is not clear on what date he married his  third  wife  in  Pakistan
    but he has two daughters with her, aged respectively 2 years old and 25
    days old at the date on which he most recently sought  entry  into  the
    United Kingdom.

4.    The applicant arrived at Manchester Airport on 14  February  2021  and
    sought entry for three weeks  to  visit  his  sister  and  presented  a
    Pakistani passport which contained his ILR.  He was required to  submit
    to further examination, his  fingerprints  were  taken  and  a  baggage
    search was conducted.  He was interviewed at 10.30 on the morning of 14
    February 2021 and on conclusion of the interview he was issued  with  a
    decision refusing entry into the  United  Kingdom  and  cancelling  his
    indefinite leave to remain.

5.    He signed an administrative review waiver form at  around  12.30  p.m.
    on 14 February 2021 and immigration bail was  authorised  at  12.45  on
    that day.  Subsequently, on 2 March 2021, he submitted  a  request  for
    administrative review of the decision of  14  February  2021  but  that
    application was rejected on 4 March 2021 as he had  signed  the  waiver
    form and the request was submitted out of time.

6.    Directions had been made for his removal to Pakistan on 10 March  2021
    but he failed to comply and on 25 March he was listed as an absconder.

7.    On 6 April 2021 the applicant submitted an application  for  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  Article  8  family  and
    private life.  That application was refused and  certified  as  clearly
    unfounded in the decision of 21 April 2021.  Directions for his removal
    to Pakistan on 20 May 2021 were set on 4 May 2021.

8.    The challenge to the decisions is summarised in  paragraph  14  of  Mr
    Raza's skeleton and the points made there were developed by him in oral
    submissions.  The first argument is that the respondent's decision  was
    procedurally and substantively unfair in that  the  applicant  was  not
    offered an interpreter, nor was the purpose of the interview  explained
    to him, nor was the declaration relating to the  administrative  review
    waiver explained to him.  It was also argued that  notwithstanding  the
    above the decision making was procedurally unfair and/or irrational  in
    failing to make proper enquiry during his interview,  and  reliance  in
    this regard is placed on the decision in Mushtaq [2015] UKUT 224 (IAC).
     It is  further  argued  that  the  respondent  failed  to  follow  her
    published guidance in respect of returning residents, having failed  to
    ask herself the right questions and take reasonable steps  to  acquaint
    herself with the relevant  information  to  enable  her  to  answer  it
    correctly.  It is further argued that the conclusion that the applicant
    was not a returning resident is irrational/unlawful.

9.    I do not propose to set out the terms of the  interview  in  full  but
    rather to refer to particular points of  significance  within  it.   At
    page 1 it can be seen that the applicant answered yes when asked if  he
    understood the interpreter and also answered yes when asked whether  he
    was happy to be interviewed in English.   The  first  question  was  as
    follows:

         "Tell me why you have come to the United Kingdom today?"

    His answer was:

         "My passport is finished so I came back.  In and out stamp".

10.   He was then asked at question 2 whether he meant  that  he  wished  to
    renew the passport or renew his status here and said  "yes  within  the
    two years and see my kids as well".   He  was  then  asked  whether  he
    wanted to renew his status and replied yes.  He was proposing  to  stay
    for three weeks and had a return ticket.

11.   He was then asked questions about when he first  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom and said that it was  to  join  his  wife  and  he  obtained  a
    residence permit in 2003 and that was the permit he  wished  to  renew.
    It was put to him that if he stayed  away  more  than  two   years  the
    permission would lapse and was that correct and he replied yes.  He was
    asked about whether he was still married to his  first  wife  and  said
    they were divorced and he had  no  contact  with  her.   They  had  two
    children who lived in the United Kingdom.   He  was  asked  whether  he
    still had contact with his children and said he "tried but  is  nothing
    no".  He had last seen them in 2006.   He  had  two  brothers  and  two
    sisters in the United Kingdom.   He  had  no  property  in  the  United
    Kingdom nor did he have a business here.  He had had a job as a  packer
    in a Ford factory in 2005 and the last time he had worked in the United
    Kingdom was in a chip shop for a month in 2019.

12.   He was asked whether he had remarried  since  his  first  divorce  and
    said yes in 2010 and they had divorced in 2016.  The  girls  were  with
    their mother in the United Kingdom.  He was asked whether  he  had  any
    contact with the second wife and her  daughters  and  said  no  he  had
    tried.

13.   He had gone back to Pakistan in 2016  and  had  made  the  two  visits
    subsequently that I have set out above.

14.   He was asked whether he had another wife in Pakistan and said yes  and
    gave her name and said that they had two daughters, one aged 2 and  one
    25 days old.  He agreed that the younger child was born in January this
    year.  It was put to him that he had left her and travelled just so  he
    could stay within the two year Rule and he replied yes.

15.   He worked in Pakistan and also owned property and had a  house  there.
    He was asked whether he was in the United Kingdom to visit his brothers
    and sisters and keep  his  visa  going  and  replied  yes.   The  final
    question was as follows:

         "You have a very young child in Pakistan.  If  your  visa  was  not
         about to expire would you have come here?"

    to which the answer was "no".

16.   There has also been provided the Home Office  minute  sheet  from  the
    date of the applicant's  interview  which  summarised  the  applicant's
    immigration history and noted that in light of  that  it  was  apparent
    that he resided in Pakistan and only visited  the  United  Kingdom  for
    short periods and that given the timing of his  visits  to  the  United
    Kingdom it was equally apparent that these were contrived in  order  to
    comply with the two year Rule and maintain  his  UK  residence  status.
    The officer said  that  he  subsequently  interviewed  the  subject  in
    English, a language he spoke well.  The applicant declined the offer of
    an interpreter.   The  officer  then  summarised  the  content  of  the
    interview, noting among other things the  applicant  confirmed  he  was
    seeking entry as a visitor, that he had had no contact with  his  first
    family since 2006 nor with his second family since 2016, that  Pakistan
    was his sole domicile and that if it were not for  the  fact  that  his
    residence status would lapse if he were to absent himself from  the  UK
    for a period greater than two years he would not have travelled to  the
    United Kingdom that day.  His case was referred to another officer  who
    authorised  refusal  of  entry  in  accordance  with  Part  9.18.1  and
    cancellation of the applicant's ILR in  accordance  with  Part  9.20.1.
    The officer served the applicant with form IS82 and explained his right
    to an administrative review.  The applicant  was  said  immediately  to
    have recognised that administrative review was academic given  that  he
    was to return to Pakistan in line with his existing ticketing  and  was
    therefore happy to sign form IS301.

17.   In his submissions Mr Raza placed weight in particular  on  ground  1,
    accepting that the challenge to the certification of the  human  rights
    claim was heavily dependent on a positive finding in respect of  ground
    1 concerning the  cancellation  of  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   He
    referred to the relevant provisions of the Immigration (Leave to  Enter
    and Remain) Order 2000, in particular at  parts  (iv)  and  (v),  which
    underpinned paragraph 18 of  HC  395.   He  argued  that  this  was  an
    important context and that created a positive presumption that  when  a
    person had indefinite leave to remain and had not been absent from  the
    United Kingdom for more than two years then they would be readmitted.

18.   Mr Raza  also  noted  the  recent  change  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    concerning people who had been away from the United  Kingdom  for  more
    than two years, and there was a further relevance to the presumption he
    identified, at paragraph 7.1.  In addition,  there  was  now  the  very
    recent Home Office guidance of 4 February 2021 upon which reliance  was
    placed.  Mr Raza also referred to the guidance in authorities  such  as
    Mahad [2009] UKSC 16 and Odelola  [2009]  1  WLR  1230  on  the  proper
    interpretation of the Immigration  Rules.   The  statutory  presumption
    referred to earlier was the correct context for the  interpretation  of
    paragraph 18.

19.   The main  challenge  was  with  regard  to  procedural  unfairness  in
    respect of the interview on 14 February 2021.  Reference  was  made  to
    the most recent Home Office guidance in particular what was said  about
    cancelling indefinite leave, at page 8 of 20.  There was a broad  range
    of relevant factors to assess.  There was  guidance  about  people  who
    might be visitors but should still be  recognised  as  being  returning
    residents including people absent for over two years.   Examples  would
    be compelling circumstances and future plans and family member  issues.
    In that context the interview should be considered.

20.   The interview had shown the intention to create a preordained  outcome
    and that it had already been decided  that  the  applicant  was  not  a
    returning resident.  Alternatively the questions were put in such a way
    as to lead to that conclusion.  There had been no real  enquiry  as  to
    the applicant's circumstances.  Most  of  the  questions  were  leading
    questions and most of the answers were just yes or no or brief.   There
    was an absence of any question as to why the applicant had been  absent
    from the United Kingdom from 2016 and  also  no  questions  as  to  his
    future plans.  This view was reinforced  by  the  guidance.   A  person
    could be a visitor for this visit but could still plan to settle in the
    future.

21.   As examples of the approach taken were question  2  at  the  interview
    and question 3 which illustrated the overall context of the  interview.
    There was an absence of questions on material points.

22.   The interview had been in the context of an  atmosphere  as  described
    by the applicant in his witness statement.  The further submissions  on
    21 April 2021 also addressed the point.  He had provided a frank, clear
    and vivid description.  He did not dispute the factual recordings  made
    in the interview, but he disputed the manner in which the interview was
    made and the lack of questions on relevant matters.  He had  asked  for
    an interpreter.  Also a  Punjabi  speaking  officer  had  made  himself
    available to explain certain aspects, so the applicant had been unclear
    as to the purpose of the interview and he could  not  engage  with  the
    process.  It was one person's word against another but if the applicant
    were correct that he had asked for an interpreter and this request  had
    been declined, it was hardly likely that such a request would appear in
    the minute sheet.  There were clear failures to ask and  enquire  about
    all circumstances.  The interview  procedure  failed  to  follow  basic
    principles of fairness, and reference was made  to  the  guidance,  for
    example, in Mushtaq [2015] UKUT 224 (IAC).  This and Anjum [2017]  UKUT
    406 were PBS cases but the requirements of procedural fairness  equally
    applied there.

23.   As regards the argument made at paragraph 11 of Ms Bayoumi's  skeleton
    argument, referring to the further submissions that had  been  put  in,
    this in no way rectified any procedural errors nor did it even mitigate
    any such failures.  The cancellation of indefinite leave to remain  was
    a separate decision with harsh consequences in contrast to what at best
    could be achieved from a human rights application that  succeeded.   It
    was relevant to note what had been said in Mohibullah [2016] UKUT 00561
    (IAC) at paragraphs 77 and 80 in particular in this regard.

24.   Finally as regards the challenge to the certification  decision,  this
    was, as argued earlier, tied in with the ILR cancellation  and  if  the
    decision in that regard was unlawful then the  applicant  had  ILR  and
    there was no prospect of removal.

25.   In her submissions Ms Bayoumi referred to the fact that the  applicant
    said he had believed the interview was about the cigarettes he  had  in
    his possession but there was nothing in the interview to give  rise  to
    such an inference  or  understanding.   Rather  than  being  a  leading
    question, question 2 was if anything an open question  and  the  answer
    was  telling.   The  applicant  clearly  understood  the  Rules   about
    returning residents.  With regard to his claim not to  have  understood
    the questions and having limited English, it was  clear,  as  could  be
    seen from paragraph 17 of Mr Raza's skeleton, that  the  applicant  did
    not deny the answers he gave but said that he did not understand  their
    purpose.  He had however had ample opportunity to explain his  ties  to
    the United Kingdom and why he was in Pakistan and  the  answer  to  the
    final question when he had accepted that he had only come to the United
    Kingdom because his visa was about to expire, was telling.

26.   The contemporaneous notes of the officer in  the  Home  Office  minute
    sheet were important.  The claim that he had asked for  an  interpreter
    could  be  contrasted  with  what  was  recorded  there,  and  it   was
    contemporaneous and considerable weight should be attached  to  it  and
    there was no reason not to note such a request if it had been made  and
    to comply with it.  The officer had spoken to the applicant who clearly
    understood  English  well  and  who  had  declined  the  offer  of   an
    interpreter.  His answers showed that he clearly understood the purpose
    of the interview.  The wording of the form was standard and he had read
    it and had the opportunity to consider the position and he was having a
    return flight in three weeks' time.

27.   The point about further submissions made in Ms Bayoumi's skeleton  was
    not that it could remedy an error, but if even if  there  had  been  an
    error and in contrast to what was being argued  the  intention  of  the
    interview  was  not  made  clear,  the  further  submissions  were  the
    applicant's opportunity to make good his claim and  not  make  a  claim
    with regard to a different type of leave.  The Article 8 claim was with
    regard to ties to the  United Kingdom and that  showed  he  could  come
    within paragraph 18.  The guidance was clear.   As  was  argued  in  Ms
    Bayoumi's skeleton and the detailed grounds it was not  enough  as  for
    example here where the person was not coming to settle.  The  applicant
    suggested he would  return  after  three  weeks  and  then  return  for
    settlement but that did not mean that  he  would  keep  his  indefinite
    leave to remain as he had to show continuing ties to the United Kingdom
    and intended to return to settle.  None of these criteria were made out
    in the further submissions.  The examples in  the  guidance  were  with
    regard to people working and studying overseas but the point  was  made
    that these submissions were several  months  late  and  made  with  the
    benefit of legal  advice  and  under  no  pressure  such  as  might  be
    experienced in interview.  They were the applicant's opportunity to set
    out his intentions and his ties to the United Kingdom and he had failed
    to do so.  The point  was  therefore  what  a  further  enquiry  on  14
    February 2021 would have elicited and if there were a public law  error
    would have made any difference.  The claim was bound to fail.  The only
    supporting documents were with regard to his unwell parents  and  there
    was nothing about his children or attempts to  have  contact  or  other
    ties.  He had no property or business in the United  Kingdom.   He  had
    his siblings here only.  There was therefore little  reference  to  the
    case law to  be  made  as  this  was  a  fact-sensitive  case  and  the
    principles of procedural fairness had no application here.

28.   By way of reply Mr Raza argued that the point about leading  questions
    at the interview was more widespread.  It was clear that the  questions
    at interview were mainly leading questions.  They had  established  the
    applicant's immigration and  travel  history  but  there  was  a  clear
    failure to ask questions about material matters such as the reasons for
    his absence and his future plans.  If there were  reasons  for  absence
    then there was nothing irrational to  him  moving  on  with  his  life,
    having married and had children and getting a job.   It  could  not  be
    said that life could not move on because he  was  going  back  to  look
    after his parents.  The interview alone was the basis of the  decision.
    It was necessary to ask questions to elicit  answers  on  all  material
    matters.   Also  the  wording  of  paragraph  18(iv),  the  purpose  of
    settlement, was to be viewed in the context of the primary  legislation
    and there was a clear presumption as Mr Raza had argued.  It was  clear
    that the applicant was aware of a need to return within two  years  but
    the focus was not ties to the United Kingdom as  Ms  Bayoumi  suggested
    but was far broader.  It was true he had no close family  ties  in  the
    United Kingdom, they were in Pakistan as  he  had  been  there  in  the
    exceptional circumstances he described.   The  guidance  required  more
    than ties to the United Kingdom and the context was important.

29.   I reserved my decision.

30.   It is clear from paragraph 13 of the Immigration (Leave to  Enter  and
    Remain) Order 2000 that where a person has leave which is in force  and
    which was given by an Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State for
    a period exceeding six months, such leave shall remain in force  either
    indefinitely if it is unlimited or until the date  on  which  it  would
    otherwise have expired if limited.  It is however clear that where  the
    holder has stayed outside the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
    more than two years the leave where it is unlimited or any  leave  then
    remaining shall thereupon lapse.

31.   Mr Raza has argued that this together with  paragraph  18  of  HC  395
    create a presumption that a person with indefinite leave to remain  who
    has not been absent for more than two years in the United Kingdom  will
    be readmitted.  Paragraph 18 states as follows:

         "18.     A person may resume their residence in the UK provided the
                Immigration Officer is satisfied that the person concerned:

                (i)    had indefinite leave to enter or remain in the United
                      Kingdom when he last left; and

                (ii)   has not been away from the United  Kingdom  for  more
                      than two years; and

                (iii)  did not receive assistance from public funds  towards
                      the cost of leaving the United Kingdom; and

                (iv)   now seeks admission for the purpose of settlement".

32.   There is no real materiality to paragraph 7.1  of  HC  1154  which  in
    this context does no more than to emphasise that changes have been made
    in the Rules to clarify the distinction between  those  who  have  been
    absent from the UK  for  less  than  two  years  and  so  retain  their
    indefinite leave status from those whose indefinite  leave  has  lapsed
    due to an absence of more than two years.

33.   It is relevant also to note relevant parts of the Home  Office  policy
    entitled "Returning residents",  published  on  4  February  2021.   At
    paragraph 5 the following is stated:

         "A person who has been absent from the UK for less than  two  years
         will retain their indefinite leave and does not need to  apply  for
         entry clearance before resuming their residence in the UK.   Border
         Force officers will assess whether a person  can  be  admitted  for
         entry under the requirements of paragraph 18".

34.   It is said at page 7 that no further  enquiries  should  be  necessary
    unless there  is  substantial  evidence  to  doubt  the  person's  true
    intentions or any entitlement to that residency.

35.   At page 8 it is said that if the enquiring  officer  has  doubts  that
    the passenger still qualifies as a returning resident, they  should  be
    further examined and a decision made either to refuse leave to enter or
    readmit the passenger as before.  It is said that a person may  qualify
    in another capacity but the onus is on  them  to  seek  entry  in  that
    capacity.  Later on that page it is said  that  if  upon  conducting  a
    thorough examination an  officer  is  satisfied  that  the  person  has
    indefinite leave but that they are not returning to the UK  to  settle,
    either now or in the future, then they must cancel the indefinite leave
    due to a change of circumstances.  The individual will have a right  to
    an administrative review unless they waive their right to it.

36.   I do not read this quite as creating a presumption that a  person  who
    has indefinite leave to remain will be readmitted when  they  have  not
    been absent for more than two years.  There is certainly  not  a  legal
    presumption.  There may be an element of factual presumption to it, but
    equally it is clearly set out in the Rules and  in  the  guidance  what
    factors will come into play which may lead to a refusal  of  indefinite
    leave to remain, as was done in this case.

37.   I deal first with the contention that the applicant said he wanted  an
    interpreter and was refused one and that as  a  consequence  there  was
    procedural unfairness in that regard.  I do not accept this contention.
     It is clear from the interview record that the applicant was asked  at
    the start of that interview whether he was happy to be  interviewed  in
    English and he answered yes.  It is also clear from the contemporaneous
    Home Office minute sheet that the applicant was interviewed in  English
    which was a language he spoke well and he  declined  the  offer  of  an
    interpreter.  As Ms Bayoumi argued, there is no reason why  if  he  had
    sought an interpreter, an interpreter would not have been provided.   I
    do not accept the argument that Mr Raza makes that there was some sense
    of a climate of looking for a refusal  in  this  case.   The  applicant
    could at any stage have  explained  that  he  did  not  understand  the
    question being asked and indeed it is now the case that he  is  not  so
    much arguing that he did not understand the questions and that he  does
    not factually dispute the answers recorded but argues that he  did  not
    understand the purpose of the interview, nor the purpose of him signing
    the relevant forms including the  administrative  review  waiver  form.
    Again, the officer's minute makes it clear that when the  right  to  an
    administrative review was explained to  the  applicant  he  immediately
    recognised that it was academic given that he was to return to Pakistan
    in line with his existing ticketing and was therefore happy to sign the
    waiver form.  Again I accept the officer's account of this.  He had  no
    reason to be untruthful about this.

38.   When one turns to the content  of  the  interview,  it  is  abundantly
    clear also that the applicant understood the questions that were  being
    asked.  Though it is certainly the case that a number of the  questions
    were in leading form and elicited brief, frequently yes or no  answers,
    it is equally true that relevant detail was provided by  the  applicant
    in response to the questions asked.  It is in my view telling  that  in
    response to question 1 when he was asked to say why he had come to  the
    United Kingdom today, in response to a properly open question, he said:
    "my passport is finished so I came back.  In and  out  stamp."   It  is
    true that in response to question 2 when he was asked whether he  meant
    he wished to renew the passport or renew his status here he said:  "yes
    within the two years and see my kids as  well",  but  the  officer  was
    properly entitled to take into account in considering his intentions in
    particular with regard to paragraph 18(iv), that it was clear from  his
    answer to question 19 that he no longer had contact with  the  children
    of his first marriage and  had  not  seen  them  since  2006  and  that
    likewise, in response to question 38 he said he had no longer  had  any
    contact with his second wife and their daughters and as  a  consequence
    it was properly open to the officer to conclude that he had  not  shown
    that he was now seeking admission for the purpose of  settlement.   The
    officer properly took into account the fact that he has no home or  job
    in the United Kingdom and that his only family here  are  brothers  and
    sisters.  By contrast he has a home, a job and a  wife  and  family  in
    Pakistan.

39.   I do not consider that the officer was under any obligation  expressly
    to ask the applicant why he had been absent from the United Kingdom for
    such a period of time or what his future plans were.  The applicant had
    made it clear that he had come to visit his sister for three weeks  and
    though there was the reference to seeing his children it was very clear
    from his subsequent answers that the visit was essentially designed  to
    maintain his  indefinite  leave  to  remain  status.   He  provided  no
    evidence either then nor has he subsequently  of  any  efforts  he  had
    actually made to try and make contact with the children of his previous
    marriages, and it is telling in response to  question  58  that  he  in
    effect said that he would not have come to the United  Kingdom  if  his
    visa had not been  about  to  expire.   In  my  view  the  officer  was
    abundantly entitled to conclude as he  did  that  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 18(iv) were not met in this case  and  as  a  consequence  to
    cancel the applicant's indefinite leave to remain and refusing leave to
    enter the United Kingdom.

40.   In light of my conclusions on that point little  need  be  said  about
    the other grounds.  The human rights claim was given full  and  careful
    consideration in the context of the Immigration Rules and  outside  the
    Rules and it was entirely soundly concluded that the human rights claim
    totally lacked merit and as a consequence it  was  properly  certified,
    appropriately thorough reasoning being given to both the  certification
    decision as well as the substantive decision.  I also accept  that  the
    application for administrative review was out of time and in any  event
    the applicant had waived  his  right  to  administrative  review.   The
    challenge to the directions for removal has become academic in light of
    the cancellation of those directions.

41.   As a consequence this application is refused.~~~0~~~~
