
IAC-FH-LW-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                       JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                 JR/768/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                          4th September 2018


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                richard aboro
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE king


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms E Fitzsimons, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors appeared  on
behalf of the Applicant.

Ms J Anderson,  Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE KING:


1.   The applicant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 6th July 1976.   In  2012
    he was granted entry clearance to the UK  and  shortly  afterwards  was
    convicted of an offence relating  to  the  possession  of  an  identity
    document and was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.   He  became
    subject to the automatic deportation provisions.

2.   In May 2012 he claimed asylum on the basis that he  feared  persecution
    in Nigeria by Boko Haram.  He  stated  that  he  was  a  church  leader
    attending a Christian gathering at which he was attacked by Boko Haram.
     His house was set on fire and his wife was killed.

3.   There was no challenge to the veracity of events but it was  considered
    that there was a  sufficiency  of  protection  and/or  internal  flight
    available to him.  Thus it was that the asylum claim  was  refused  and
    certified under section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

4.   Since that time there have been many legal  challenges  made,  both  to
    the lawfulness of his continued detention and to his fitness to fly  to
    Nigeria.

5.   Such has involved  extensive  medical,  psychological  and  psychiatric
    evidence  relating  to  his  condition.   There  have   been   numerous
    challenges to detention and to removal by way of judicial review,  none
    relating to removal would seem to have been successful.

6.   These proceedings arise because the respondent put the  applicant  upon
    notice of removal as between 31st January 2018 and 14th February  2018.
    A stay of such removal was granted by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith  on
    31st January 2018.

7.   It was also contended on behalf  of  the  applicant  that  the  further
    submissions made on his behalf on  22nd  September  2017,  should  have
    given rise to a fresh human rights claim.  Thus  the  decision  of  the
    respondent of  24th  January  2018,  refusing  to  consider  that  such
    submissions amounted to a fresh claim, also became the  subject  of  an
    application for judicial review.

8.   Further submissions were made  on  behalf  of  the  applicant  on  30th
    January 2018 and they were the subject of a decision of  12th  February
    2018 once again refusing to treat such submissions as  amounting  to  a
    fresh claim for the purposes of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.



9.   These submissions were based upon his mental health and fitness to  fly
    and relied upon various medical and psychiatric reports. It was claimed
    that to return him to Nigeria  in  his  mental  condition  and  in  the
    absence of medical and community support in Nigeria  would  engage  the
    high threshold of  Article  3  ECHR.   Reliance  was  placed  upon  the
    decision of Paposhvili v Belgium - 41738/10 a  judgment  of  the  Grand
    Chamber [2016] ECHR 113.

10.  By a decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 7th June 2018  permission
    to proceed with judicial review was granted on the basis that:

     "It is arguable, having regard to all the medical evidence  before  the
         respondent when her decisions were made and the limited evidence of
         available medical treatment in Nigeria as disclosed in the  January
         2018 decision and the applicant's representations dated 30  January
         2018, that the respondent acted  irrationally,  in  the  Wednesbury
         sense, in concluding  that  there  was  no  realistic  prospect  of
         success in a notional appeal on the basis that there was a  failure
         to exercise the requisite anxious scrutiny in assessing whether the
         foreseeable  consequences  of  deportation  would   result   in   a
         sufficiently serious risk that the applicant will  commit  suicide,
         having regard to Y & Anor (Sri Lanka)v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 and N v UK."

11.   The challenge to the decisions, particularly to the decision  of  12th
    February 2018 was twofold. It was  contended  that,  in  reviewing  the
    medical evidence in detail, the respondent fell into error in  deciding
    upon the merits of the evidence rather than considering  the  essential
    question whether, on that evidence, an Immigration Judge would be bound
    to come to the same conclusion.  It was submitted that  the  resolution
    of the conflict of medical opinion was very much within the province of
    an Immigration Judge to decide.

12.  Secondly, it was contended that, in the light of the  medical  evidence
    as submitted of the background material as to treatment or  absence  of
    treatment in Nigeria, it was not reasonable for the Secretary of  State
    to conclude that  an  Immigration  Judge  could  not  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion as to the issue of Article 3 upon return.

13.  In terms of the medical evidence, that is of some complexity,  both  as
    to chronology and to substance, which indeed was considered  in  detail
    in two previous judgments relating to matters arising in the course  of
    proceedings instituted by and on behalf of the applicant.  First  is  a
    decision of Andrew Thomas QC sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge in RA
    Nigeria [2014] EWCA Civ 4073 (Admin). The focus  of  consideration  was
    then upon the applicant's fitness to fly.  The second was that of Karen
    Steyn QC (sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge), in the application  of
    Richard Aboro [2018] EWHC 1436 (Admin).  This was in connection with  a
    claim that the applicant's detention was in breach  of  Article  3,  an
    argument which was not in fact upheld.  Certain concerns affecting  the
    lawfulness of detention was upheld.

14.  Given such judgments it seems to me unnecessary to  set  out  in  great
    detail all the medical reports and the  conclusions.   Essentially  the
    threat of suicide first became a matter of concern in  September  2012.
    The applicant was assessed by Dr  Sultan,  a  Consultant  Physician  at
    Colnbrook IRC.  He reviewed the applicant over a year or so  concluding
    that the applicant's anxiety and despair was more attributable  to  his
    situation of imprisonment rather than the consequence of any severe  or
    enduring mental illness.  He concluded that the threats to end his life
    were  manipulative  in   nature.    Dr   Burrun,   another   Consultant
    Psychiatrist, came to a similar conclusion in  January  2013.   It  was
    noted that the applicant did not seek any form  of  treatment  nor  had
    sought any medication and did not want to undertake counselling.

15.  Those acting on behalf  of  the  applicant  instructed  an  independent
    Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr Bell, who saw the applicant on 23rd January
    2013 and set out his findings in the report dated 18th  February  2013.
    He concluded that  the  applicant  was  suffering  from  a  psychiatric
    disorder and considered there to be a moderate to high  risk  of  self-
    harm and suicide, particularly if returned to Nigeria.  Such views were
    not shared by Dr Burrun, or indeed by a Professor Maden who interviewed
    the applicant on 17th July 2014.  The conclusion of the  Professor  was
    that the applicant was not generally suicidal and  had  no  psychiatric
    disorder, but was rather manipulative of his symptoms.  Dr Sarkar, in a
    report of 15th  August  2016,  was  critical  of  Professor  Maden  and
    supported Dr Bell.  It is not entirely clear to what extent his  report
    was based upon his own observations or relied upon those  of  Dr  Bell.
    Professor Katona, in a report  of  1st  October  2017,  joined  in  the
    criticism of Professor Maden as did Dr Bell in a report of 3rd  October
    2017.  Professor Maden in a report of 3rd November  2017  responded  to
    the criticisms made against him.  He maintained his  views  as  to  the
    applicant.

16.  The Secretary of State in the decisions under challenge makes  detailed
    reference to the conflicting medical evidence.

17.  Of particular relevance, however, to the decision  under  challenge  is
    that the respondent also obtained reports from the medical staff at IRC
    Harmondsworth where the  applicant  was  residing  as  to  his  current
    situation.  He was seen on 27th October 2017 by a psychiatrist in  that
    location.  It was found that he was suffering no  major  mental  health
    illness.  An assessment on 30th October 2017  by  another  psychiatrist
    came to the same view.  On 3rd November 2017 Professor Maden  completed
    a  supplementary  medical  report  maintaining  his  position  of  10th
    December 2014.

18.  In the decisions under challenge the Secretary of State  placed  weight
    upon the assessments conducted by the NHS staff, particularly  on  27th
    October 2017 and 30th October 2017 where the applicant did not show any
    objective features of major depression or psychotic symptoms.   It  was
    considered therefore that  the  applicant  did  not  have  the  serious
    medical conditions, as was the case in Paposhvili,  and  did  not  fall
    within the ambit of a very exceptional case so as to prevent removal.

19.  It is submitted that it is entirely reasonable  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to rely upon the contemporary evidence of  those  who  were  best
    placed to  assess  the  applicant,  namely  the  psychiatrists  at  the
    detention centre.  It was noted in the decision of 12th  February  2018
    that no further evidence had been received, subsequent to the  decision
    of 23rd January 2018, to indicate any increased risk  of  suicide  from
    that which had been assessed before.

20.  In terms of  the  medical  evidence  it  was  noted  expressly  in  the
    decision of 12th  February  that  certain  aspects  of  that  evidence,
    particularly that a Dr Sarkar,  had  been  considered  by  a  judge  in
    judicial review proceedings and that the  challenge to removal  on  the
    basis that the applicant was not fit to fly was not upheld.

21.  As was indicated the decision of 12th February, the decision of  Andrew
    Thomas of 2014 [CO/5903/2013] was on fitness to fly and  that  did  not
    succeed upon judicial review.  Indeed, in that  decision  it  was  held
    that the Secretary of State was entitled to take account of  all  other
    material available, not just that of Dr Bell. The comment was  made  by
    Andrew Thomas Q.C that on any view Dr Sultan and Dr Burrun had far more
    information available to them than Dr  Bell.   The  decision  of  Karen
    Steyn Q.C was in relation perhaps to the more recent medical evidence.

22.  I note paragraph 207 of her decision which states as follows:-

     "The  Claimant  frequently  made  threats  of  suicide  and  self-harm.
         However, although it was right to take these seriously,  by  making
         the Claimant subject  to  constant  or  frequent  observation,  the
         Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to  accept  the  view  of  the
         responsible clinician that these threats were  manipulative  rather
         than genuine (albeit the  manipulation  may  have  stemmed  from  a
         personality disorder and may  have  been  unconscious  rather  than
         deliberate). It is striking that it was only when the Claimant  had
         served his custodial sentence and a deportation order had been made
         that the Claimant made a threat to commit suicide, and did so in  a
         way that did not suggest a serious risk, by asking a doctor to give
         him poison."

23.  In those circumstances there is merit in the submission made on  behalf
    of the respondent by Ms Anderson that, in considering  whether  or  not
    there was any realistic prospect of an Immigration Judge  coming  to  a
    different conclusion upon the mental assessment it is relevant that the
    respondent noted that on a number of occasions such a challenge did not
    succeed before the Administrative Court. Further  I  find  that  it  is
    entirely reasonable for the respondent, when considering  the  risk  of
    suicide upon removal, to have  due  regard  to  the  most  contemporary
    evidence relating to that issue which  was  provided  by  the  National
    Health Service Consultants. In assessing what weight should be given to
    contrary medical opinion it was a proper approach to  consider  whether
    there had been judicial consideration and evaluation of  that  evidence
    in the past in other proceedings.

24.  It is contended also that,  the  respondent  failed  to  apply  anxious
    scrutiny, particularly to the medical evidence and  country  background
    evidence.  It  is  entirely  clear  from  the  detailed  terms  of  the
    decisions themselves, that there was a detailed review of  the  medical
    examinations of the applicant and of his mental health. It is said that
    the reports should have been compared and contrasted in greater detail,
    including details of the time which the detention centre  psychiatrists
    spent with the applicant and the clinical methods that were  used.   It
    was suggested that there ought to have  been  a  detailed  analysis  of
    matters for and against the appellant  arising  from  the  reports  and
    examination also of the  reports  in  considerable  detail.   I  remind
    myself this is not a merits claim to be  assessed  but  one  where  the
    approach taken by the respondent should be reasonable  and  appropriate
    in all the circumstances. The respondent was entitled to rely upon  the
    fact that such medical evidence or  part  of  it  had  been  judicially
    considered and in some detail and to have conducted an assessment of it
    I can find little to criticise the approach of the respondent as  being
    unreasonable or unlawful in the circumstances on this aspect.

25.  Given the findings of the respondent that there was no or  little  risk
    of suicide upon return, it  could  be  said  that  the  nature  of  the
    background material, as submitted on behalf of the applicant as to  the
    lack of treatment available, was of less  significance  than  otherwise
    might have been the case.

26.  Ms Anderson submits that even were the  clinical  and  mental  evidence
    considered at its highest, as expressed by Dr Bell, it is unlikely that
    the circumstances and situation of the applicant would  meet  the  high
    test that is required in such cases, notwithstanding the comments  made
    in Paposhvili.  Dr Bell spoke of the likelihood  of  suicide  were  the
    applicant to return to Nigeria and be retraumatised by his experiences,
    particularly given the lack of treatment that might be available to him
    in such a situation.  Ms Anderson submits that prognosis upon a  mental
    illness is uncertain and the outcome of  removal  cannot  be  predicted
    with any degree of certainty.  The  prediction  of  traumatisation  may
    arise or may  not,  much  turning  upon  the  context  particularly  if
    returned to another area away from conflict.   The  applicant  did  not
    currently take medication and so the  absence  of  medication  may  not
    necessarily lead to a decline in his condition.  He may or may not find
    work.  He may or may not find a community that gives him support rather
    than one that excludes him.

27.  She invited me to contrast that situation  with  many  that  have  come
    before the courts, where the outcome is certain and life  limiting  but
    where the applicants have not succeeded in  their  claim.   By  way  of
    example she invites my attention to GS (India), EO (Ghana), CM (India),
    PL (Jamaica), BA (Ghana) and KK (DRC), the decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal [2015] EWCA Civ 40.  The appellants  in  those  situations  were
    suffering from terminal renal failure or end of stage kidney disease or
    an advanced stage of HIV infection. There was  no  dispute  as  to  the
    seriousness  of  the  conditions  and  it  was  recognised  what  would
    invariably happen to the appellants were the appropriate  treatment  to
    be denied.  The court held however that the cases did not  fall  within
    the exceptional category established in the decision of D v The  United
    Kingdom [1997] 24 EHRR 423.

28.  In terms of European jurisdiction my attention was drawn to  the  cases
    of Balogun v UK [2013] 56 EHRR 3 and Bensaid [2001]  33  EHRR  10.   Ms
    Anderson submits that in both of those cases the issue of mental health
    was perhaps somewhat stronger than that relating to the  applicant  and
    neither succeeded on the general principles.

29.  In terms of the ambit of Paposhvili  my  attention  was  drawn  to  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal AM & Anor (Zimbabwe) [2018] EWCA Civ 64
    in which  the  Court  held  at  paragraph  34  of  that  judgment  that
    Paposhvili was of narrow application and could only conceivably make  a
    difference where the  demanding  test  set  out  in  paragraph  183  of
    Paposhvili was met:-

         "183.    The Court  considers  that  the  'other  very  exceptional
                  cases' within the meaning of the judgment  in  N.  v.  the
                  United Kingdom (� 43)  which  may  raise  an  issue  under
                  Article 3 should be  understood  to  refer  to  situations
                  involving the removal of a seriously ill person  in  which
                  substantial grounds have been shown for believing that  he
                  or she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would face
                  a real risk, on account  of  the  absence  of  appropriate
                  treatment in the receiving country or the lack  of  access
                  to such treatment, of being exposed to  a  serious,  rapid
                  and irreversible decline in his or  her  state  of  health
                  resulting  in  intense  suffering  or  to  a   significant
                  reduction in life expectancy. The Court  points  out  that
                  these situations correspond to a high  threshold  for  the
                  application of  Article  3  of  the  Convention  in  cases
                  concerning the removal of aliens  suffering  from  serious
                  illness."

30.  In the present application it may be  considered  that  the  applicant,
    unlike Mr Paposhvili, has not been  shown  to  be  suffering  from  the
    severe effects of  any  illness,  let  alone  one  that  invariably  on
    deportation would give rise to  an  immediate  rapid  and  irreversible
    decline  resulting  in  intense  suffering  on  return.   In   granting
    permission Upper Tribunal Judge Blum had regard to the  decision  of  Y
    and Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362.  nt that case  it  was  accepted
    that the brother and  sister  had  been  tortured  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    security authorities as suspected LTTE members and both had been  raped
    in captivity and that both suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder
    and depression.

31.  As noted in paragraph 50 of that judgment, the first distinction  which
    was made  with  N  was  that  the  anticipated  self-harm  would  be  a
    consequence of the acts of the Sri Lankan  security  forces  not  of  a
    naturally occurring illness, because it would be the  product  of  fear
    and humiliation brought about by the brutality to which both applicants
    were subjected.

32.  The finding in paragraph 61 of that decision was that  the  psychiatric
    evidence was to the effect that the applicants were so  traumatised  by
    their experiences and so subjectively  terrified  at  the  prospect  of
    return to the scene of their torment that they would not be capable  of
    seeking  the treatments they need upon such removal.  It was found that
    the therapeutic care which would keep them from taking their own  lives
    on any admissible view of the evidence was remote. It seems to  me  the
    factual matrix of that case falls short of the nature of  the  evidence
    as presented on the part of the applicant in this case, even  taken  at
    its highest.  The medical evidence in  that  case  was  consistent  and
    accepted, whereas in the case of the applicant it clearly is not.

33.  The respondent in the decisions  under  challenge  made  an  assessment
    that the applicant would not fall within the ambit of Paposhvili in any
    event.  It was not accepted that the applicant suffers from the  degree
    of mental trauma as alleged.  The decision of 23rd January 2018 set out
    the position of the respondent as to the availability of  treatment  in
    Nigeria in some detail.   As  I  have  indicated,  the  general  mental
    condition of the applicant was judicially considered both under fitness
    to fly and unlawful detention. It was found that the  medical  evidence
    as advanced  did  not  support  the  contentions  that  were  made.  In
    considering whether such matters would have a different outcome  before
    an Immigration Judge it was reasonable for the respondent to note  that
    even when the matter was considered before a judge no different outcome
    was arrived at.

34.  Overall therefore I find that the Secretary of State has given  anxious
    scrutiny to the matters raised  on  behalf  of  the  applicant  in  the
    various submissions  and  has  focused  attention  upon  the  important
    medical  and  mental  health  reports  that  had  been  prepared.   The
    conclusion that the applicant was not suffering from the agreed  mental
    illness as claimed was a reasonable conclusion, particularly given  the
    most recent medical evidence from the NHS consultants  upon  which  the
    respondent was entitled to rely. Further  it  was  reasonable  for  the
    respondent to  conclude  that  the  applicant  was  not  someone  whose
    condition fell within the ambit of Paposhvili or who would  succeed  in
    an article 3 claim  in  the  context  of  current  judicial  decisions.
    Accordingly, the judicial review application is dismissed.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~

Peter King

30 October 2018


                                                                      UTIJR5


                                                                 JR/768/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice




                The Queen on the application of Richard Aboro
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge King


Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms E Fitzsimons of Counsel,  on  behalf  of  the
applicant, instructed by Duncan  Lewis  Solicitors  and  Ms  J  Anderson  of
Counsel, on behalf of the respondent, instructed  by  the  Government  Legal
Department, at a hearing at Field House, London on 4th September 2018.


Decision:  permission is refused


The reasons for such a refusal are set out in  a  judgment  handed  down  on
30th October 2018 and attached hereto.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  I do not  find  there
to be an error of law nor any  matter  of  wider  public  importance  to  be
determined.

Costs


The applicant is to pay the respondent's reasonable costs of  the  claim  to
be assessed if not  agreed,  such  costs  not  to  be  enforced  without  an
assessment of the applicant's means carried out pursuant to  Section  26  of
the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act  2012.   There  is
to be a detailed assessment of the applicant's legally aided costs.


       [pic]
 Signed:  ......................................................
          Upper Tribunal Judge King


 Dated:   31st October 2018


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------

Notification of appeal rights

A refusal by the Upper Tribunal  of  permission  to  bring  judicial  review
proceedings  following  a  hearing,  is  a   decision   that   disposes   of
proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 7 days of the Tribunal's decision refusing permission  to  appeal  to
the Court of Appeal (CPR 52.9(3)(a)).




