
                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                                 JR/168/2019


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                    Heard on: 26th July 2019


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between


      The Queen (on the application of Syed Hassan Kazmi and Asad Raza
                                   Kazmi)




                                                                  Applicants
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

    Mr S Ahmed, instructed by 12 Bridge Solicitors, on behalf of the
    Applicant
    Mrs J Gray, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
    behalf of the Respondent.
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
      The application


        1) The applicants, nationals of Pakistan,  applied  on  10  January
           2019 for judicial review of  the  respondent's  decision  of  10
           October 2018, (the 'Decision') to refuse their applications  for
           leave to remain,  as  Tier-1  entrepreneurs.  The  Decision  was
           maintained, following administrative review, by a decision dated
           22  November  2018.  In  terms  of  the   applicants'   previous
           immigration histories, the  applicants  were  initially  granted
           entrepreneur visas, which were valid until 19 March  2015.  They
           unsuccessfully applied to extend  their  leave  to  remain,  and
           brought judicial review proceedings,  which  were  unsuccessful.
           In those proceedings, permission to proceed was refused both  on
           the papers and at an  oral  renewal  hearing  by  Vice-President
           Ockelton, on 1 June 2017. Nevertheless, in light  of  what  they
           regarded as favourable comments  on  the  genuineness  of  their
           business by Vice-President Ockelton at the oral renewal hearing,
           the applicants renewed their application for leave to remain  on
           26 June 2017. The respondent  refused  that  application  on  27
           March 2018. They then made a further application, which  is  the
           subject of the Decision, on 10 July 2018,  which  they  seek  to
           challenge on the grounds below.


       Grounds of permission application


        2) Ground (1) was that the respondent  had  failed  to  follow  its
           evidential flexibility policy. In particular, the  Decision  did
           not explain whether the respondent  had  assessed  the  evidence
           relating to the applicants' employment of people; or  considered
           the exercise of her discretion in  the  event  of  any  gaps  in
           evidence. The applicants were concerned that the respondent  had
           stopped  considering  any  evidence,  or  any  exercise  of  her
           discretion, when she noted that the applicants were  overstayers
           at the date of  their  application.    She  may  otherwise  have
           concluded that the applicants met the Immigration Rules.


        3) Grounds (2) and (3) were effectively one ground. The  respondent
           had criticised the applicants for  the  lack  of  "Full  Payment
           Submissions" ('FPS') data  under  the  "Real  Time  Information"
           procedure of the PAYE regulations, for evidence that  they  were
           employing the correct number of people.  FPS data  was  required
           under paragraph 50 of appendix A of the Immigration  Rules.  The
           respondent ignored the fact that that submission  of  FPS  data,
           required on each employee's pay day, was optional under the PAYE
           Regulations at the time that the applicants were employing their
           employees. In applying  this  requirement,  the  respondent  had
           ignored alternative sources of evidence  that  were  permissible
           under tax legislation, such as wage books.  When Mr  Ahmed  made
           his oral submissions to me, this ground changed. The  applicants
           instead asserted that they had provided the FPS data, which  the
           respondent unlawfully declined to accept  as  valid.   Mr  Ahmed
           made no application to amend the ground but both representatives
           were able and content to deal with issue at the  hearing  before
           me.

        4) Ground (4) asserted that the respondent had failed  to  exercise
           discretion by waiving the requirement that the applicants should
           not be overstayers, when the applicants were genuinely  trading,
           paying taxes and employing people.

        5) In seeking permission, the applicants seek orders  quashing  the
           Decision and the subsequent administrative review decision of 22
           November 2018.

Upper Tribunal permission


        0. On 4 March 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede refused permission
           to proceed on the papers, concluding that the evidential
           flexibility provisions did not extend to waiving the requirement
           not to have overstayed at the date of the visa applications. The
           FPS data for each salary payment had still not been provided.


        6) At an oral hearing on 11 April ,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara
           granted permission on the basis that "it is  arguable  that  the
           exceptional circumstances set out by  the  applicants  in  their
           letter of representation which accompanied the applications were
           not taken  into  account  in  refusing  them  on  the  basis  of
           overstaying and  therefore  it  is  arguably  unclear  what  the
           respondent's decision would have been if evidential  flexibility
           had been extended."   Permission was granted on all grounds.


         The basis of the respondent's resistance to the orders sought


        7) The respondent served an Acknowledgment of Service on 8 February
           2019 and detailed Grounds of Defence on 23 May 2019.


        8) In relation to ground (1),  the  respondent  asserted  that  its
           Evidential Flexibility Guidance applies  in  the  context  of  a
           request for further evidence. It does not  apply  in  situations
           where the  applicants  do  not,  for  other  reasons,  meet  the
           Immigration Rules. The applicants had not identified which  part
           of the guidance the respondent had failed to apply. Page [5]  of
           the Guidance explicitly stated that "if  the  application  falls
           for the refusal for a reason which could  not  be  addressed  by
           requesting additional information,  for  example  under  general
           grounds of refusal then you must not request further evidence."

        9) In the applicants' cases, the respondent refused leave to remain
           on general grounds of refusal and so the respondent did not make
           a request for further information. Being  an  overstayer  was  a
           valid reason to not request further information.  The  statement
           in the Decision that a request for additional information "would
           not have changed  the  outcome"  was  obvious  in  what  it  was
           referring to, when the Decision was read as a whole.  There  was
           no lack of clarity in the Decision.

       10) In relation to grounds (2) and (3), according to  the  rules  on
           Tier-1 applications, and contrary to the applicants' assertions,
           whatever was otherwise optional under tax  legislation,  it  was
           mandatory for the applicants to provide  'FPS'  data  for  their
           employees under appendix A of the Immigration Rules.  There  was
           no policy which stated that the applicant need not  provide  FPS
           data, if there was no  wider  mandatory  requirement  under  tax
           legislation. In any event, the applicants had  registered  under
           the RTI process on 30 October 2013 and FPS  data  was  available
           for both employees, for the majority of  their  employment.  The
           applicants had not provided the required FPS data and there  was
           no good reason for them not to have done so,  particularly  when
           the respondent had previously identified this as an omission, in
           an earlier application.  The applicants had submitted their Tier-
           1 application on 11 July 2018 in the full  knowledge  that  they
           had not included suitable FPS data.

       11) Vice-President Ockelton  had  merely  commented,  when  refusing
           permission in the previous judicial review application on 8 June
           2017,  that  if  a  further  application  were  made  with   all
           accompanying documentary requirements, the respondent  might  be
           persuaded to waive the requirements under paragraph  245  DD(g),
           i.e. the requirement not to be overstayers.  He did  so  in  the
           context of his view that from what he had read and heard it  was
           sufficient him  to  think  that  the  applicants'  business  was
           genuine. However, Vice-President Ockelton was not committing the
           respondent to such a decision, nor, with respect,  could  he  do
           so. The applicants had not had valid leave to  remain  since  19
           March 2015.

         Legal Framework


       12) Paragraph 245DD of the Immigration Rules provides:


           "245DD. Requirements for leave to remain


           To qualify for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
           Migrant under this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements
           listed below. If the applicant meets these  requirements,  leave
           to remain will be granted. If the applicant does not meet  these
           requirements, the application will be refused.


           Requirements:


            (a) The applicant must not fall for refusal under  the  general
           grounds for refusal, except that  paragraph  322(10)  shall  not
           apply, and must not be an illegal entrant.
           (b) The applicant  must  have  a  minimum  of  75  points  under
           paragraphs 35 to 53 of Appendix A.
           (c) The applicant  must  have  a  minimum  of  10  points  under
           paragraphs 1 to 15 of Appendix B.
           (d) The applicant  must  have  a  minimum  of  10  points  under
           paragraphs 1 to 2 of Appendix C.
           (e) The applicant who is applying for leave to remain must have,
           or have last been granted, entry clearance, leave  to  enter  or
           remain:
                   (i) a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant,
                   (ii) a Tier 1 (Graduate Entrepreneur) Migrant, or
                   (iii) a Start-up migrant, having previously  held  leave
           as a Tier 1 (Graduate Entrepreneur) Migrant.
           (g) The applicant must not be in the UK in breach of immigration
           laws except that, where paragraph 39E of  these  Rules  applies,
           any current period of overstaying will be disregarded."


       13) Paragraph 50 of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules goes  on  to
           state:


           "50. If the applicant  is  required  to  score  points  for  job
           creation in Table 5 or Table 6, they must  provide  all  of  the
           following specified documents:


                  a)  printouts  of  Real  Time  Full  Payment  Submissions
                     showing that the applicant complied with  Pay  As  You
                     Earn (PAYE) reporting requirements  to  HM  Revenue  &
                     Customs in respect of each relevant settled worker  as
                     legally required, and has done so for the full  period
                     of employment used to claim points.  These  must  show
                     every payment made to each settled worker as  well  as
                     any deductions"


       14) Paragraph 245AA provides:


           "(a) Subject to sub-paragraph (b) and where otherwise indicated,
           where Part 6A or any appendices referred to  in  Part  6A  state
           that specified documents must be provided,  the  decision  maker
           (that is the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the
           Secretary of State) will only consider documents received by the
           Home  Office  before  the  date  on  which  the  application  is
           considered.
           (b) If the applicant has submitted the specified documents and:
                   (i) specified evidence is missing from the documents; or
                   (ii) a document is in the wrong format (for example,  if
           a letter is not
                    on letterhead paper as specified); or
                   (iii) DELETED
                   (iv) a document does not contain all  of  the  specified
           information;
                   the decision maker may  contact  the  applicant  or  his
           representative
                   in writing,  and  request  the  correct  documents.  The
           requested
                  documents must be received at the  address  specified  in
           the request
                  within 10 working days of the date of the request.
           (c) Documents will not be requested  where  the  decision  maker
           does not  think  that  the  submission  of  missing  or  correct
           documents will lead to a grant because the application  will  be
           refused for other reasons.
           (d) If the applicant has omitted to provide specified  evidence,
           or submitted it in the wrong format, but the missing information
           is verifiable from other documents provided with the application
           or elsewhere, the  decision  maker  may  grant  the  application
           despite the error or omission, if they are  satisfied  that  the
           applicant meets all the other requirements of the Rules."

Page [4] of the respondent's Evidential Flexibility Guidance: Points Based
System - version 8 (in force at the date of the Decision) states:


           "When evidential flexibility applies in PBS applications


           The requirements of each PBS route, including the evidence which
           must be submitted, are set out in the  Immigration  Rules.  This
           means applicants should provide all information and evidence  on
           which they rely to support their application at  the  outset  of
           the process. However, it is  recognised  that  if  an  applicant
           makes a minor error or omission  with  the  supporting  evidence
           they provide, then in some circumstances it may  be  appropriate
           to  contact  them  and  invite  them   to   provide   additional
           information. Guidance on how to consider applications  submitted
           prior to 24 November 2016 can be found in the  guidance  archive
           on Horizon.


           The circumstances when a decision maker can  request  additional
           information are set out in the evidential  flexibility  rule  in
           paragraph 245AA in part 6A of the Immigration Rules.


           Paragraph 245AA only applies to specified  documents.  Specified
           documents are route specific and are documents the applicant has
           to provide in order to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules.  A
           request  for  further  information  can  only  be   made   under
           evidential flexibility when  the  applicant  has  made  a  valid
           application.


           Additional information can only be requested once  and  only  in
           the specific circumstances set out in paragraph 245AA(b).  These
           are where:
           .documents (for example bank  statements)  are  missing  from  a
           sequence - for the definition of  this  see  'Documents  missing
           from a sequence'
           .a document has been submitted but is in the wrong  format,  for
           example, where  a  document  contains  all  of  the  substantive
           information required by the Immigration Rules  but  should  have
           been submitted on letterheaded paper
           .the document submitted with the application is a  copy  and  an
           original document is required
           .a document does not contain all of the specified information  -
           for example, if an employer's letter has been provided that does
           not confirm the applicant's gross  annual  salary  or  that  the
           employer needs to employ the applicant in their current role for
           the foreseeable future


           If a specified document  does  not  include  all  the  specified
           information, you do not need to write to  an  application  where
           the missing specified information can be obtained  from  one  of
           the following:
           .other documents submitted with the application
           .the website of the organisation which issued the document
           .the website of the appropriate regulatory  body,  for  example,
           the Financial Conduct Authority


           You must only request  additional  information  under  paragraph
           245AA if you have reason to believe the information  exists  and
           that  the  applicant  would  meet  the   requirements   of   the
           Immigration Rules if they were given a  further  opportunity  to
           provide that information. If the application falls  for  refusal
           for  a  reason  which  could  not  be  addressed  by  requesting
           additional information, for example, under general  grounds  for
           refusal  then  you  must  not  request  further  evidence  under
           paragraph 245AA. If you are unsure, you must discuss  this  with
           your senior case worker or line manager."


The applicants' oral submissions

        0. In relation to grounds (2) and (3), Mr Ahmed referred to the
           respondent's evidential flexibility guidance, in particular page
           [75] of the applicants' bundle, paragraph [175]. It referred to
           a requirement of employment of two workers, with the
           stipulations that they be employed for at least twelve months.
           He referred to the two employees of the applicants on whom they
           sought to rely as meeting appendix A of the Immigration Rules.
           I will refer to them as employee 'A' and employee 'B.' Employee
           A had been employed from 1 October 2013 to 30 September 2015.
           Employee B had been employed from 1 October 2013 to 13 November
           2015. The applicants asserted that they had begun submitting FPS
           data to HM Revenue & Customs on 30 October 2013, and had done so
           for a period longer than 12 months required by appendix A.


The crux of grounds (2) and (3) was whether the applicants had complied in
providing FPS data to the respondent, in terms required by appendix A. Mr
Ahmed referred to 3 annual RTI submissions for each of the relevant tax
years, copies of which were at page [347] onwards of the applicants'
bundle.  In the Decision, the respondent refused to accept the annual RTI
submissions as adequate, and declined to award any points under appendix A.
The respondent stated:

           "RTI full payment submissions you have provided are not
           sufficient as you have only provided some of the individual
           monthly submissions per employee which show tax and national
           insurance payments per month.  From the RTIs and wage slips you
           have provided we have calculated a total of 1,538 working
           hours."

Mr Ahmed pointed out that the respondent had mistaken the annual RTI
submissions for monthly FPS data.  Annual RTI submissions were sufficient.
Mr Ahmed urged me to consider the case of R (on the application of Saiful
Islam) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 500 where the Court of Appeal, including the
Senior President of Tribunals, was critical of the respondent's assertion
that a Tier-1 applicant had not provided mandatory evidence, when in fact
he had. While FPS data was not an issue in Mr Islam's case, the print-outs
he provided were not the wrong documents, and even if they were in the
wrong format, the information missing was not so wholesale as to affect
their fundamental character, particularly given the other material that had
been provided.


In relation to grounds (1) and (4), the respondent always had a residual
discretion. The respondent had unlawfully fettered her discretion by
failing to consider whether to waive the requirement that the applicants
should not be overstayers at the date of their most recent Tier-1
application.


The respondent's oral submissions

The applicants had overstayed unlawfully in the United Kingdom since 26 May
2015. They had not submitted further valid applications for leave to remain
until 27 June 2017, over two years later, which were in any event refused.
Vice-President Ockelton had not bound the respondent in any way. He had
merely suggested that the respondent may be willing to waive the
requirement that the applicants should not be overstayers.  In the case of
Mudiyanselage v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 65 Lord Justice Underhill emphasised
that occasional harsh outcomes are the price that has to be paid for the
perceived advantages of the points-based system process.


The applicants had made two applications after Vice-President Ockelton's
refusal of permission. On the first occasion they had omitted any RTI
information.  Even in their most recent application, they had failed to
include FPS data and had instead submitted annual RTI submissions.
Considering the question of evidential flexibility, the point of the policy
was not to require that additional documents should be sought where the
applicants fell to be rejected on other grounds.


        0. This was not a case of missing documents in a sequence, or
           merely in a different format but containing all of the relevant
           information. The applicants had not provided FPS data. The
           provisions of paragraph 50 of appendix A were quite specific as
           requiring FPS submissions for every payment and the summary,
           single-line, annualised RTI statements did not meet that
           requirement.  Islam as an authority did not disturb the
           principles established in Mudiyanselage, and the Court of Appeal
           in the former case had expressly considered the latter.  There
           was no good reason for the applicants' failure to provide FPS
           data.


Discussion and conclusions

Grounds (1) and (4)

Paragraph 245AA(c) of the Immigration Rules is clear that documents will
not be requested where a decision maker does not think that the submission
of missing or correct documents will lead to a grant because the
application will be refused for other reasons.  The respondent's Guidance
states the same.  That is precisely what occurred in this case. The
Decision was clear on the point, stating (at page [126] of the applicants'
bundle):


           "Please note, on this occasion we have not carried out full
           verification checks on the documents you submitted or the
           statements that you have made on your application form as your
           application falls for refusal on other grounds as outlined
           above."


I am satisfied that the respondent was entitled not to pursue enquiries
about FPS data, as the applicants have had no lawful leave to remain since
26 May 2015.  This is not a statutory appeal and the applicants have not
sought leave to remain on human rights grounds, outside the Immigration
Rules, under article 8 of the ECHR. The applicants' case is limited to
their assertion that but for the requirement of the Immigration Rules that
they are not overstayers, they would meet the financial and business
requirements of those rules.  No other personal circumstances are advanced
by the applicants, which they said that the respondent failed to consider.
The respondent did not ignore the evidence presented in the application.
She assessed it, concluded it was deficient, and on the basis that the
applicants could not meet the requirements as overstayers, enquired no
further.  I am satisfied that that was a decision that was properly open to
her and does not amount to an unlawful fetter on her discretion, merely an
application of a points-based system.  The applicants seek leave to remain
under that very points-based system.  As submitted by Mrs Gray, there may
be harsh consequences as the result of such a system, as made clear in
Mudiyanselage, but the Decision was not the result of the respondent
unlawfully fettering her discretion.


       Grounds (2) and (3)

Paragraph 50(a) of appendix A requires FPS printouts that show "every
payment" for "each settled worker."  For later periods not under challenge,
the applicants appear to have provided FPS data (for example, for employees
in May 2017, at [158] of the applicants' bundle).  Inexplicably, they did
not do so for the period on which they sought to rely i.e. between 2013 and
2015. Instead, they provided annual RTI submissions, which, as is clear
from the copies of them in the applicants' bundle, are single line
statements for each employee at the end of each year, showing pay to date,
without a schedule of each payment. The annual RTI statements do not show
payments for each pay date. For example, they would not show a casual
worker who stops work after a short period and restarts work at a later
date.  The RTI statements are a 'snap shot', rather than what the FPS data
records (in real-time), which is a pattern of payments over time.


The respondent was entitled to reject the annual RTI submissions, as
insufficient to meet paragraph 50 of appendix A.  They do not show a
pattern of payments. Paragraph 50 requires precisely that. The absence of a
pattern of payments explains why the respondent raised concerns that the
annual RTI submissions appeared to relate to a single month.  Contrary to
Mr Ahmed's assertions, the pattern of payments is relevant to periods of
working under the points-based system and are of a different nature to an
annual snap-shot.  The respondent's refusal to accept annual statements as
sufficient is all the more understandable when the applicants have provided
FPS data for other periods. They have not explained why FPS data is not
available for the periods on which they seek to rely.

       Conclusions

        6) For the above reasons, I conclude that the  Decision  cannot  be
           impugned on public law grounds.  The respondent did  not  fetter
           her discretion when refusing to waive  a  requirement  that  the
           applicants  should  not  be  overstayers.  The  respondent   was
           entitled to conclude that the evidence provided to her  did  not
           meet the requirements of paragraph  50  of  appendix  A  of  the
           Immigration Rules.  She was not required to ask for  additional,
           different tax records.

       Decision


        7) The application for judicial review is refused on all grounds.


                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    8 August 2019



                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                 JR/168/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice








      The Queen (on the application of Syed Hassan Kazmi and Asad Raza
                                   Kazmi)


                                                                  Applicants
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Upon judgment being handed down on 8 August 2019,  neither  counsel  was  in
attendance.


It is ordered that


     1) The judicial review application is dismissed in accordance with the
        judgment attached.


     2) I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review  application  be
        dismissed.

        Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

     3) Neither party has sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
        Appeal. I refuse permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  for
        the same reasons that I have refused the orders sought for judicial
        review.


        Costs


     4) The applicants shall pay the respondent's reasonable costs,  to  be
        assessed if not agreed.






                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    8 August 2019






      Applicant's solicitors:
      Respondent's solicitors:
      Home Office Ref:
      Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -------
       Notification of appeal rights


      A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review
      is a decision that disposes of proceedings.


       A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal  on
      a question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to
      the Upper Tribunal  for  permission,  at  the  hearing  at  which  the
      decision is given. If  no  application  is  made,  the  Tribunal  must
      nonetheless  consider  at  the  hearing  whether  to  give  or  refuse
      permission to appeal (rule 44(4B) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008).


      If  the  Tribunal  refuses  permission,  either  in  response  to   an
      application or by virtue of rule 44(4B), then  the  party  wishing  to
      appeal can apply for permission from the Court of Appeal itself.  This
      must be done by filing an applicant's notice with  the  Civil  Appeals
      Office of the  Court  of  Appeal  within  28  days  of  the  date  the
      Tribunal's decision on permission to appeal was sent (Civil  Procedure
      Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).












