


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                 JR/727/2017



                  Upper Tribunal
                  Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                  Judicial Review Decision Notice





                       The Queen on the application of

                             PARINDA MAHA SINGH
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before

               Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 26 November 2018


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all documents lodged and having  heard  Mr.  S.  Karim  of
counsel, instructed by AWS Solicitors on behalf of the Applicant, and Mr  J.
Holborn of Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,  London  on  26
November 2018.


Decision: the application for judicial review is refused





THE HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


1.    The Applicant is a national of Mauritius. She had leave to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom  as  a  student  from  4  September  2007  until  15
    September 2015.  On that same day she applied for indefinite  leave  to
    remain outside the Immigration Rules.  Her application was  refused  on
    19 January 2016 and she appealed. Her  appeal  was  dismissed  and  she
    sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. Permission to appeal
    was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge King on 7 July 2017 and she  became
    appeal rights exhausted on that same day.


2.    She applied for further leave to remain on  14  July  2017  and  on  9
    August 2017, she varied her application to one for indefinite leave  to
    remain.  Her application was  refused  on  15  December  2017  and  the
    Respondent decided not to treat her  human  rights  claim  as  a  fresh
    claim.


3.    The Applicant lodged her claim for judicial review on 30 January  2018
    and the Respondent filed his  acknowledgment  of  service  and  summary
    grounds of defence on 20 February 2018.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic
    refused her permission on the papers on 1 June 2018  but  on  9  August
    2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted her permission  after  an  oral
    hearing.


4.    On 13 September 2018, the Respondent was granted a short extension  of
    time until 24 September 2018 to file and serve his detailed grounds  of
    defence and on 11 October 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  vacated
    the hearing set down for 19 October 2018 and listed  the  claim  to  be
    heard with Md Azizul Islam v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    (JR/2443/2018), which raised similar points of law.


THE SUBSTANTIVE HEARING


5.    The Applicant filed a bundle for the hearing on 10 October 2018 and  a
    bundle of authorities on 23 November 2018.  The  Respondent's  detailed
    ground of defence were served on 19  October  2018  and  the  Applicant
    filed and served  her  skeleton  argument  on  9  November  2018.   The
    Respondent filed and served his skeleton argument on 23 November  2018.
    At the start of the hearing, counsel for the Applicant stated that  the
    Applicant's fourth ground of claim was effectively subsumed by  grounds
    2 and 3 and noted that the Respondent had accepted that  this  was  the
    case in paragraph 4 of his skeleton argument.


THE SUBSTANTIVE DECISION


GROUND ONE


6.    In paragraphs 41 - 46 of her initial grounds of claim,  the  Applicant
    submitted that she had never previously  made  a  human  rights  claim.
    However, in the skeleton argument and at  the  start  of  the  hearing,
    counsel  for  the  Applicant  submitted  that  paragraph  353  of   the
    Immigration Rules had no application in her case, as she had  not  made
    further submissions but had made a formal  application  for  leave.  He
    noted  that  paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration   Rules   refers   to
    "submissions" as opposed to "applications" and states that:


         "Fresh claims


         When a  human-rights...claim  has  been  refused  or  withdrawn  or
         treated as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of these  Rules  and  any
         appeal relating to that claim is no longer  pending,  the  decision
         maker will consider any further submissions and, if rejected,  will
         then  determine  whether  they  amount  to  a  fresh   claim.   The
         submissions will amount to a fresh claim if they are  significantly
         different from the material that has  previously  been  considered.
         The  submissions  will  only  be  significantly  different  if  the
         content:


         (i)      had not already been considered; and


         (ii)     taken together with the  previously  considered  material,
             created a realistic prospect of success,  notwithstanding  its
             rejection".


7.    This was not a ground which had been advanced in the  written  grounds
    of claim  and  Counsel  for  the  Respondent  submitted  that,  if  the
    Applicant wished to pursue this alternative ground, she needed to apply
    to amend her grounds. He also submitted that the Respondent would  also
    require an adjournment in order to  take  instructions  and  prepare  a
    response and that, therefore, the hearing would have to be  vacated.  I
    indicated that, if the Applicant wished to apply to amend her  grounds,
    it would be necessary for an adjournment to be granted.


8.    Counsel for the Applicant asked for time  to  take  instructions  from
    the Applicant and returned and informed the Tribunal that she  did  not
    wish to apply to amend her grounds to rely on this further ground.


GROUND TWO


9.    When granting permission Upper Tribunal Judge Smith found that it  was
    arguable  that  paragraph  276B,  read  with  paragraph  39E   of   the
    Immigration Rules, requires the Respondent to disregard the  fact  that
    the Applicant overstayed following her application made within 14  days
    of the expiry of her section 3C leave.


10.   Paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules states that:


         "The requirements to be met by an applicant for indefinite leave to
         remain on the grounds of long residence in the United  Kingdom  are
         that:


         (i)      (a)  he has  had  at  least  10  years  continuous  lawful
                  residence in the United Kingdom"


         ...


         (v)      the  applicant  must  not  be  in  the  UK  in  breach  of
             immigration laws, except that, where paragraph  39E  of  these
             Rules applies, any  current  period  of  overstaying  will  be
             disregarded.  Any  previous  period  of  overstaying   between
             periods of leave will also be disregarded where -


             (a) the previous application was made before 24 November  2016
                  and within 28 days of the expiry of leave; or


             (b) the further application was made on or after  24  November
                  2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied".


12.   Paragraph 276A of the Immigration Rules states that:


         "For the purposes of paragraphs 276B...


         (a)      'continuous  residence'  means  residence  in  the  United
             Kingdom for an unbroken  period,  and  for  these  purposes  a
             period shall not be considered to have been  broken  where  an
             applicant is absent from the United Kingdom for a period of  6
             months or less at any one time".


         (b)      'lawful residence' means  residence  which  is  continuous
             residence pursuant to:


             (i) existing leave to enter or remain".


13.   Paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules states that:


         "This paragraph applies where:


         (1)      the application was made within 14 days of the applicant's
             leave expiring and the Secretary of State considers that there
             was a good reason beyond the control of the applicant or their
             representative, provided in or with the application,  why  the
             application could not be made in-time; or


         (2)      the application was made:


             (a) following the refusal of a previous application for  leave
                  which was made in-time or which sub-paragraph (1) applied;
                  and


             (b) within 14 days of:


                  (i)  the refusal of the previous application for leave; or




                  (ii) the expiry of any leave extended by section 3C of the
                      Immigration Act 1971..."


14.   Counsel for the Applicant did not accept that  it  was  necessary  for
    the Upper Tribunal to follow the decision reached by the Honourable Mr.
    Justice Sweeney in The Queen  on  the  application  of  Juned  Ahmed  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department JR/4184/2017. I accept  that
    I am not bound by this decision but it is clearly persuasive and I have
    treated it as such.


15.   Counsel for the Applicant submitted that, when paragraph  39E  of  the
    Immigration Rules was read with paragraph 276B(v)  of  the  Rules,  any
    period of overstaying should be disregarded if the Applicant had made a
    further application for  leave  within  14  days.   Therefore,  as  the
    Applicant had made an application, which was subsequently varied to one
    for indefinite leave, within 14 days of her section 3C leave  expiring,
    her period of overstaying from 7 July 2017 should be disregarded and it
    should be accepted that she had accrued more than ten years  continuous
    lawful residence for the purposes of paragraph 276B of the  Immigration
    Rules.


16.   He also relied on the fact that  paragraph  276A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules permits an absence of up to six months from  the  United  Kingdom
    within the continuous ten-year period. Counsel for the  Applicant  also
    referred to page 17 of the Respondent's policy on Long residence, where
    it was said that a  period  of  overstaying  was  permitted  before  an
    applicant actually left the United Kingdom  if  he  applied  for  entry
    clearance within the permitted time period of 14 or 28  days  from  the
    date that his previous leave had expired.


17.    However,  this  example  was  not  on  all  fours  with  the  present
    Applicant's circumstances. She had not left the United Kingdom  between
    different periods of lawful residence and had  not  applied  for  entry
    clearance within a relevant 14 or 28-  day  period.  Instead,  she  was
    relying on a period  of  overstaying  at  the  end  of  her  period  of
    continuous lawful residence. In addition, as submitted by  counsel  for
    the Respondent, at no time could she show that  she  had  a  continuous
    period of lawful residence which extended for ten years, which had been
    punctuated by a period abroad or short period of overstaying.


18.   Mr. Justice Sweeney considered such a scenario in Ahmed and  concluded
    in paragraph 75(2) of his judgment that:


         "It is obvious from  the  structure  of  paragraph  276B,  read  in
         conjunction with paragraph 276D, that paragraph 276(v) is  a  free-
         standing  requirement  additional  to  sub-paragraph   (i)(a)   and
         consistent with the general amendment of the Immigration  Rules  to
         the effect that applications for leave to remain by persons who had
         overstayed for more than 28 days will be refused on that ground".


19.   Counsel for the Applicant relied on the fact that Mr. Justice  Sweeney
    had not explicitly referred to paragraph 39E of the Immigration  Rules.
    However, giving this paragraph  its  plain  and  ordinary  meaning,  it
    cannot be said to have the capability of creating leave to  remain  for
    the Applicant when she had no other entitlement to such leave.


20.   It also has to be applied in the context of paragraph  276B(v),  which
    is just one of five separate requirements which have to be met before a
    person becomes entitled to indefinite leave to  remain.  The  principle
    requirement in paragraph 276B(v) is that an  applicant  for  indefinite
    leave must not be in the United Kingdom in breach of Immigration  Laws.
    This requirement is modified to permit short  periods  of  overstaying.
    Nothing in the sub-paragraph indicates that this modification creates a
    further period of lawful leave.


21.   Furthermore, as noted by Mr. Justice Sweeney in paragraph  47  of  his
    judgment, the definition of "lawful residence", contained in  paragraph
    276A(b) of the Immigration Rules, makes it clear that,  to  be  lawful,
    continuous residence must be pursuant to existing  leave  to  enter  or
    remain or in certain circumstances  be  as  a  result  of  a  grant  of
    temporary admission or an exemption from immigration control.


22.   For all of these reasons, I find that the decision that the  Applicant
    was not entitled to indefinite leave to remain  under  the  Immigration
    Rules was not irrational or unlawful.


23.   However, counsel for the Applicant also submitted,  that  even  if  it
    could not be established that the Applicant was entitled to  indefinite
    leave to remain within the Immigration Rules, it  was  unreasonable  to
    find that there was no realistic prospect of him succeeding outside the
    Immigration Rules before a First-tier Tribunal Judge. This was  because
    the Respondent had a discretion to grant  indefinite  leave  to  remain
    outside the Immigration Rules.


24.   He relied on  the  Respondent's  policy  guidance  on  Long  Residence
    Version 15.0, which states that:


         "Where an out of time application  is  submitted  on  or  after  24
         November 2016, you must consider whether to exercise discretion  in
         line with paragraph 39E of the immigration rules".


25.   In his refusal letter, the Respondent had accepted that the  Applicant
    had been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom  for  a  period  of  9
    years and ten months.


26.   When exercising his discretion, he was also bound to  apply  paragraph
    353 of the Immigration Rules and to consider the  decision  reached  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Phillips in which he made a number of adverse
    credibility findings  in  relation  to  the  account  provided  by  the
    Applicant at page 11 of his decision. In particular, he found that  the
    Applicant was not at serious risk of harm in Mauritius and  that  there
    were no insurmountable obstacles  to  her  continuing  her  family  and
    private life there. He  also  found  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances  which  would  justify  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.


27.   The Respondent took into account these  findings  and  the  subsequent
    decision by Upper Tribunal Judge King, when he  refused  the  Applicant
    permission to appeal, when considering whether the Applicant had made a
    fresh claim. The Applicant's grounds of  claim  do  not  challenge  the
    substance of the fresh claim decision.


28.    At  page  3  of  his  decision  the  Respondent  also  gave  detailed
    consideration to any possible  exceptional  circumstances  which  could
    have led to him to decide to exercise his discretion in favour  of  the
    Applicant. When doing so, he explicitly found that the mere  length  of
    the Applicant's residence in the United Kingdom  was  not  sufficiently
    compelling to justify allowing her to remain in the United Kingdom.


29.   Counsel for the  Applicant  made  a  bare  assertion  that  discretion
    should  have  been  exercised  in  line  with  paragraph  39E  of   the
    Immigration Rules. However, the Applicant was not refused leave because
    of her period of overstaying.  She  was  refused  indefinite  leave  to
    remain as she had not accrued ten years continuous lawful residence  in
    the United Kingdom.


30.   The Applicant's grounds do not  identify  any  error  of  law  in  her
    decision  not  to  grant  indefinite  leave  to  remain   outside   the
    Immigration Rules which would have rendered his decision irrational  or
    unlawful, even applying the "somewhat modest test" articulated by  Lord
    Justice Buxton in paragraphs 6 and 7 of WM (DRC) v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495.


31.   Counsel for the Applicant also sought to rely on the GCID Case  Record
    Sheet relating to JR/2443/2018. However, this was  not  evidence  which
    was  before  the  Respondent  when  he  reached  his  decision  in  the
    Applicant's case and, therefore, I cannot take it into account.


32.   For the reasons given above I also find that the Guidance referred  to
    in paragraph 16 above was not capable of giving rise to a  fresh  claim
    for the purposes of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.


Order


(1)   The Applicant's claim is refused.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


(2)   I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal because there  is
    no merit in the grounds of claim or in the oral submissions made at the
    oral hearing on behalf of the Applicant.


Costs


(3)   The Applicant do pay the Respondent's costs  to  be  assessed  if  not
    agreed, subject to any submissions in writing to be made within 14 days
    of service of this decision.





                  Nadine Finch
       Signed:

                 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


       Dated:    4 December 2018






Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to the above parties on:.

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 7 Days of the date the Tribunal's decision on  permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).
