
IAC-FH-CK-V2

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   HEARING
                           via Skype for Business

                                                                 JR/818/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A IWR

                                                            2 September 2020


                                  THE QUEEN
                      (ON THE APPLICATION OF ARIF MIR)
                                                                   Applicant



                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   BEFORE

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Z Malik and Mr A Rehman, instructed by Lawfare Solicitors appeared on
behalf of the Applicant.

Ms N Barnes, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGEMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE ALLEN: The  applicant  has  applied  for  a  judicial  review  of  the
    decision of the Secretary of State of  28  October  2015  revoking  his
    indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis  that  it
    was obtained by deception.

 2. The brief history of the applicant  is  that  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom on 2 January 2010 with leave as a Tier 4 Student valid until 29
    November 2011. He needed an English language certificate and he took  a
    test at Alpha College on 19 October 2011. This was unsuccessful and  he
    took a  further  test  on  15  November  2011  at  Richmond  School  of
    Management Studies. This  was  successful,  and  as  a  consequence  he
    applied for an extension of leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student on 24 November 2011. On 9 January 2012, the earlier application
    having been rejected as mandatory sections of the application form  had
    not all been completed, he applied for an extension of leave to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student, submitting the  TOEIC  certificate  from
    Richmond School of  Management  Studies  of  15  November  2011.  On  2
    February 2012 he was granted leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student  until
    30 September 2013. On 5 April 2012 he applied for leave  to  remain  as
    the spouse of a settled person, again submitting the TOEIC certificate.
    On 18 September 2012 he was granted leave to remain as the spouse of  a
    settled person, until 18 September 2014. He was subsequently successful
    with an application for indefinite leave to remain as the spouse  of  a
    settled person,  made  on  23  August  2014.  He  applied  for  British
    nationality as the spouse of a  British  citizen,  on  15  April  2015.
    Thereafter the decision under challenge was made on 28 October 2015. He
    was issued on that same date with a  Statement  of  Additional  Grounds
    form. He made further submissions in respect of the decision on Article
    8, on 4 November 2015, and the respondent reconsidered her decision  on
    24 November 2015, maintaining the decision to  revoke  the  applicant's
    leave and advising him to make an application for leave  to  remain  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The applicant filed an application for judicial review challenging  the
    revocation decision, on 25  January  2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    refused on 22 March 2016 and the claim was certified as  being  totally
    without merit. The Tribunal refused permission to appeal to  the  Court
    of Appeal and the appeal was subsequently stayed  pending  the  court's
    decision in Hossain & Islam. Thereafter on 23 December 2019  the  Court
    of Appeal allowed the applicant's appeal by consent  and  remitted  the
    case to the Upper Tribunal.

The Law

 4. There is no disagreement between the parties as to the  relevant  legal
    principles in this case.

 5. It is clear from section 76(2)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 that:

         "The Secretary of State may revoke a person's indefinite  leave  to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom if -

      a) the leave was obtained by deception.

         ..."

 6. In Abbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]  EWHC  78,
    it was held that in a judicial review challenge to a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to revoke leave under section 76(2)(a) the  question
    whether deception was used by the applicant is a precedent fact for the
    court itself to determine, because the very existence of the  Secretary
    of State's power as exercised in  such  a  case  depends  on  deception
    having been used.

 7. The legal burden of proving that the applicant used deception  lies  on
    the Secretary of State. There is a three  stage  process,  namely  that
    first, the Secretary of State must adduce sufficient evidence to  raise
    the issue of fraud in relation to the TOE IC certificate; secondly, the
    appellant has  a  burden  of  raising  an  innocent  explanation  which
    satisfies the minimum level of plausibility;  and  if  that  burden  is
    discharged, the Secretary of State must establish  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that this explanation is to be rejected.

 8. It is relevant to note that there is one civil standard of  proof,  the
    standard applicable for  the  present  case.  The  seriousness  of  the
    consequences of an allegation does not require a different standard  of
    proof, but flexibility in its application will involve consideration of
    the strength  and  quality  of  the  evidence.  The  more  serious  the
    consequence,  the  stronger  must  be  the  evidence  adduced  for  the
    necessary standard to be reached (see Abbas at paragraph 7, to be  read
    in the light of Re B (Children) [2009] 1 AC 11). In Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department v Shehzad and Chowdhury [2016] EWCA Civ 615  it
    was said that in order to meet the first stage the Secretary  of  State
    must adduce  the  generic  evidence  which  should  be  accompanied  by
    evidence showing that the individual  under  consideration's  test  was
    categorised as invalid. It is then for the applicant to put forward his
    explanation if the first stage has been met, and as in  this  case  the
    Tribunal may be invited to accept that his  explanation  satisfies  the
    minimum level of plausibility.

 9. As regards the third stage, it was held by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  MA
    [2016] UKUT 450 (IAC), that the question of whether a person engaged in
    fraud in procuring a TOEIC English language  proficiency  qualification
    will invariably be intrinsically fact-sensitive. The Court of Appeal in
    Ahsan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009
    endorsed this view and added that even in a case  "where  the  impugned
    test was taken at an established fraud factory"  and  even  "where  the
    voice file does not record the applicant's voice  (or  no  attempt  has
    been made to obtain it)", the decision  as  to  whether  a  person  has
    cheated in the TOEIC test will be fact-specific.

Evidence

10. At paragraph 18 the Court of Appeal in Majumder and Qadir  v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1167 approved what had
    been said by the Upper Tribunal in those cases that when considering an
    allegation of dishonesty the relevant factors included  the  following:
    what the person accused had to gain from being dishonest; what  he  had
    to lose; what is known about his character; the cultural environment in
    which he operated; how the individual accused of  dishonesty  performed
    under cross-examination, and whether the Tribunal's assessment of  that
    person's English language proficiency is commensurate with his  or  her
    TOEIC scores and whether his or her academic achievements are such that
    it was unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated.

11. The applicant gave oral evidence, confirming that the contents  of  his
    statement of 14 July were true and he adopted it as his evidence today.
    He was referred to his wife's statement and said that she was  at  work
    today, working as a carer and she was not able to attend the hearing as
    they were very strict and short  of  staff  as  a  consequence  of  the
    pandemic and she was unable to take a day off.

12. On cross-examination he was asked why prior to the statement he had not
    set out previously his explanation of the test and his  claim  to  have
    sat it. He said that in 2015 he was with different solicitors  and  the
    Rules on judicial review were different then and they had  never  asked
    him for a witness statement and the case was in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    behind other cases and he had never been asked for it  before.  It  was
    put to him that he could have asked his  representatives  at  any  time
    over the five years and he said  it  was  just  because  the  case  was
    pending and that  was  the  only  reason  and  there  had  been  little
    correspondence for two or three years and  it  was  pending  for  three
    years. It was put to him that representations had been made on a number
    of occasions initially after the refusal even though the case had  been
    pending for a while and he said that the previous  representatives  had
    never really asked him to make a statement.

13. He agreed that the initial period of leave elapsed on 29 November  2011
    and therefore he had to submit a further leave application before  that
    leave expired. The application he had put in was for a level  5  course
    in hotel management and as part of the application he had to submit  an
    English language test certificate. He thought he had needed a score  of
    150 to 160. He had taken that test at  Alpha  College  at  the  end  of
    October, 19 October 2011. That college was in Edgware. He was asked how
    he had got there and he said to the best of  his  recollection  he  had
    taken the train from his home in Folkestone to St Pancras and then went
    to Edgware. He had paid around �150. He said he had  gone  to  do  that
    test without preparation as he was full of confidence  and  also  there
    had been background noise. He  had  probably  been  overconfident  plus
    there was the factor of  the  noise.  He  was  asked  why  he  had  not
    complained if he could not hear and said he was thinking  it  would  be
    all right and the result was very disappointing and he had  thought  he
    would pass. He was asked why he had not complained and sought  to  redo
    the test under proper conditions and said as far as  he  remembered  he
    raised concerns with the relevant person at the college and  they  said
    it was a usual thing. He had rung them and had said this. He agreed  he
    had not referred to this in his statement and did not know  he  had  to
    mention it. He was asked whether he had  not  thought  it  relevant  to
    mention it and he said he did refer to the noise and  he  thought  that
    was enough. As to why he had not mentioned it before he  said  he  only
    mentioned the noise, not raising concerns to the  college.  As  regards
    their response, they had told him that sometimes this kind of noise was
    always around and this was the second time of a complaint he  had  been
    told. He had asked to do the test again there at a reduced fee but they
    were fully booked.

14. He did not have the results from  the  Alpha  test  with  him.  He  was
    referred to the relevant page in the bundle (258) where he was recorded
    as scoring 120 on the speaking element and 60 in the  writing  element.
    It was put to him that that was significantly below the pass level  and
    he said in the writing, yes. He agreed that he had gone to the Richmond
    college less than two weeks later to book a new test. It was put to him
    that that had given him almost no time to improve  his  writing  skills
    and he said he thought there was enough  time  and  he  had  gone  with
    preparation. This contrasted with his absence  of  preparation  before,
    but with preparation it was not hard to get this score. It was  put  to
    him that even if he did prepare, his  skills  at  writing  and  grammar
    needed a marked improvement over a short period of time and he said  he
    was doing nothing but prepare for the test. He thought that although he
    had to pass before the end of November there was enough time to pass.

15. He had been looking for a place where the test date was  available  and
    hence the distance away from his home. Travel was not a problem. He had
    looked on the website and there were none nearer to him. He  could  not
    remember the names of any other colleges that he had considered. He had
    chosen Richmond as there  was  special  availability  on  his  friend's
    advice. His friend Shakil had put in an affidavit but was not available
    to give evidence as he was now in Pakistan.

16. As to how he had got to the Richmond college on the  two  occasions  he
    went there, he had gone by train to St. Pancras and then the  train  to
    Victoria, to Vauxhall and then on to  Richmond.  He  had  walked  about
    fifteen to twenty minutes at the other end and it was on the main road.

17. It was put to him that his writing score  had  improved  by  more  than
    three times in less than a month and he  said  that,  as  he  had  said
    before, he had not prepared previously. It was  put  to  him  that  the
    reason why he scored much better was because it was not he who had  sat
    the test and he said he had sat the test himself. It  was  put  to  him
    that that was why he accepted that the voice on the recordings was  not
    him and he said he did not know how it came to be on the certificate.

18. On re-examination the applicant agreed that he prepared for a couple of
    weeks after the first test and before the  second  test.  He  had  gone
    through the material available from the ETS website and practised  with
    his friend and there were  many  tests  available  on  YouTube  He  had
    written it all down and had been very confident[pic]

Discussion

19. I had full and helpful submissions from Mr Malik  and  Ms  Barnes  both
    orally and in their skeleton arguments, and as they were structured  in
    essentially the same way it will I think  be  clearer  to  address  the
    issues taking account of their submissions rather than setting out  the
    submissions separately and then addressing them.

20. There are three grounds of challenge to  the  decision.  The  first  is
    whether the UT can be satisfied that the applicant exercised discretion
    in the obtaining of the TOEIC certificate. The second  ground  contends
    that the Secretary of State did not properly exercise  her  discretion,
    the third ground argues that the decision was procedurally unfair.

21. As regards the first ground, Ms Barnes  concentrated  her  argument  on
    seven points which were responded to by Mr Malik, and I  shall  address
    these in order. The Secretary  of  State's  first  point  is  that  the
    applicant now accepts that the voice recordings provided by ETS are not
    his voice. Ms Barnes accepted that that was not conclusive, bearing  in
    mind what was said by the Upper Tribunal in MA at paragraphs 13 to  17,
    where there is a detailed discussion as to the potential  for  breaches
    in continuity in the recordings, but nevertheless Ms Barnes argued that
    this should be the starting point. She referred to what had  been  said
    by the Court of Appeal in Ahsan (2017] EWCA Civ 2009 including what was
    said at paragraph 33 that where the  impugned  test  was  taken  at  an
    established fraud factory and also where the voice file did not  record
    the applicant's voice (or no attempt had been made to obtain  it),  the
    case that he or she cheated would be hard to resist.  Mr  Malik  argued
    that only if the voice matched that of the applicant it  would  be  the
    end of the case and ETS would only invalidate if there were  a  problem
    with the voice recording and if it was to be said that if there were  a
    mismatch it was strongly adverse to the applicant and would be a strong
    indication in every case as the case would only come before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal if the voices did  not  match  and
    therefore it was not a strong  indication  and  not  a  reason  not  to
    believe the applicant.

22. I do not consider that the point can be dismissed in this way. Although
    the existence of a discrepancy must be said to be a sine qua non of the
    ultimate finding of deception, it cannot be said to be a factor without
    weight in considering a case such as this. The fact that in every  case
    that goes forward there is a mismatch does  not  mean  that  no  weight
    should be attached to the existence of a  mismatch  in  any  particular
    case.

23. The second point made in this regard on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State was that the serial numbers on the voice recordings  provided  by
    ETS matched the serial number on the lookup tool and Ms Barnes took  me
    to pages 140 and 298 to 299 to make the point good Mr Malik agreed that
    the numbers were the same but he contended  that  this  meant  nothing.
    Again, he argued that if they were not the same the case would not come
    before the Tribunal and if the Secretary of State had  no  evidence  to
    show there was a  test  with  the  same  serial  numbers  as  had  been
    indicated by ETS the matter would go no further, It did not show that a
    proxy had been used.

24. Again, I do not think the point can be reduced in the way in  which  Mr
    Malik argues. The existence of a correlation between the serial  number
    on the lookup tool and on  the  voice  recording  is  clearly  relevant
    evidence that a careful process was followed and that a mistake was not
    made in linking the voice recording to the lookup tool.  Again,  it  is
    evidence of relevance and part of the  evidence  that  requires  to  be
    considered in the round.

25. Ms Barnes' third point was that the dramatic improvement  in  the  test
    results over such a short period of time  lacked  credibility  and  the
    score had gone up from 120 to 190 in speaking and from 60  to  190  for
    writing. These scores were near perfect.  She  took  me  to  the  TOEIC
    handbook for the  detail  as  to  how  the  different  categories  were
    described and the clear differences between the level of  speaking  and
    writing skills  indicated  by  the  respective  different  scores.  The
    difference was material and even more so for the writing.  It  was  not
    credible that the applicant had improved his English to such an  extent
    in such a short time He had said it was  because  conditions  at  Alpha
    College were noisy  and  he  could  not  hear  well,  as  part  of  his
    explanation but that would have no impact on the writing aspect. It was
    also a very recent explanation and he had said today he had  complained
    to the college but there was no reference to that in his statement,  so
    there was an inconsistency.

26. Her next point (I set these both out at this stage as Mr Malik  coupled
    the two together in the response) was that the results were  improbably
    high in the circumstances where not a single test taken at the Richmond
    college on that day was found to be reliable, as could be seen at  page
    142 where 45 of 101 tests were found to have been taken by a proxy.

27. Mr Malik argued that the level of improvement was not  incredible.  The
    point was unattractive as there had never  been  a  dispute  about  the
    writing element of the TOEIC test as could be seen  from  the  decision
    letter, where it was said that the cancellation was on account  of  the
    speaking element. The voice comparison was irrelevant with  respect  to
    the written element and the Secretary of State had taken  no  point  on
    that. The same could be seen in the PAP response. Also, Ms Barnes  said
    the explanation of the improvement lacked  credibility  but  there  was
    nothing incredible in the applicant's explanation that he had done  the
    first test without preparation and there were issues  during  the  test
    and then he had gone through the materials and practised the test  with
    his wife and online and his skills improved in two weeks and he sat the
    test. There was no reason to  reject  that  evidence  and  it  was  not
    inconsistent. It was also relevant to mention, as noted  at  page  257,
    which was the result of the Alpha lookup test, the first  test  he  had
    done, that it was said to be invalid on the second line, which meant  a
    proxy had been used. Ms Barnes' argument collapsed at that point, as if
    he was perceived on the basis of this evidence and it was accepted what
    the Secretary of State said, he had used a proxy in his first  test  to
    fail. The Secretary of State's evidence was that that also  was  deemed
    invalid by ETS and the  implication  from  this  was  relevant  to  the
    reliability of the lookup tools.

28. I take Mr Malik's point about the lack of any challenge to the  outcome
    of the written test. No issue was taken with that, and though it  might
    have been regarded as relevant  that  there  was  such  a  very  marked
    discrepancy between the two scores in less than a month, it  is  not  a
    point  that  was  taken  against  the  applicant   in   the   decision.
    Nevertheless there was a significant improvement in the speaking  score
    It is not a sole matter of discrepancies, other  than  the  discrepancy
    that Ms Barnes was entitled to emphasise between  the  absence  of  any
    reference  to  a  complaint  to  Alpha  College  being  made  and   the
    applicant's witness statement and what he contended today,  but  rather
    the inherent implausibility of  such  a  significant  increase  in  the
    applicant's score over such a short period of time. I find it  hard  to
    believe that someone would, so  close  to  the  deadline  of  the  visa
    expiry, take such  a  cavalier  approach  to  the  Alpha  test  as  the
    applicant claims to have done. To my mind it is incredible that someone
    so close to the expiry of his visa taking a  crucial  test  upon  which
    getting the new visa would significantly depend,  would  simply  do  no
    preparation and have the level of confidence that  he  claims  to  have
    had. His credibility is not assisted by the claim he now makes to  have
    complained  to  Alpha,  not  having  mentioned  that  in  his   witness
    statement. So, though I agree with Mr Malik that no adverse  point  was
    taken  against  him  in  the  decision  letter  on  the  basis  of  the
    discrepancy in the writing scores, with regard to the  speaking  scores
    there is a point of relevance to credibility as noted above.

29. Ms Barnes' next point was that  the  applicant  had  clear  reasons  to
    cheat. This is one of the factors addressed at paragraph 18 of  SM  and
    Qadir, to which I have referred above. Clearly, what  he  had  to  gain
    from being dishonest was the enhancement of the opportunity to obtain a
    visa on the basis of a pass in the TOE IC test. It is also relevant  to
    the final point on  that  list  as  to  whether  his  or  her  academic
    achievements were such that it was unnecessary or illogical for them to
    have cheated. Clearly, in light of  the  earlier  failure  it  was  not
    unnecessary or illogical for the applicant to consider cheating  to  be
    the only way forward. Mr Malik made the point that  any  student  would
    have to do a test if seeking further leave to  remain  so  there  would
    always be an incentive to do well in the test, but I  do  not  consider
    that that weakens the force of the point that it is a  relevant  factor
    to be borne in mind when considering an allegation of dishonesty.

30. Ms Barnes's next point concerned the absence of oral evidence from  the
    applicant's wife or Mr Shakil. She argued that less  weight  should  be
    given to their written evidence, especially to that of Mr  Shakil,  who
    would be best placed to corroborate what the applicant said  about  the
    two trips to the Richmond college. if he had given  live  evidence  she
    would have asked a lot more questions about the trip both  of  him  and
    the applicant.

31. Mr Malik emphasised the evidence of the applicant as to  why  his  wife
    did not attend but argued that it was not really relevant  to  the  key
    issue. There was no reason to  doubt  his  extensive  evidence  because
    there was no oral evidence from those two witnesses.

32. I agree with Ms Barnes that the absence of oral evidence from  both  of
    these witnesses does have relevance to the weight  to  be  attached  to
    that evidence. It is not a central point, but the respondent  has  been
    denied the opportunity of cross-examination particularly of Mr  Shakil,
    bearing in mind what he said in his evidence about  having  accompanied
    the applicant each time to his visits to the Richmond college (a matter
    which was not referred to in the applicant's witness statement). But of
    course he was not available, having returned to Pakistan.

33. Ms Barnes' next point was that caution should be placed in  relying  on
    the applicant's current competence in English, given  that  nine  years
    have passed since he sat the test in dispute and he  has  been  in  the
    United  Kingdom  at  all  times.  Mr  Malik  agreed  that  his  present
    competence was not determinative, but argued that it could not be  said
    that it was not relevant, bearing in mind what had been said  in  Qadir
    and SM. It was relevant to note also that  there  was  nothing  adverse
    known about the applicant's character, which was a relevant factor, and
    he had always complied with the law and the Immigration  Rules  and  it
    should be questioned why he would risk all in reliance on a  fraudulent
    TOE IC certificate. There  was  nothing  adverse  with  regard  to  the
    cultural environment point, for example in ruling it a non-college or a
    fraud factory. In cross-examination he had answered all  the  questions
    and gave straightforward answers  and  was  consistent.  There  was  no
    reason to reject his evidence as incredible.

34. Mr Malik also made the general point that it was wrong to criticise the
    applicant for only having made a witness statement at the time when  he
    did. The position in 2015 was very different from what was now accepted
    by the Secretary of State as being correct. In 2015  the  Secretary  of
    State's  view  was  that  judicial  review  was   only   available   on
    conventional public law grounds, and the Upper Tribunal had agreed with
    this and it was thought not to have a fact-finding role. This could  be
    seen from the acknowledgement of service and  the  summary  grounds  in
    this case. It had only been accepted in 2016 that  there  was  a  fact-
    finding role for the Tribunal, and thereafter the appeal was pending in
    the Court of Appeal for some time and was ultimately remitted from  the
    Court of Appeal in  2019.  It  was  only  after  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jackson's order on 13 April 2020 that the applicant  was  permitted  to
    use further evidence. There was nothing adverse in making the statement
    when he had.

35. I see the force of this point. I do not consider it is adverse  to  the
    applicant that the statement was made at the time when it was[pic]

36. However, having considered the points made on the Secretary of  State's
    behalf and on the applicant's behalf with regard to the first ground, I
    consider that the Secretary of State has discharged the burden of proof
    and has rebutted the "innocent explanation" provided by the  applicant.
    It is in my view clearly relevant that it is accepted  that  the  voice
    recordings, which are properly identified by serial  numbers,  are  not
    the voice of the applicant, and I do not find credible the  explanation
    given for the dramatic improvement that appeared between  the  time  of
    the October test and the November test, bearing in mind the significant
    incentive the applicant had to obtain a  pass  so  as  to  be  able  to
    succeed in his visa application. Clearly, he had something to gain from
    being dishonest: i.e. the visa that  he  hoped  to  secure.  In  cross-
    examination, though his evidence was reasonably consistent, he raised a
    point about complaining to Alpha that he had not made in his  statement
    or elsewhere, and  his  academic  achievements,  bearing  in  mind  the
    previous failure, are not such that is was unnecessary or illogical for
    him to have cheated. In that regard I see no materiality  to  the  fact
    that he seems to have been recorded as having an invalid result for the
    Alpha test. The fact that cheating had not assisted  him  in  the  past
    would not be a good reason not  to  try  cheating  again  in  my  view.
    Otherwise there is nothing adverse known about his character, there  is
    nothing adverse to the cultural environment in which  he  operated  and
    bearing in mind how long it is since he took the test, my assessment of
    his  English  proficiency,  which  is  clearly  good  now,  is  of   no
    materiality I think in relation to what it would  have  been  in  2011.
    Bringing these matters together, I  consider,  as  I  say,  that  on  a
    balance of probabilities the innocent explanation is to be rejected and
    as a consequence, that ground of appeal fails.

37. The second ground concerns  whether  or  not  the  Secretary  of  State
    properly exercised her discretion. Ms  Barnes  argued  that  there  was
    nothing in the decision letter to suggest that the Secretary  of  State
    thought her finding of deception  compelled  revocation  of  indefinite
    leave to remain and there was no need to state explicitly that she  was
    exercising discretion but as she argued, the factors that  were  raised
    subsequently go to an Article 8 claim and the Secretary  of  State  has
    made  it  clear  from  the  start  that  that  would  be  given  proper
    consideration in due course.

38. As against that, Mr Malik argues  that  section  76  contains  a  clear
    discretion, and that it is clear from authorities such as  Ukus  [2012]
    UKUT 00307 (IAC)  and  Yaseen  [2020]  EWCA  Civ  157  that  where  the
    respondent has a discretion as here the failure to conduct a  balancing
    exercise will render the  decision  subsequent  to  that  unlawful.  He
    argued that there was no basis for contending as Ms Barnes did that the
    Secretary of State had exercised discretion, given the  clear  language
    of the decision letter, the use of deception was determinative  and  no
    balancing exercise had been  carried  out.  He  also  referred  to  the
    respondent's policy, which made it  clear  that  discretion  is  to  be
    exercised in cases including those where deception had  been  found  to
    exist. Nor was there any merit to the fact that the Secretary of  State
    had agreed to look at Article 8 as that could not be adequate or as  an
    alternative remedy to revocation of indefinite leave to remain.  If  an
    Article 8 claim was  successful  the  applicant  would  be  granted  30
    months' leave, and there was also the point made at paragraph 26(h)  of
    Mr Malik's skeleton as to the hostile consequences the applicant  would
    face following revocation of  indefinite  leave  to  remain  until  any
    future grant of limited leave to remain was made.

39. I see force in the applicant's points  in  this  regard.  There  is  no
    indication in the decision letter and it could not be implied  into  it
    that discretion was exercised in this case as the  statutory  provision
    clearly mandates as indeed does the  respondent's  policy.  The  offer,
    vague at  best  in  the  decision  letter  and  more  clearly  set  out
    subsequently, of an Article 8 claim being considered, does not,  as  Mr
    Malik  argued,  in  any  sense  provide  a  realistic  alternative   in
    circumstances where indefinite leave to remain has been revoked. In  my
    view, there was a clear failure  on  the  part  of  the  respondent  to
    exercise discretion in this case and as a consequence, the decision  is
    unlawful in that regard.

40. The third ground is an allegation of procedural  unfairness.  Mr  Malik
    cited what had been said in Bank Mellat v HM Treasury  [2013]  UKSC  39
    requiring a person who foreseeably would be significantly detrimentally
    affected by  the  exercise  of  a  statutory  power  to  be  given  the
    opportunity to make representations unless either this is forbidden  in
    the statute in question or the circumstances in which the power  is  to
    be exercised would render it impossible, impractical or pointless.  The
    applicant was given no notice of the  Secretary  of  State's  decision.
    Nor, Mr Malik argued, could it be suggested  that  the  opportunity  to
    make submissions arising after the service of  the  decision  would  be
    enough to meet the public law obligations of the  Secretary  of  State.
    Here he referred to what  was  said  in  Sinfield  v  London  Transport
    Executive [1970] Ch 550, considering the  value  of  the  right  to  be
    consulted.

41. Ms Barnes relied on what was said in R v SSHD, ex parte Doody [1994]  1
    AC 631, concluding that fairness will very often require that a  person
    who may be adversely affected by the decision will have an  opportunity
    to make representations on his own behalf either before the decision is
    taken with a view to producing a  favourable  result  or  after  it  is
    taken, with a view to procuring its  modification  or  both.  She  also
    argued that this reasoning was supported by what had been said  by  the
    High Court in Islam [2017] EWHC 3614 (Admin) at. paragraphs 14  to  17.
    She argued that Bank Mellat was to be distinguished as  it  involved  a
    draconian measure against the bank in question. Even  if  the  Tribunal
    concluded there was procedural unfairness,  it  was  not  material  and
    judicial review is discretionary and relief should be  refused  as  the
    applicant now had  the  opportunity  to  provide  full  representations
    including in evidence, so he was in at least as good a position  as  if
    he had been given full notice.

42. Mr Malik argued that the decision was effectually governed by what  had
    been said by the Court of Appeal in Balajigari  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  673,
    which meant that Islam was no longer  good  law.  This  case  was  even
    stronger as it was one  where  indefinite  leave  to  remain  had  been
    revoked rather than it being a case of  unfairness  in  respect  of  an
    application for indefinite leave to remain[pic]

43. Again, I agree with the applicant's arguments in this regard.  It  does
    not seem to me that the procedural unfairness involved in the  decision
    not having been adumbrated in advance and the applicant  thereby  being
    denied the opportunity to make representations, can be said to be saved
    by the subsequent opportunities including the giving of evidence  at  a
    hearing. Balajigari is a more specific context for consideration of the
    relevant issues than the more general guidance in Doody which of course
    it applied. As a consequence, it seems to me that this ground  is  made
    out.

44. I therefore refuse the application in respect of ground 1 but  I  allow
    it in respect of grounds 2 and 3. I should be grateful if  the  parties
    can agree a form of order, and I  will  address  their  submissions  on
    costs  and  any  other  matters   at   the   handing   down   of   this
    decision[pic]~~~~





JR6

                                                                 JR/818/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                  The Queen on the application of Arif Mir
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Z  Malik  and  Mr  A  Rehman,  instructed  by
Lawfare  Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Ms N Barnes,  instructed
by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  at  a
remote hearing at Field House, London on 2 September 2020.

Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

(1)  For the reasons set out in the judgment,  I  order  that  the  judicial
review application be granted.

Order

        1) The claim for judicial review is granted.
        2) The Respondent's decision of 28 October 2015, as upheld on 24
           November 2015, is quashed.
        3) The Respondent shall pay 50% of the Applicant's reasonable
           costs, to be assessed if not agreed.
        4) The Respondent shall file and serve any application for
           permission to appeal, if so advised, within 7 days of the date
           of this Order, and any such application shall be determined on
           the papers.
           As regards (3) above, the key issue in the case  was  the  TOEIC
           issue, and the most appropriate reflection of  the  significance
           of that issue to the claim as a whole is properly  reflected  in
           the order made as to costs.



                           David Allen
           Signed:      [pic]

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


           Dated: 13th October 2020







Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 13/10/2020
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
----------
Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

