
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/912/2020   |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |MOHAMMAD SALEEM                              |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |and                                          |              |
|              |THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME          |              |
|              |DEPARTMENT                                   |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

HAVING considered all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  Mr.  D  Hayes,
Solicitor Advocate, on behalf of Deo Volente Solicitors, for  the  applicant
and Mr. Z Malik of counsel, instructed by the Government  Legal  Department,
for the respondent at a hearing held at Field House on 6 January 2021.

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The application for judicial review is granted.


    2) The decision of the respondent dated 3 February 2020 is quashed.


    3) The respondent is to pay the applicant's  reasonable  costs  in  this
       matter, to be subject to detailed assessment if not agreed.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated:       5 February 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):

Solicitors:
Ref  No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

                                    [pic]
                                                        Case No: JR/912/2020
In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                                 Field House
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                             5 February 2021

                                   Before
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN
                 ___________________________________________


                                   Between

                                   REGINA

                            On the application of
                               MOHAMMAD SALEEM
                                                                   Applicant
                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
              _________________________________________________


    Daniel Hayes (instructed by Deo Volente Solicitors) for the Applicant
     Zane Malik (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the
                                 Respondent

                        Hearing date: 6 January 2021

                            ____________________

                                  JUDGMENT
                            ____________________


Judge O'Callaghan:

Introduction

 1. In this judicial review application, the applicant seeks  to  establish
    that the respondent failed to follow her published policy guidance when
    revoking his indefinite leave to remain and, further, failed to provide
    adequate reasons when deciding to revoke. The respondent's decision  is
    dated 3 February 2020.

 2. The respondent says that she lawfully abided  by  her  policy  guidance
    when exercising her discretion to  revoke  the  applicant's  indefinite
    leave to remain, which the applicant accepts he secured  consequent  to
    the use of deception, and provided adequate reasons for her decision.

 3. Permission to apply for judicial review was granted by UTJ Allen at  an
    oral permission hearing held on 8 July 2020.

The Hearing

 4. The hearing was a Skype for  Business  video  conference  hearing  held
    during the Covid-19 pandemic. I was present  in  the  hearing  room  at
    Field House. The hearing room and the building were open to the public.
    The hearing and its start time were listed in the  daily  list.  I  was
    addressed by the representatives in exactly the same manner  as  if  we
    were together in the hearing room.  The  applicant  and  his  solicitor
    accessed the hearing remotely. I am satisfied: that this constituted  a
    hearing in open  court;  that  the  open  justice  principle  has  been
    secured; that no party has been prejudiced; and that, insofar as  there
    has been any restriction on a right or interest,  it  is  justified  as
    necessary and proportionate.

Legal Framework

 5. The Immigration Rules ('the Rules') provide for a foreign  national  to
    secure indefinite leave to remain on  the  ground  of  long  residence:
    paragraph 276C, with reference to paragraph 276B. At the material  time
    in 2011, when the applicant applied for and secured indefinite leave to
    remain under this Rule,  the  relevant  provisions  of  paragraph  276B
    detailed:

         '276B. The requirements to be met by an  applicant  for  indefinite
         leave to remain on the ground  of  long  residence  in  the  United
         Kingdom are that:


         (i) ...


             (b)  he has had at least 14 years continuous residence in  the
                 United Kingdom, excluding any period spent in  the  United
                 Kingdom  following  service  of  notice  of  liability  to
                 removal or notice of  a  decision  to  remove  by  way  of
                 directions under paragraphs 8 to 10A,  or  12  to  14,  of
                 Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act 1971 or  section  10  of
                 the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, or  of  a  notice  of
                 intention to deport him from the United Kingdom, ...


         (ii)   having regard to the public interest there  are  no  reasons
             why it would be undesirable for  him  to  be  given  indefinite
             leave to remain on the ground of long  residence,  taking  into
             account his:


             ...


             (c)    personal   history,   including   character,   conduct,
                 associations and employment record;


             ... '

 6. Paragraph 276B was amended from 9 July 2012 to remove reference to  the
    14-year rule. Such amendment is not material to this claim.

 7. The statutory power enjoyed by  the  respondent  to  revoke  indefinite
    leave  to  remain  is  granted  by  section  76  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act'). The material part  in
    this matter is:

         '76 ...


         (2) The Secretary of State may revoke a person's  indefinite  leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if -


             (a) the leave was obtained by deception.


              ...'

Respondent's Policy Guidance

 8. The respondent's relevant policy guidance instruction is 'Revocation of
    Indefinite Leave' Version 4.0 (19 October 2015), ('the  policy')  which
    details at section 1.1:

         'This guidance explains the circumstances when the Home Office  may
         consider revoking a person's indefinite leave to enter or remain in
         the United Kingdom.'

 9. The parties each rely upon several paragraphs of the policy. I  observe
    that the policy intention behind revocation is  identified  at  section
    1.3:

         'The  underlying  policy  objective  when  considering  revoking  a
         person's indefinite leave to remain is to:


         . enable action to be taken against foreign national offenders who
           cannot be deported only because of the  UK's  obligations  under
           the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  or   the   Refugee
           Convention;


         . ensure that war criminals  and  perpetrators  of  other  serious
           crimes cannot avoid the consequences  of  their  actions  simply
           because they were granted indefinite leave at some point in  the
           past;


         . instill public confidence in the immigration system by  ensuring
           any abuse is tackled and dealt with accordingly.

10. Section 3.2 addresses 'deception cases' and details, inter alia:

         'Section 76(2) gives the Secretary of State the power to  revoke  a
         person's indefinite leave to enter or remain  in  the  UK  where  a
         person has obtained indefinite leave to enter or remain in  the  UK
         by deception.


         Section 10(1) of the 1999 Act  provides  for  the  removal  of  the
         person who requires leave to enter  or  remain  does  not  have  it
         [possibly as a result of Section 76(2) action].


         Deception has the same meaning as in paragraph 6 of the Immigration
         Rules. This means making false representations or submitting  false
         documents (whether or not material to the application), or  failing
         to disclose material facts.


         ...'

11. Section 4 is  concerned  with  'reasons  for  not  revoking  Indefinite
    Leave'. Relevant to this claim are section 4.1 and 4.3:

         '4.1 Passage of Time


         Length of time spent in the UK may  constitute  a  reason  for  not
         revoking indefinite leave. It would only be relevant to cases under
         section 76(2) and 76(3). For cases under section  76(1)  length  of
         time spent in the UK will not constitute a  bar  to  revocation  of
         indefinite  leave   because   it,   and   any   other   Article   8
         considerations, will have  been  taken  into  account  in  deciding
         whether the person should be deported.


         What is of more relevance is the length of  time  that  has  passed
         since the incident(s) which is/are causing the review of a person's
         continuing entitlement to indefinite leave.


         For example, indefinite leave would not normally be  revoked  where
         the deception question or where the person's travel to  their  home
         country occurred more than  five  years  ago.  Each  case  must  be
         considered on its merits. The longer the person has been in the  UK
         or, more crucially, the more time it has been since  the  incident,
         the less likely it will be appropriate to revoke ILR.'


         ...


         4.3 Previously Overlooked or Considered


         Indefinite leave should not normally be revoked where the decision-
         maker had the information available in either previously overlooked
         it, could reasonably have been expected to act on it all considered
         it and granted anyway.


         Where the decision-maker had the power/authority to grant leave and
         did so in error and if there was no deception by the applicant,  it
         will not normally be appropriate to revoke the indefinite leave  to
         remain or enter.'

12. Section 6 of the policy guidance is  concerned  with  the  process  for
    referring and considering cases. Section  6.2.2.  addresses  'deception
    cases':

         'A person whose leave was obtained  by  deception  will  have  this
         revoked under Section 76(2) and will, unless  any  other  leave  is
         granted, be liable to removal under section 10(1). In such cases  a
         person should normally be removed from the UK.


         Examples where removal  may  not  be  appropriate,  but  revocation
         should still be pursued include - but are not limited to - where  a
         person has:


             i. been granted leave as a  refugee  and  it  is  subsequently
                established that they are not the nationality that  claimed
                to be.


            ii. been  granted  leave  on  the  basis  of  marriage  and  it
                subsequently established that the marriage was  a  sham  or
                that the letter of support was forged or the spouse is  not
                a British citizen/ settled in the UK or the person had  not
                disclosed that the marriage had already ended in divorce.


           iii. used different or multiple identities.


            iv.  submitted  forged  documents  such  as  bank   statements,
                employment references.


             v. failed to declare  that  they  have  criminal  convictions,
                including those outside of the UK particularly where  these
                would have arguably led  to  a  different  outcome  on  the
                application.


            vi. failed to declare that  they  have  been  involved  in  war
                crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide; or


           vii. failed to declare that they are a member or supporter of  a
                proscribed organisation.

The Facts

13. The applicant is a  national  of  Pakistan.  For  the  purpose  of  his
    application for indefinite leave to remain on the basis of 14-year long
    residency, he asserted his name to be 'Mohammad Saleem'. He stated that
    he arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely in May 1997 and remained
    here unlawfully until his application dated 24 June 2011.

14. By means of his SET(O) application form he asserted, inter alia:

         'Q.6.1.  When did you (the main applicant) first enter the UK? This
                 refers to the date of your first entry into the UK  at  the
                 beginning of the period of stay in which  this  application
                 is based.


         A.6.1.   14 May 1997


         Q.6.2.   Since then have you had any absences from the UK? if  yes,
                 give the date you left and  returned  to  the  UK  and  the
                 reason for any  absence  in  the  spaces  below.  List  all
                 absences however short and in date order...


         A.6.2.   [Ticked] No'

15. As evidence of  his  long  residency  in  this  country  the  applicant
    provided a variety  of  information  dating  from  1997  to  2011.  The
    respondent considered that the applicant had provided  substantial  and
    extensive evidence to demonstrate that he had resided in  this  country
    for 14 years and a decision was made to grant him indefinite  leave  to
    remain under paragraph 276C of the Rules, with reference  to  paragraph
    276B, on 12 September 2011.

16. The applicant applied to the respondent on 26 November 2012 to  have  a
    no time limit endorsement of indefinite leave to remain placed onto his
    Pakistani passport, the latter having been issued to him on 7  November
    2012. This application was granted on 9 January 2013.

17.  On  28  June  2016,  the  applicant  applied  to  the  respondent  for
    naturalisation to become a British citizen. The application was refused
    by a decision dated 29 September 2016 as the respondent considered that
    the applicant did not qualify  under  the  good  character  requirement
    consequent to having worked illegally in this country.

18. On 16 December 2016, the applicant's wife submitted an entry  clearance
    application to  join  her  husband  in  this  country.  Linked  to  the
    application were those made by the applicant's three minor children who
    were born in 2001, 2003 and  2013.  The  applicant  was  named  as  the
    sponsor in all four applications.

19. The applicant was interviewed by telephone on 23 March  2017  where  he
    confirmed that he married his  wife  in  Pakistan  in  April  2000.  He
    accepted that he had travelled to Pakistan in 2000 and 2003.

20.  Having  considered  her  records  the  respondent  identified  that  a
    Pakistani national named 'Mohammed Saleem' with the same date of  birth
    as the applicant had arrived at Heathrow airport on 7 February 1998 and
    was given 'temporary visitor admission' for six months.

21. Her records further identified that a 'Muhammad Saleem' with  the  same
    date of birth as the applicant applied in Pakistan for a  student  visa
    in August 2001 and entry clearance was granted on 9 October  2001.  The
    date of 'Muhammad Saleem's' entry into this country is unknown but on 1
    October 2002 he submitted an in-time application for leave to remain as
    a student and this application was granted on the same day  with  leave
    expiring on 26 February 2004. Later an in-time work  permit  employment
    application was made and before a decision was  made  upon  it  by  the
    respondent a subsequent application was made for leave to remain  as  a
    student. The latter application  was  rejected  on  23  March  2004.  A
    further application for leave to remain as a student was made on 6  May
    2004 but refused by the respondent on 30 June 2004  with  no  attendant
    right of appeal. The work permit application was  refused  on  26  July
    2005 and no in-country right of appeal was filed.

22. The respondent decided to revoke the applicant's  indefinite  leave  to
    remain status by a decision dated 3 September 2019.

23. The applicant served upon the respondent a detailed pre-action protocol
    letter  dated  16  September  2019  observing,  inter  alia,  that  the
    respondent had:

         '... failed to consider or apply, adequately or  at  all,  her  own
         policy guidance entitled 'Revocation of Indefinite  Leave'  Version
         4.0  dated  19  October  2015,  prior  to  revoking  the   proposed
         applicant's Indefinite Leave to Remain'.

24. By means of this letter,  the  applicant  accepted  that  he  had  used
    deception in his application for indefinite leave  to  remain  in  June
    2011 by asserting that he had continuously resided in this country  for
    14-years, when the true position was  that  he  had  left  the  country
    during such time. He disputed the contention that he had arrived in the
    United Kingdom on 7 February 1998 in the  name  of  'Mohammed  Saleem'.
    Rather, he accepted that he had  been  granted  entry  clearance  as  a
    student in the name of 'Muhammad Saleem' in  2001  and  had  his  leave
    varied to leave to remain as a  student  following  an  application  in
    October 2002. He confirmed that he subsequently used the name 'Mohammed
    Saleem' in correspondence with the respondent  as  this  was  the  name
    recorded by a GP and he had consequently adopted it. He  denied  having
    made subsequent applications to the respondent in 2004, stating that he
    had lost his passport earlier that year.

25. The pre-action protocol letter further detailed, inter alia:

         'The proposed Applicant, a national of Pakistan, arrived  into  the
         United Kingdom on 17 May 1997. By application dated 3  August  2001
         the proposed Applicant applied for entry  clearance  to  enter  the
         United Kingdom as a student under the name of Muhammad Saleem. This
         was issued on 9 October 2001 and was valid until 9 October 2002.  A
         further application for leave to remain as a student was  submitted
         on 1 October 2002 and was granted until 26 February 2004.


         In 2004, the proposed Applicant lost  his  passport.  The  proposed
         Applicant disputes that he made any further applications for  leave
         to remain following the last grant of leave to remain in 2004 until
         the last application dated 24 June 2011.'


         ...


         'The reasons for refusal letter finds that the  proposed  Applicant
         used deception in his application for Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
         dated 24 June 2011 on the basis that:


             i) he had previously claimed  to  have  lived  in  the  United
                Kingdom continuously for 14 years despite having  left  the
                United Kingdom during this time ...


            ii) the proposed Applicant did not enter the UK on 14 May  1997
                as he had claimed in the course of his application and that
                he had in fact entered the UK on 7 February 1998 ...


           iii) the proposed applicant had used the  name  Mohammad  Saleem
                after his entry into the UK and therefore the true  factual
                background had not been apparent to the proposed Respondent
                before this  time  as  he  had  originally  used  the  name
                Muhammad Saleem.


         The proposed Applicant does not dispute (I) above but does  dispute
         (ii) above. In respect of iii) above, his name had been recorded as
         Mohammad by his GP on registration in 1997 shortly after he arrived
         in the UK and he then used this spelling following this  time  from
         [sic].'

26. By a decision dated 3 February 2020 the respondent observed:

         'The decision to revoke your client's Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
         has now been fully reconsidered. All the points  raised  have  been
         noted and fully considered. The decision to  revoke  your  client's
         Indefinite Leave to Remain has been maintained.'

27. Before me the parties agreed that this constituted a new  decision  and
    Mr. Hayes withdrew a submission  advanced  by  means  of  his  skeleton
    argument that the February 2020  decision  was  supplementary  to  that
    taken in September 2019.

28. The respondent confirmed in her decision that she  had  considered  the
    relevant policy:

         'A full and thorough consideration of your case was made  before  a
         decision to revoke your Indefinite Leave to Remain was  made.  Your
         full immigration history, background and circumstances have been re-
         assessed  and  reconsidered  alongside  the  relevant  policy.  The
         reasons for the decision to revoke have been  fully  explained  and
         clarified. You  have  deliberately  provided  a  false  immigration
         history in order to benefit from a grant  of  Indefinite  Leave  to
         Remain using the 14-year route, despite you knowing  that  you  are
         not entitled to such a grant. You were knowingly untruthful on your
         Indefinite Leave to Remain application, stating that  you  had  not
         left the UK in the 14-year qualifying period. Taking  into  account
         the deception you have practised and  continue  to  practice  until
         such time as the Home Office discovered this  dishonesty  in  2017,
         revocation is considered wholly appropriate.'


29. Section 4.3 of the policy was addressed:

         'It is noted that the time of the refusal  of  your  Naturalisation
         application information  regarding  your  deception  was,  at  that
         point, unknown to the Home Office.  As  previously  detailed,  your
         deception came to light on 23-Mar-2017 during an interview with  an
         Entry Clearance Assistant as part of the process  for  your  wife's
         application for a 33-month Spouse visa. As such when the  decision-
         maker refused your application  to  be  naturalised  as  a  British
         citizen, they would not have been aware of your  deception.  Taking
         this into account it is considered that section 4.3 of  the  policy
         guidance does not apply in your case.'


30. I observe that the respondent's consideration of  section  4.3  in  her
    February 2020 decision is not challenged by the applicant.


The Parties' Contentions

31. The applicant's grounds of claim, which were not drafted by Mr.  Hayes,
    advance two complaints:

         i) The respondent failed to 'consider and apply' her policy; and


        ii) The respondent failed to provide adequate reasons when  deciding
            to revoke the applicant's indefinite leave to remain.

Application of policy

32. As to ground one,  the  challenge  is  drafted  in  general  terms  and
    identifies a 'complete failure' to adequately apply relevant  guidance.
    The core of this complaint is succinctly identified at para. 31 of  the
    grounds as:

         '31. The Applicant made his application  for  Indefinite  Leave  to
            Remain on 24 June 2011; namely 8 years and 3 months  before  the
            revocation decision was made. [Section] 4.1 of the  guidance  as
            outlined above is specifically relevant to this factual  matrix.
            Failure to consider this policy guidance renders the  revocation
            decision as both unreasonable and unlawful.'

33. Mr. Hayes observed by means of his skeleton argument  that  some  eight
    years and three months had passed from the date of the application  for
    indefinite leave to remain in June 2011 and  the  initial  decision  to
    revoke in September 2019. This was said  to  be  beyond  the  five-year
    period identified by the policy as being a  factual  basis  upon  which
    such leave would not normally be revoked.

34. He submitted that there is no support for an  interpretation  that  the
    'passage of time' in section 4.1 begins from the date of  discovery  of
    any deception, or that cases of continuing  deception  fall  under  the
    policy. As section 4.1 does not mention or  import  'knowledge  of  the
    incident' for discovery as the starting point for the  calculation  for
    the passage of time, the policy was said to  have  provided  a  closely
    defined restriction on the period of time applicable to the section.

35. It was contended  on  behalf  of  the  applicant  that  the  'incident'
    identified in section 4.1 must properly  be  linked  to  the  statutory
    power established by section 76 of the 2002 Act and so crystallises  at
    the point deception was used in the application. Consequently, the time
    when the respondent  first  has  knowledge  of  deception  is  not  the
    'incident' for the purpose of section 4.1.

36. As for the requirement that 'each case must be considered  on  its  own
    merits' Mr. Hayes submitted that  reliance  upon  previous  immigration
    history prior to the use of deception would  defeat  the  crystallising
    effect of section 76(2)(a) of the 2002 Act. Further,  adverse  reliance
    upon subsequent applications  dependent  upon  the  status  secured  by
    deception would nullify the purpose of the policy.

37. As to 'merits' it was contended that to the extent that this is a wider
    consideration than 'time', it is limited in scope by section 6.2.2. Mr.
    Hayes asserted that  it  must  include  any  positive  factors  and  be
    proportionate. He observed that in this matter there  was  a  delay  of
    over 27 months between the respondent becoming aware of  the  deception
    and her decision of September 2019.

38. As to ground 2, the applicant  advanced  a  general  reasons  challenge
    identifying factual errors and a failure to provide adequate  reasoning
    as to why the applicant did not benefit from the policy.

39. The respondent's position as to ground 1 was  that  whilst  passage  of
    time from the deception to revocation may  be  relevant,  such  passage
    does not mean that she could not revoke  indefinite  leave  to  remain.
    Each case was required to be considered on its own  merits.  The  words
    used  within  section  4.1  provided  maximum   flexibility   for   the
    respondent, consistent with  the  policy  consideration  identified  at
    section 1.3: 'instill public confidence in the  immigration  system  by
    ensuring any abuse is tackled and dealt with accordingly'.

40. As to the reasons provided within the decision, the respondent observed
    that the applicant's challenge was advanced on  reasonableness  grounds
    and submitted that the conclusion reached was  reasonable  in  all  the
    circumstances. The decision identified clear reasons for the revocation
    consequent to a comprehensive assessment. Cogent reasons were  provided
    as to why when considering the particular circumstances of this  matter
    the length of time from the deception did not outweigh  the  particular
    abuse of the system utilised by the applicant in this matter.  Reliance
    could, as part of the assessment, properly be placed upon the delay  in
    the respondent becoming aware of the use of deception.

41. The parties agreed at the hearing that the Tribunal was not invited  to
    consider precedent fact evidence in relation to the  deception  itself,
    the applicant accepting that he had used deception  in  his  June  2011
    application.

Reasoning and Conclusions

42. Lord Dyson confirmed in R. (Lumba) v. Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 12, [2012] 1 AC 245, at [34], that the  rule  of
    law  calls  for  a  transparent  statement  by  the  executive  of  the
    circumstances in which broad statutory criteria will be exercised.  The
    policy applicable in this matter fulfils that role in  respect  of  the
    respondent's statutory powers under section 76 of the 2002 Act.

43. When considering policy guidance, it should be interpreted  objectively
    in accordance with the language used, read  as  always  in  its  proper
    context: Tesco Stores Limited v. Dundee City Council [2012] UKSC 13, at
    [18], per Lord Reed.

44. The Tribunal is ultimately the final arbiter of what a policy means: R.
    (on the application of Kambadzi) v. Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2011] UKSC 23, [2011] 1 W.L.R.  1299,  at  [36],  per  Lord
    Hope. I am therefore to determine the meaning for myself and not to ask
    whether the meaning the respondent has attributed to it is reasonable.

45. Lord Wilson confirmed in R. (Lee-Hirons)  v.  Secretary  of  State  for
    Justice [2016] UKSC 46, [2017] A.C. 52, at [17]:

         '17. Where a public authority  issues  a  statement  of  policy  in
             relation to the exercise of one of its functions, a  member  of
             the  public  to  whom  it  ostensibly  applies,  such  as  this
             appellant, has a right at common law to require  the  authority
             to apply the policy, so long as it is lawful, to himself unless
             there are good reasons for the authority not to do so: Mandalia
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  UKSC  59,
             [2015] 1 WLR 4546, paras 29-31.'

46. The reference by Lord Wilson to his judgment in Mandalia  v.  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2015] UKSC 59, [2015] 1  W.L.R.  4546
    encompasses his confirmation at [29]:

         '29.  So  the  applicant's  right  to  the  determination  of   his
             application in accordance with policy is now generally taken to
             flow from a principle, no doubt  related  to  the  doctrine  of
             legitimate  expectation  but  free-standing,  which  was   best
             articulated by Laws LJ in R. (Nadarajah) v. Secretary of  State
             for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1363, as follows:


             "68 ... Where a public  authority  has  issued  a  promise  or
                 adopted a practice which represents how it proposes to act
                 in a given area, the  law  will  require  the  promise  or
                 practice to be honoured unless there is good reason not to
                 do so. What is the principle behind this  proposition?  It
                 is not far to seek. It is said to be grounded in fairness,
                 and no doubt in general terms that is so. I  would  prefer
                 to express it rather more broadly as a requirement of good
                 administration, by  which  public  bodies  ought  to  deal
                 straightforwardly and consistently with the public."'

47. Section 4.1 constitutes one part of a section within  the  policy  that
    details the discretion  enjoyed  by  the  respondent  not  to  exercise
    statutory power under section 76 of the 2002 Act. It  is  focused  upon
    'passage of time', a term enjoying its natural meaning as  the  process
    by which time passes. That discretion is enjoyed by the  respondent  in
    the application of section 4.1 is confirmed by reference to 'length  of
    time spent  in  the  UK  may  constitute  a  reason  for  not  revoking
    indefinite leave'. The use of the  word  'may'  in  policy  imports  an
    element of  discretion,  reflecting  different  possible  outcomes,  by
    contrast with  mandatory  words,  and  in  this  matter  constitutes  a
    reliable indication of the creation of a discretion.

48. Section 4.1 expressly recognises  that  the  passage  of  time  may  be
    relevant  in  consideration  of  revocation  in   circumstances   where
    indefinite leave to remain was obtained by deception or, alternatively,
    where someone, or someone of whom s/he is a dependant, ceases to  be  a
    refugee consequent to the undertaking of identified acts: section 76(2)
    and 76(3).

49. The second paragraph of section 4.1 links the passage of time with 'the
    incident(s) which is/are causing the review of  a  person's  continuing
    entitlement to indefinite  leave'.  The  grounds  of  claim  sought  to
    establish the passage of time as running in this matter from  the  date
    the applicant made his application for indefinite leave to remain on 24
    June 2011. At the hearing, Mr. Hayes  adopted  an  approach  consistent
    with the intention of the policy, namely that the passage of  time  ran
    from the date the deception was used to obtain leave, namely  the  date
    of decision. For the purpose of section 76(2)  of  the  2002  Act,  the
    operative factor is that leave was  obtained  by  deception.  The  only
    legitimate interpretation of 'incident(s)' is that it is concerned with
    the circumstances identified by section 76  as  constituting  a  lawful
    basis for revocation, as they are  the  only  grounds  upon  which  the
    respondent can lawfully review a  person's  continuing  entitlement  to
    indefinite leave. Time in this matter therefore runs from the date  the
    deception became operative upon the decision-making process, namely the
    date indefinite leave to remain was granted on 12 September 2011.

50. Further, time does not run from the date the respondent became aware of
    the deception or could reasonably have been  expected  to  have  become
    aware. If the policy intended this to be the case, it would  have  been
    clearly  identified  as  an   exception   to   the   requirement   that
    consideration be given to the passage of time that has passed since the
    incident(s) causing the review.

51. A focus of submissions  in  this  matter  was  upon  the  reference  in
    paragraph 3 of section 4.1 that indefinite leave would not normally  be
    revoked where the deception in question occurred more than  five  years
    ago. At the hearing Mr. Hayes initially sought for a close  restriction
    on permissible circumstances in which the discretion to revoke could be
    exercised where deception was used more than five years previously. His
    focus was upon the relevance of the  reference  to  'length  of  time',
    asserting that the policy expressly provided for only two factors to be
    attributed weight: 'the longer the person has been in the UK', and 'the
    more time it has been since the incident, the less likely  it  will  be
    appropriate to revoke ILR'.

52. This suggested scope of  the  policy  would  establish  a  very  narrow
    permissible exercise of discretion as  to  fundamentally  diminish  its
    worth. The exercise of discretion  permitted  under  section  4.1  must
    properly be read in context, and this requires consideration of section
    1.3. I observe that section 4.1 confirms  that  length  of  time  'may'
    constitute  a  reason  for  not  revoking  indefinite  leave.  This  is
    consistent with a decision-maker  being  required  to  consider  public
    confidence in the immigration system when considering the  exercise  of
    the statutory power under section 76. It is not  consistent  with  such
    requirement that a decision-maker enjoy only a narrow  discretion.  The
    words 'not normally'  have  been  used  thereby  establishing  that  it
    remains open to a decision-maker to  adopt  a  different  course  in  a
    particular case so long as the substance of the  discretion  concerning
    passage of time is  taken  into  account  and  lawful  reasons  for  so
    deciding are provided. I observe that the factors relied  upon  by  Mr.
    Hayes are themselves simply examples to be considered when  considering
    a case 'on its merits'. They are not identified  to  be  an  exhaustive
    list of relevant considerations, as to be otherwise would  undermine  a
    merits-based assessment. It is consistent  with  the  policy  intention
    identified at section 1.3 that a decision-maker enjoy maximum  possible
    discretion, permitting the placing into the assessment the installation
    of public confidence in the immigration system. To read the  policy  in
    the manner advanced by the applicant would clearly be inconsistent with
    the stated policy intention.

53. Such an approach is consistent with the clear  instruction  in  section
    4.1 that each case must be considered on its  own  merits.  During  his
    submissions Mr. Hayes  accepted  that  it  would  be  permissible  when
    considering passage of time for a decision-maker to take  into  account
    post-incident events such as marriage to a British citizen or the birth
    of a British citizen child. He further  accepted  that  the  respondent
    could properly  consider  adverse  behaviour  including  the  continued
    reliance  upon  act(s)  of   deception   in   respect   of   subsequent
    applications, such as seeking naturalisation, though he  observed  that
    such acts should not be  considered  determinative  nor  undermine  the
    underlying rationale of the passage of time policy. I conclude that Mr.
    Hayes was correct to accept that a decision-maker is not excluded  from
    consideration of any  relevant  information.  Evaluative  relevance  is
    primarily  a  matter  for  the  decision-maker  upon  considering   the
    particular  facts  arising,  being  informed  by  the  policy  and  its
    intention. Consequently, a decision-maker is not excluded from  placing
    weight upon previous immigration history prior to the use of deception,
    or post-deception acts. However, such events must be  relevant  to  the
    exercise of power under section 76 of the 2002 Act and the  application
    of the discretion as to passage of time.

54. As an alternative,  Mr.  Hayes  submitted  by  means  of  his  skeleton
    argument that to the extent the merits consideration could be wider, it
    was limited by section 6.2.2. During his submissions, Mr. Hayes  placed
    limited weight on this argument, ultimately accepting that the examples
    provided were specifically concerned with  instances  where  revocation
    'should still be pursued', though 'removal  may  not  be  appropriate'.
    This is not said to be the position in this matter. In any event,  even
    when considered at its highest, the submission failed  to  engage  with
    the examples provided in this section not being an exhaustive list,  as
    confirmed by the clear confirmation that the examples  'include  -  but
    are not limited to'.

55. The last sentence of section 4.1's third paragraph  confirms  that  the
    longer a person has been in the United Kingdom or, more crucially,  the
    more time it has been since the incident(s), the less likely it will be
    appropriate to revoke indefinite leave.  This  is  consistent  with  an
    implicit acknowledgement that  article  8  rights  may  be  established
    through lawful residence in this country. However, such passage of time
    is not determinative of the approach to be  adopted  by  the  decision-
    maker, as tentatively suggested by the  applicant  in  his  grounds  of
    claim. Rather, it is a recognition of the fact sensitive  consideration
    that must be undertaken by a decision-maker and is not to  be  divorced
    from the context in which the policy is to be applied.

56. Whilst the passage of time from the respondent becoming  aware  of  the
    deception to the consideration of the exercise of power  under  section
    76 may on the facts of a particular case be a  relevant  factor  to  be
    weighed, it is not determinative. Its relevance  is  to  be  considered
    consequent to the underlying rationale of the passage of  time  policy,
    and its recognition through the five-year threshold that though it  may
    take some time for deception to be identified by the respondent a point
    may be reached where discretion can properly be exercised in favour  of
    a foreign national in relation to section 76 of the 2002 Act.

57. To the extent that ground 1 seeks to narrow the respondent's discretion
    when applying section 4.1 of the policy this ground must be refused.

Reasoning

58. The grounds of claim have been drafted in an idiosyncratic manner  that
    fails to clearly delineate the respective grounds relied upon.  Rather,
    the two grounds identified at para. 31 above are drawn from the section
    of the grounds inappropriately entitled  'Submissions'.  Consequent  to
    the imprecise  nature  of  the  drafting,  elements  of  the  complaint
    advanced as to ground  1  flow  more  appropriately  into  the  reasons
    challenge advanced by ground 2.

59. Whilst the interpretation of policy is ultimately a  question  for  the
    Tribunal, its application to particular  facts  is  a  matter  for  the
    judgement of the respondent, susceptible to challenge on  irrationality
    grounds. Therefore, consideration as to whether  the  respondent  acted
    within the limits of her discretion when applying  the  policy  to  the
    relevant facts is one to which a Wednesbury  test  applies.  I  observe
    that it is entirely for a decision-maker to attribute to  the  relevant
    considerations such weight as they think fit, and the Tribunal will not
    interfere unless they acted unreasonably: Tesco Stores Ltd v. Secretary
    of State for the Environment [1995] 1 WLR 559, 764 G-H, per Lord Keith.
    The weight to be ascribed to any  particular  factor  or  criterion  in
    reaching a decision remains quintessentially a matter for the decision-
    maker.

60. As to adequacy of reasons Lord Brown confirmed in South Buckinghamshire
    District Council v. Porter (No. 2) [2004] UKHL 33, [2004] 1  WLR  1953,
    at [36]:

         'The reasoning must not give rise to  a  substantial  doubt  as  to
         whether  the  decision-maker  erred  in   law,   for   example   by
         misunderstanding some  relevant  policy  or  some  other  important
         matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational  decision  on  relevant
         grounds. But such adverse inference will not readily be drawn.  The
         reasons need refer only to the main issues in the dispute,  not  to
         every material consideration.'

61. Public law  standards  require  that  there  be  proper,  adequate  and
    intelligible reasoning when discretion is exercised, such standards  to
    be applied to the context and circumstances of the individual case.

62. The Tribunal confirmed in R. (SA) v. Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2015] UKUT 536 (IAC), at [11]-[16], that in general  it  is
    right that the assessment of fact is left  to  the  public  authorities
    which are primarily suited to gathering and assessing evidence.

63. Mr. Malik candidly accepted at the outset of his submissions  that  the
    February decision letter was not a perfect  example  of  its  type  but
    observed that the true question was whether in  the  circumstances  the
    decision-maker had come to  a  reasonable  conclusion  when  exercising
    discretion, and he submitted that in this matter only a positive answer
    could be given to the question.

64. The decision letter can be broken down into two distinct sections.  The
    first details the relevant background. It identifies the  substance  of
    the deception exercised in the June 2011 application,  the  arrival  of
    'Mohammed Saleem' at Heathrow airport in February 1998 and the  various
    applications made by 'Muhammad Saleem'.   This  section  also  provides
    relevant detail as to the telephone interview held with  the  applicant
    on 23 March 2017.

65. The second section is entitled 're-consideration'  and  initially  sets
    out the provisions of section 76 of the 2002 Act. It then proceeds over
    three pages to address concerns raised by the  applicant  in  his  pre-
    action protocol letter of September 2019.

66. I observe that the applicant has not challenged  the  consideration  of
    his matter under section 4.3 of the policy.  There  can  be  no  proper
    challenge to the fact  that  the  decision-maker  was  unaware  of  the
    deception in September 2011, because knowledge of the two absences from
    this country  during  the  14-year  period  would  have  precluded  the
    applicant from securing indefinite leave to remain  under  the  14-year
    continuous residence rule.

67. The applicant complains that  the  respondent  relied  upon  continuing
    deception  in  subsequent  applications  consequent  to  the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain when deciding to exercise her discretion not
    to give him the benefit of the  passage  of  time  under  section  4.1.
    However, whilst I have detailed above that the  continued  use/reliance
    upon previous use of deception in applications can be  relied  upon  by
    the  respondent  if  relevant  to  her  exercise  of  discretion,  upon
    carefully considering the decision the respondent's assessment  of  the
    refusal of the  naturalisation  application  is  identifiable  only  in
    respect of her consideration under section 4.3 of the policy.  Contrary
    to the applicant's  concern  this  point  did  not  form  part  of  the
    respondent's consideration under section 4.1.

68. By means of her decision the respondent  observed  that  the  applicant
    deliberately used fraud in his  application  for  indefinite  leave  to
    remain and that such leave would not have been granted if the decision-
    maker had been aware as to the true circumstances. The statutory  power
    provided by means of section 76 of the 2002 was therefore available  to
    the respondent.

69. The respondent proceeded to provide reasons as to why the applicant did
    not enjoy the benefit of section 4.1.:

         'As previously explained all sections of Reasons for  not  Revoking
         Indefinite Leave to Remain have been taken into account  and  fully
         weighed against the facts of your case. In  support  of  your  case
         your representatives have referred to Section 4 of  the  Revocation
         of Indefinite Leave policy, in particular Section  4.1  Passage  of
         Time which states:


           '... What if of more relevance is the length of  time  that  has
           passed since the incident(s) which is/are causing the review  of
           a person's  continuing  entitlement  to  indefinite  leave.  For
           example, indefinite leave would not normally  be  revoked  where
           the deception in question or where the person's travel to  their
           home country occurred more than five years ago.'


         'In your case, it is clear that the deception of  your  immigration
         history only came  to  light  on  23-Mar-2017  when,  by  your  own
         admission, you admitted to having travelled outside of the  UK  and
         back to  Pakistan  during  the  qualifying  period  to  be  granted
         Indefinite Leave to Remain under the 14-year route. It was at  this
         point in time your deception became known to the Home Office.'


70. The respondent reasoned, inter alia:

         'Whilst it is clear your deception has  been  utilised  in  the  UK
         since your entry in 1998 of [sic] which amounts  to  21  years,  11
         months, the Home Office has only been aware of your deception for 2
         years, 10 months.'


71. Addressing the respondent's reliance upon the utilisation of  deception
    in this country as having occurred over a period of  21  years,  it  is
    appropriate to observe that the  decision  identifies  the  applicant's
    residence in this country having commenced in 1998:

         'It is not accepted that you  arrived  in  May  1997  as  you  have
         claimed, as there is evidence taken from Home Office systems  which
         shows that your first arrival into the UK was 07-Feb-1998 based  on
         this your residency has been taken from this time. It is  therefore
         acknowledged that although you have resided in the UK for  over  21
         years, this was not continuously prior to your grant of  Indefinite
         Leave to Remain. had the decision-maker been aware of the deception
         then it is considered that she would not have met the  requirements
         to be granted Indefinite Leave to Remain and  would  therefore  not
         have been in a position to accrue the length of residence as it  is
         now.'

72. Such reasoning does not engage with  the  respondent's  own  conclusion
    earlier in the decision letter that the applicant subsequently  secured
    entry clearance in 2001, and so on the basis of such conclusion he  had
    resided in this country for at  most  18  years  by  the  time  of  the
    February decision. In any event, the actual length of residence in this
    country is irrelevant on the facts of  this  case  as  nowhere  in  the
    decision is it stated that the applicant's entry into this  country  in
    1998 was secured through deception. Nor is it said that  the  grant  of
    entry clearance in 2001 and subsequent grant of leave to remain in 2002
    were secured by deception. The conclusion by the  respondent  that  the
    applicant had utilised deception since his entry in 1998, and so for  a
    period of 21 years and 11 months, is irrational.

73. Further, having determined that the applicant  had  utilised  deception
    for over 21 years the decision adopts a simple, and erroneous, approach
    of relying upon the length of time the respondent has been aware of the
    deceit when assessing the application of section 4.1.:

         'Therefore, it is considered that the amount of time that you  have
         practiced deception does not fall in scope  of  section  4.1  as  a
         reason to not pursue revocation and far  outweighs  the  length  of
         time the Home Office has been aware of your deception.'

74. Such approach is wholly irrational.  As  detailed  above,  section  4.1
    permits the favourable exercise of discretion  in  circumstances  where
    the deception in question occurred more than five years  ago.  If  time
    were to run from the  respondent  having  knowledge  of  the  deception
    section 4.1 would be expected to say so in  clear  terms.  As  observed
    above, it does not. Rather, the true starting point is  the  length  of
    time from the incident which causes the review of a person's continuing
    entitlement to indefinite  leave.  The  policy  does  not  establish  a
    mathematical exercise in identifying whether the  length  of  time  the
    deception was practiced is much longer than the time the deception  has
    been known to the respondent. Consequently,  the  approach  adopted  is
    irrational and unsustainable.

75. The February decision provides no other reasons concerning the exercise
    of discretion in respect of passage of time. In the circumstances,  the
    reasoning provided is unsustainable and erroneous in law.

Relief

76. In all of the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  decision  leaves
    room for genuine, as opposed to forensic, doubt as to the basis of  the
    decision-maker's reasoning and I find that the applicant has  satisfied
    the Tribunal that he has genuinely been substantially prejudiced by the
    failure of the respondent to provide an adequately reasoned decision. I
    conclude that the respondent unlawfully  failed  to  reach  a  rational
    decision on the  exercise  of  her  discretion  under  relevant  policy
    guidance.

77. As this is a matter where the defect in reasons goes to  the  heart  of
    the justification of the decision, and so  undermines  it  validity,  I
    find that the applicant is successful in respect of ground  2  and  the
    only appropriate remedy is to quash the decision and for the matter  to
    return to the respondent to make a fresh decision  as  to  whether  she
    wishes to revoke the applicant's earlier grant of indefinite  leave  to
    remain under section 76 of the 2002 Act.

78. In conclusion, I allow the  application  for  judicial  review  on  the
    reasons challenge advanced by ground 2.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 5 February 2021

