

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                 JR/970/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                                26 June 2017

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE pitt

                                   Between

                                  Fakir [E]

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Z Malik, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr E Metcalfe, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


    JUDGE pitt:


 1. This is a judicial review of a decision dated  27  October  2015  which
    revoked Mr [E]'s indefinite leave to remain. The  respondent  made  the
    decision under Section 76(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 on the basis that Mr [E] had obtained his indefinite leave  to
    remain by deception.  The alleged deception here is the use of a  proxy
    in ETS TOEIC speaking tests taken on 22  February  2012  and  21  March
    2012.


    Background


 2. Mr [E] came to the UK from Pakistan  on  5  February  2004  with  entry
    clearance as a student valid until  31  August  2005.   His  leave  was
    extended by the Secretary of State on a number of occasions  and  until
    10 April 2015.


 3. Mr [E] took a TOEIC test in early 2012. It is common  ground  that  the
    listening and reading components were taken on  7  February  2012.  The
    speaking and writing components were taken on 22 February  2012  but  a
    score of only 140 obtained  in  the  speaking  element.  The  test  was
    retaken on 21 March 2012 and the  necessary  scores  obtained  on  that
    occasion. The TOEIC  certificate  from  those  tests  was  used  in  an
    application for leave on 31 March 2012 and Mr [E] was  granted  further
    leave until 10 April 2015.


 4. Mr [E] then made an application for indefinite leave to  remain  on  14
    February 2014. The Secretary of State granted him indefinite  leave  to
    remain on 22 May 2014.


 5. Mr Elashi proceeded to make an  application  for  naturalisation  as  a
    British citizen on 22 May 2015.  On 27 October 2015 the respondent made
    the decision of 27 October 2015 now under challenge. The naturalisation
    application was refused on 21 January 2016.


 6. The respondent's decision of 27 October 2015 states as follows:


         "REASONS FOR REVOCATION


         A decision has been made to revoke your leave so  that  it  expires
         with immediate effect.  The following reasons are given:


         In your  application  dated  31-Mar-2012,  you  submitted  a  TOEIC
         certificate from Educational Testing Service ("ETS").


         ETS has a record of your speaking test.  Using  voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the SSHD that there was significant evidence  to  conclude  that
         your certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
         test taker.  Your scores from the tests taken on 22-Feb-2012 &  21-
         Mar-2012 at New College of Finance have now been cancelled by  ETS.
         On the basis of the information provided to her by ETS, the SSHD is
         satisfied that your certificate was fraudulently obtained and  that
         you used deception in your application of 31-Mar-2012.


         At the time you took your test, as you will have  been  aware,  ETS
         was an approved provider of Secure English  Language  Tests  (SELT)
         for UK immigration purposes.  Its role as a SELT  provider  was  to
         help ensure that those who seek to enter or remain  in  the  United
         Kingdom are able to speak  English.   As  recognised  in  paragraph
         117B(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  those
         who can speak English are less of a burden  on  taxpayers  and  are
         better able to integrate into society.


         As stated above it is now known that you submitted  a  fraudulently
         obtained TOEIC certificate for  your  application  of  31-Mar-2012.
         You were then subsequently granted Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  on
         the 22-May-2014 on the basis of your length  of  residence  in  the
         United Kingdom for which you would not have qualified for had  your
         deception been known.  Your complicity in the fraud contributed  to
         an  extremely  serious  attack  on  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls and the public interest more generally.


         Accordingly, I am satisfied that you  have  employed  deception  to
         gain leave in the United Kingdom  through  the  submission  of  the
         TOEIC certificate in your T4 - General Student -  LTR  application.
         This means that  you  have  not  gained  your  leave  lawfully  and
         therefore you have fail (sic) to accrued (sic) 10 years  of  lawful
         residence to qualify for the grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain on
         22-May-2014.  As you have used deception in gaining your indefinite
         leave to remain it has been revoked  under  Section  76(2)  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002."


 7. The applicant sent a pre-action protocol letter  on  3  November  2015.
    The respondent issued a pre-action protocol  response  on  24  November
    2015 maintaining  the  original  decision.   On  27  January  2016  the
    applicant issued these proceedings.


 8. On 25 April 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam granted  permission  to
    appeal on the papers.  On 10  June  2016  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen
    issued a direction staying the matter behind the outcome of  the  cases
    in MA (ETS -  TOEIC  testing)  [2016]  UKUT  00450  (IAC),  R  (On  the
    application of Saha and Another) v SSHD (Secretary of State's  duty  of
    candour)  [2017]  UKUT  00017  (IAC)  and  R  (On  the  application  of
    Mohibullah) v SSHD (TOEIC - ETS - judicial  review  principles)  [2016]
    UKUT 00561 (IAC). After the conclusion of those cases, the  application
    was listed for hearing.


    The Law


 9. Section 76(2) of the Nationality and Immigration  Act  2002  states  as
    follows:


         (2)  The Secretary of State may revoke a person's indefinite  leave
             to enter or remain in the United Kingdom if -


             (a)  the leave was obtained by deception.


10. It was common ground that, following R (Abbas) v SSHD [2017] 4 WLR  34,
    the question of whether the applicant obtained his indefinite leave  by
    deception, and therefore the lawfulness of the s.76 decision, is one of
    precedent fact for the Upper Tribunal to decide.


11. As there was agreement on  this  point,  the  other  grounds  were  not
    pursued; see paragraph 9 of Mr Malik's skeleton argument, confirmed  at
    the hearing.


12. R (Abbas) v SSHD sets  out  at  [7]  the  following  principles  to  be
    followed in precedent fact cases concerning an allegation of deception:




         "7.


         ...


         ? The legal burden of proving that the Claimant used deception lies
         on the Secretary of State  albeit  that  there  is  a  three  stage
         process. The  Secretary  of  State  first  must  adduce  sufficient
         evidence to raise the issue of  fraud.  The  Claimant  has  then  a
         burden of raising  an  innocent  explanation  which  satisfies  the
         minimum level of plausibility. If that burden  is  discharged,  the
         Secretary of State must establish on  a  balance  of  probabilities
         that this innocent explanation is to be rejected.


         ? There is one civil standard of proof (which is the standard to be
         applied). The seriousness of the consequences does  not  require  a
         different standard of proof but flexibility in its application will
         involve consideration of the strength and quality of the  evidence.
         The more serious the consequence, the stronger must be the evidence
         adduced for the necessary standard to be reached. "


13.  There  was  agreement  before  me  that  the  respondent  had  adduced
    sufficient evidence to meet the initial evidential  burden  of  showing
    fraud. She relies on  information  from  ETS  showing  the  applicant's
    speaking and writing components taken on 22 February 2012 and 21  March
    2012 as invalid. Further, the applicant does not dispute that the  tape
    recording provided for the test registered as having been taken by  him
    has someone else's voice on it.


14. The oral evidence and submissions at the hearing focussed mainly on the
    balancing of the respondent's evidence against that of  the  appellant,
    the third stage identified in R (Abbas) v SSHD  but  as  there  was  no
    express concession from the respondent as to whether Mr [E] had met the
    burden of providing an innocent  explanation,  I  should  address  that
    stage also.  His case is that there must have been a "mix-up" either at
    the college where he took the test or in the ETS systems.  He  provided
    witness statements asserting that he took the  speaking  tests  himself
    and provided some details of what happened on the days that he attended
    the test centres. He provided evidence of  his  English  language  test
    results and educational  achievements  in  the  medium  of  English  to
    support his assertion that he had  no  need  to  use  a  proxy.  I  was
    satisfied that he had put forward materials  that  met  the  evidential
    burden on him to provide an innocent explanation.


15. When assessing whether the respondent has  established  that  Mr  [E]'s
    innocent explanation should be rejected I applied the civil standard of
    proof, in line with the comments of  Mr  Justice  William  Davis  in  R
    (Abbas) v SSHD, set out above. As indicated in a number of the reported
    ETS cases, for example SM & Qadir at [102], and R  (Abbas)  v  SSHD  at
    [26], each decision on whether someone used a proxy in a TOEIC speaking
    test is fact sensitive.


16. When making my decision I bore  in  mind  the  factors  with  potential
    relevance to the legal burden set out in [69] of SM and  Qadir  v  SSHD
    (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC),  approved  by
    the Court of Appeal in Majumder and Qadir v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  1167
    at [18]. The factors set out at [69] of SM and Qadir are as follows:


         "We turn thus to address the legal burden. We  accept  Mr  Dunlop's
         submission that in considering an allegation of dishonesty in  this
         context the relevant factors to be weighed include (inexhaustively,
         we would add) what the  person  accused  has  to  gain  from  being
         dishonest; what he has to lose from being dishonest; what is  known
         about his character; and the culture or  environment  in  which  he
         operated.  Mr Dunlop  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  three
         further considerations, namely how the Appellants  performed  under
         cross examination,  whether  the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  their
         English language  proficiency  is  commensurate  with  their  TOEIC
         scores and whether their academic achievements are such that it was
         unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated."


    The Evidence


17. At the outset of the hearing, both parties were in agreement  that  all
    of the evidence on which both side sought to rely on should be admitted
    regardless of any non-compliance with directions. Given that  agreement
    I extended time for all materials provided  by  the  beginning  of  the
    hearing to be admitted.


18. During  cross-examination,  Mr  Metcalfe  sought  to  admit  a  further
    document concerning the weather conditions on the  days  of  the  tests
    that Mr [E] maintained he took  the  TOEIC  tests.  Where  a  party  is
    entitled to know the case against him at the outset and in light of the
    generous approach to late evidence already taken at the outset  of  the
    hearing, I declined to admit this last piece of evidence.


19. The applicant relied upon:

         Skeleton argument
         Bundle comprising 320 pages set out in Tab A -Tab D
         Bundle of authorities comprising 256 pages set out in Tab A-Tab L
         Second witness statement dated 12 June 2017 of Mr [E]
         Letter from ETS (undated)
         Emails from May 2015 between the applicant and ETS and lawyers  for
         ETS
         Affidavit of Usman Ali dated 13 June 2017
         Companies  House  entry  for  London  School  of   Management   and
         Development Studies and New College of Finance

20. The respondent relied upon:

         Amended detailed grounds of defence
         Skeleton Argument
         Voice Recording from ETS test taken by applicant
         Witness statement of Rebecca Collings
         Witness statement of Rebecca Collings dated 23 June 2014
         Witness statement of Peter Millington dated 23 June 2014
         Report of Professor Peter French dated 20 April 2016
         Report of Witness statement of Richard Heighway  of  Kroll  Ontrack
         dated 26 July 2016
         Witness statement of Rachel Green dated 27 March 2017
         Witness statement of Mr Richard Green dated 23 June 2017

    Discussion


21. The respondent's evidence on the wide scale use of fraud in  ETS  cases
    has become more cogent as time has passed. The President of  the  Upper
    Tribunal recognised this in MA at [11]-[18] and [45]-[46]. The  witness
    statements and oral evidence of Ms  Collings  and  Mr  Millington  from
    2014, found wanting in SM  &  Qadir  and  the  concerns  raised  by  Dr
    Harrison's evidence in that case have been addressed in later cases  by
    the evidence of Professor French and Mr Heighway of  Kroll  Associates,
    amongst others.


22. The respondent relies here on the report of Professor French  dated  20
    April 2016 at [214] of the bundle as highly probative evidence  on  the
    reliability  of  the  information  on  invalid  or  questionable  tests
    provided by ETS. The respondent also relies on the report dated 26 July
    2016 of Richard  Heighway  of  Kroll  Associates  which  addressed  the
    applicant's case that his real speaking test had not been submitted and
    someone else's voice used. This is addressed specifically and  rejected
    as at all likely at 2.1.4 b and 244 of Mr Heighway's report.


23. Also, the information provided by Rachel Green in her witness statement
    of 27 March 2017 indicates that all of the speaking tests taken at  the
    applicant's test centre on 22 February 2012  and  21  March  2012  were
    either invalid or  questionable  suggesting,  in  the  context  of  the
    respondent's other documents, very strong evidence of TOEIC  corruption
    at that test centre.


24. The respondent's case on the  robustness  of  the  ETS  information  is
    undoubtedly strong but does not provide  a  complete  answer,  however.
    Each case must be considered on the full merits and, as  identified  at
    [47] of  MA  identified  at  [47]  some  uncertainties  remain  in  the
    respondent's generic evidence.


25. There is a specific, potentially problematic feature  in  the  material
    relied upon by the respondent here. The invalid test outcomes  set  out
    in the respondent's evidence and commented on in the  statement  of  Ms
    Green refer to Mr [E] taking the tests on 22 February 2012 and 21 March
    2012 at  New  College  of  Finance  (NCF).  It  was  conceded  for  the
    respondent that the applicant had never studied  at  NCF  and  did  not
    apply to take a TOEIC test there but had taken the test via the  London
    School of Management and Development Studies (LSMDS).


26. This discrepancy is addressed in the witness statement  dated  23  June
    2017 of Mr Richard Green. He states as follows:


         "5. This witness statement is  intended  to  assist  the  Court  in
         response to the suggestion by Mr [E]  that  the  London  School  of
         Management and Development might not  be  the  same  place  as  the
         college recorded as New College of Finance on the look up tool.


         ...


         7. This ETS look-up tool illustrates the information  available  to
         the SSHD at the point that a decision was made on  the  Applicant's
         case. This is the information that was provided to the SSHD by ETS,
         which contains date regarding  whether  the  test  was  valid,  the
         certificate number, the Applicant's date  of  birth  and  the  test
         centre.


         8. In order to rationalise the data for ease of  use,  specifically
         when counting the number of  educational  establishments  involved,
         PRAU made an amendment to the date that  was  used  in  the  lookup
         tool. This amendment was based on a  response  given  by  ETS  that
         confirmed that two establishments were the same  despite  the  data
         showing them with different names.


         9. The original data provided by ETS came in two forms. One  was  a
         list of test taken at a specific  test  centre,  the  other  was  a
         summary count of tests taken at each test centre. The summary  data
         had LSMDS listed, but the individual test data had two test centres
         included: LSMDS and New College of Finance. The count of individual
         tests, for both centres, was equal to  the  summary  date  for  New
         College of Finance. Therefore, I asked ETS whether New  College  of
         Finance/LSMDS is the same place or two separate centres. I annex an
         extract of the spreadsheet as Exhibit 1.


         10. I was told that "Yes they are the same place."  On  that  basis
         and to ensure that  any  aggregation  undertaken  would  match  the
         summaries as provided by ETS, a manual amendment, changing LSMDS to
         New College of Finance, was made to the live data that sits  behind
         the  Lookup  Tool  and  was  which  was  routinely  used  for   our
         statistical analysis, such as the Transparency Publication.


         11. The original data, as provided by  ETS  was  archived,  but  is
         readily available to caseworkers if necessary and the amendment was
         noted by PRAU in case of any dispute.


         12. In this case, it is right to indicate in the look up tool  that
         both tests were taken at New College of Finance.


         13. Since the information from ETS was provided, the SSHD  has  run
         analytical tests on the results of those tests  at  specified  test
         centres, on  specified  dates.  The  information  relating  to  the
         Applicant is taken from New College of Finance 22 February 2012 and
         21 March 2012, explained by my colleague Rachel Green."


27. The core of the intended explanation appeared to me to be at  [9]-[10].
    I did not find them easy to follow. Mr Metcalfe summarised  them  thus:
    both LSMDS and NCF, accepted to be different  organisations,  used  the
    same test centre to run TOEIC tests. The respondent  put  together  the
    information from the  tests  taken  by  student  registered  with  both
    colleges and identified them only as "NCF". This was for administrative
    reasons arising from the way in which the information had been provided
    by ETS. I accept,  just,  that  this  is  the  purport  of  Mr  Green's
    statement and it provides a credible explanation for the  reference  to
    NCS on the applicant's invalid test result.


28. The applicant seeks to argue that this  matter  seriously  weakens  the
    respondent's case. I do not find that to be so. Firstly, the  applicant
    accepts that he took the speaking and writing  components  on  the  two
    days identified in the Lookup Tool and that the  invalid  outcomes  are
    logged against his name and date of birth  and  that  the  registration
    number is consistent through all the entries. The name of the  college,
    NCF rather than LSMDS, is the only anomaly. The evidence from Companies
    House shows the two organisations being separate which is not  disputed
    and those entries cannot be of assistance regarding the  issue  of  the
    same test centre being used by both.


29. There were other aspects of the evidence which reduced the weight  that
    could be placed on Mr [E]'s  evidence.   His  first  witness  statement
    dated 22 January 2016 contained  significantly  less  detail  that  the
    later statement dated 12 June 2017. He could  have  provided  the  same
    level of detail earlier but did not. It is not  credible  that  he  was
    able to remember so much more in 2017 than a year and half  earlier  in
    2016.


30. Mr [E] maintains that he had no need to use a proxy as his  English  is
    more than good enough. At [33] of  the  bundle  he  provided  an  IELTS
    certification from 2003 with a score  of  5.0.  He  went  on  to  study
    successfully in the UK, obtaining an MBA degree from the University  of
    Wales in 2013; see [39].  I heard him give his evidence in English and,
    albeit 5 years after the test was taken, he is clearly a very competent
    English speaker.


31. I accept that it is likely that in  2012  Mr  [E]  spoke  English  well
    enough to pass the TOEIC speaking test. As  at  [57]  of  MA,  however,
    there are reasons why a competent  English  speaker  may  still  use  a
    proxy, including: "... lack of confidence, fear  of  failure,  lack  of
    time and commitment and contempt for the immigration  system."  Mr  [E]
    accepts that he did need some form of English language test urgently as
    his leave was expiring on 31 March 2012. He indicates that he could not
    find anywhere to take an  IELTS  test  and  so  went  to  LSMDS  as  an
    alternative as they had test dates available.


32. Mr [E] also relied on the affidavit of Usman Ali affirmed  in  Pakistan
    on 13 June 2017 but I did not find that much could turn on  this.   The
    statement is relatively brief and vague. Mr Ali  does  not  attempt  to
    attest that the applicant did attend and take the speaking and  writing
    tests on 22 February 2012 and 21 March 2012. That would  appear  to  be
    beyond his first-hand knowledge. He was not present for the evidence to
    be tested.


33. It is my conclusion that there is clear evidence of TOEIC corruption at
    the test centre used by LSMDS and NCF on the days that Mr [E] maintains
    he attended for the speaking test. Against that strong evidence, the Mr
    [E]'s case is undermined by  the  absence  of  any  meaningful  details
    capable of demonstrating that he took the tests himself  in  his  first
    witness statement of 22 January 2016 and the more detailed  information
    he did provide being in the main available  to  him  from  the  day  he
    undisputedly did attend the test centre, for the listening and  reading
    test component.


34. For these reasons, I found that the respondent had met the legal burden
    of showing that the applicant used a proxy in the ETS tests taken on 22
    February 2012 and 21 March 2012. It follows that she acted lawfully  in
    finding that he obtained leave  by  deception  in  2012  and  that  the
    decision to revoke  indefinite  leave  to  remain  under  s.76  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 is lawful.


35. The application for judicial review is refused.


Appeal to Court of Appeal

36. There was no application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal  from  the  applicant.  I  am  required  to  consider  such   an
    application following Rule 44(4B)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008. I refuse permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal where the reasoning set out above is not show to  contain  legal
    error.


Costs

37. The applicant has not been successful, obtaining the remedy  he  sought
    and is to pay the respondent's reasonable costs, to be assessed if  not
    agreed.


Signed: [pic]                                Dated:  18 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).
