
                                    [pic]
                                                     Case No: JR/482/2021(V)
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                         15th September 2021
                                   Before:

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of
                      AA (by his litigation friend RA)
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         Ms R Chapman and Eva Doerr
               (instructed by Bindmans LLP), for the Applicant

                               Mr S P G Murray
     (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the Respondent

                        Hearing date: 3rd August 2021

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               J U D G M E N T

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


Anonymity Direction

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) we make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  Applicant  or
any  family  members.   This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
parties.  Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to
contempt of court proceedings.

Judge Jackson:

 1. This has been a remote hearing which has not been objected  to  by  the
    parties.  The form of remote hearing was by video, using  Teams.  There
    were no audio or visual difficulties during the course of the  hearing.
    A face to face hearing was not held to  take  precautions  against  the
    spread of Covid-19 and as all issues  could  be  determined  by  remote
    means.   The  file  contained  the  papers  in  hard  copy,  with   two
    supplementary  documents  being  available  electronically  during  the
    course of the hearing.


 2. The Applicant challenges  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  26
    February 2021 to refuse to accept a take charge request ("TCR") made by
    the Republic of Greece  pursuant  to  Article  17.2  of  EU  Regulation
    604/2013 of 26 June 2013 establishing the criteria and  mechanisms  for
    determining the Member State responsible for examining  an  application
    for international protection lodged in one of the Member  States  by  a
    third-country  national  or  a  stateless  person  (the   "Dublin   III
    Regulation").

 3. The Applicant claims to be a stateless Bidoon from Kuwait with  a  date
    of birth of 15 April 2003, who sought to join his  elder  brother  (the
    "Sponsor")  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  have  his  asylum  claim
    determined here.  The Sponsor lives  here  with  status  as  a  refugee
    together with his wife and another brother.  The  Applicant  claims  to
    have fled Kuwait in December 2019, arriving on the island of  Samos  in
    Greece on  or  around  12  December  2019  and  his  asylum  claim  was
    registered there on 15 June 2020 (although he was seen earlier  by  the
    authorities there) as an Iraqi national with  a  date  of  birth  of  1
    October 2000.  Following his asylum interview on 30 November 2020,  the
    Applicant's nationality has been  amended  to  show  his  claim  to  be
    stateless, but the Greek authorities have not accepted the  Applicant's
    claimed date of birth in 2003, a matter which remains in dispute.


 4. The TCR request was made under Article 17 of the Dublin III Regulation,
    which provides as follows:

       1. By way of derogation from Article 3(1),  each  Member  State  may
          decide to examine an  application  for  international  protection
          lodged with it by a third-country national or a stateless person,
          even if such examination is  not  its  responsibility  under  the
          criteria laid down in this Regulation. ...


       2. The Member  State  in  which  an  application  for  international
          protection is made and which  is  carrying  out  the  process  of
          determining the Member State responsible,  or  the  Member  State
          responsible, may, at any time before a first  decision  regarding
          the substance is taken, request  another  Member  State  to  take
          charge of an applicant in order  to  bring  together  any  family
          relations, on humanitarian grounds based in particular on  family
          or cultural considerations, even where that other Member State is
          not responsible under the criteria laid down in Articles 8 to  11
          and 16.  The persons concerned  must  express  their  consent  in
          writing.


          The request to take charge shall contain all the material in  the
          possession of the requesting Member State to allow the  requested
          Member State to assess the situation.


          The requested Member State shall carry out any  necessary  checks
          to examine the humanitarian grounds cited, and shall reply to the
          requesting Member State within  two  months  of  receipt  of  the
          request ...  A reply refusing the request shall state the reasons
          on which the refusal is based.

          Where  the  requested   Member   State   accepts   the   request,
          responsibility for examining the application shall be transferred
          to it.

 5. The Dublin III Regulation ceased to have effect in the  United  Kingdom
    on 1 January 2021 by virtue of regulation  54  and  paragraph  3(h)  of
    schedule 1  of  the  Immigration,  Nationality  and  Asylum  (EU  Exit)
    Regulations  2019;  albeit  paragraph  9  of  the  same  provided   for
    transitional provisions to allow considerations of  TCR  requests  made
    prior to 1 January 2021 which were still awaiting determination at that
    date.  It is important to note that the transitional provisions do  not
    make any provision for a new TCR request, request  for  reconsideration
    of or actual reconsideration of a refusal of a TCR request made  on  or
    after 1 January 2021.


 6. To determine this application for Judicial Review, it is  necessary  to
    consider in some detail the evidence that was before the Respondent  at
    the time of the decision, as well as evidence which is available to the
    Upper Tribunal in the course of this application for  Judicial  Review,
    which includes evidence which existed at the date of decision  but  was
    not before the Respondent and evidence which post-dates  the  decision.
    I set this out below,  including  the  detail  of  the  decision  under
    challenge and the Respondent's pre-action response.

Evidence before the Respondent at the date of decision

 7. In the decision letter dated 26 February 2021,  the  Respondent  states
    that the following evidence submitted alongside the TCR was  considered
    and/or is expressly referred to in the decision:
     - UK Sponsor's bank statement, his tenancy  agreement,  his  residence
       permit, his GBR passport.
     - Family photo.
     - The Applicant's Memorandum and Social Report dated 17 December 2020.
     - Sponsor's written consent dated 23 December 2020.
     - Extract from response from the Greek authorities  dated  28  January
       2021 as to the Applicant's age.
     - Completed form from the Sponsor dated 22 January 2021.
     - Money transfer receipts dated 19 October 2020, 11 December 2020,  28
       January 2021 and 26 August 2020.

 8. The decision letter includes multiple references to a family photo, but
    only one has been included with the  papers  in  this  application  for
    Judicial Review, which shows three individuals, in submissions said  to
    be the Sponsor, the Applicant and their sister  (whose  face  has  been
    blacked out).  There is no  further  identification  of  those  in  the
    photograph and no details as to when or where it was taken.


 9. In the written statement of Mr A Tomlinson dated 26 May 2021  and  made
    on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  paragraph   6   provides   additional
    confirmation of the documents and evidence available  to  the  decision
    maker at the time of the decision dated 26 February 2021 as follows:

         "6. To assess the relationship between  [the  Applicant]  and  [the
         Sponsor], the original decision maker would have had access to  all
         the documentation that was received with the TCR which had been  e-
         mailed by the Greek Authorities on 30 December 2020 (email and  TCR
         now produced  as  AT1).   That  being:  [the  Applicant's]  written
         consent (dated 23 December  2020  -  now  produced  as  AT20,  [the
         Sponsor's] written consent (dated 23/12/2020, which is at  page  19
         of R/B), the memorandum from the [Applicant's] Greek  lawyer  (page
         72 of the Applicant's bundle), [the Applicant's]  "Praksis"  social
         report dated 17/12/2020 which is at page 16 of R/B), a eurodac form
         for  [the  Applicant],  [the  Sponsor's]  bank   statements,   [the
         Sponsor's] tenancy agreement, a picture of [the Applicant], contact
         details for [the Sponsor], [the Sponsor's] residence  permit,  [the
         Sponsor's] ID card, a family photo, [the  Sponsor's]  statement  of
         evidence  form  relating  to  his  asylum  application,   a   birth
         certificate for HRA, a birth certificate for AA (dated 25/04/2019),
         [the Sponsor's] curriculum vitae, HA's residence permit,  and  HA's
         EDF energy account information."

10. The 'Memorandum' is a document  dated  21  December  2020,  written  by
    Romanos  Stivaktakis,  an  authorized  lawyer  in  Greece  who  is  the
    Applicant's legal representative there.  This  document  describes  the
    Applicant as a stateless Bidoon from Kuwait, of Arab ethnicity,  Muslim
    and an unaccompanied minor "registered to be born  on  01/10/2000,  but
    his real date of birth is the 15/04/2003" and due to his  statelessness
    he does not possess any document.  The Applicant's family in Kuwait was
    set out, together with confirmation that two of  his  brothers  arrived
    separately in the United Kingdom and have residence here as  a  refugee
    and on the basis of family reunification.  The Applicant did  not  have
    any contact with the Sponsor from when he left  Kuwait  in  2014  until
    after the Applicant had arrived in Greece in 2019.


11. The memorandum refers to the Applicant being falsely registered  as  an
    adult by the Greek authorities, despite his  declaration  of  his  real
    age.  There is reference to the Applicant having appealed the  decision
    of his age assessment because of  "gaps  and  deficiencies  during  the
    procedure in hospital and he is still waiting for the  response".   The
    author of the memorandum is the same author of the  grounds  of  appeal
    submitted to the Greek authorities in relation to the  age  assessment,
    but no further detail in  relation  to  this  is  set  out  within  the
    memorandum.

12. The memorandum sets out the Applicant's experiences in Kuwait, as  well
    as his poor living conditions  in  Greece,  with  the  Applicant  being
    identified as vulnerable as a victim of torture.  It is stated that the
    Applicant's  older  brother  in  the  United  Kingdom  has   sufficient
    resources to cover the Applicant's needs and is ready to do anything to
    take care of the Applicant, stating that: "Their will is  to  reconnect
    again with their brother, who really is in need of them to continue his
    life, as he is a  minor  person,  that  has  never  learnt  to  support
    himself".  The document goes on to state: "In this particular case, the
    person of concern is a minor, he has been living in a nomadic  way  for
    all of his life.  He has been always supported by his brother,  who  he
    considers as a parent. ... In fact, his family in the United Kingdom is
    capable of providing adequate care, with proven family relations.   The
    strong supportive network that  is  provided  in  the  United  Kingdom,
    creates ideal conditions for a  minor  like  [the  Applicant]  to  live
    properly and it is to his best interest to reunite with them."   Family
    reunification was considered to be imperative and in the best interests
    of the Applicant.


13. The memorandum lists the names  and  dates  of  births  of  two  family
    members who are recognised refugees (including the Sponsor) and  listed
    nine documents submitted in support; some, but not all  of  which  have
    been included  with  the  bundle  available  in  this  application  for
    Judicial  Review.   The  documents  include  the   interview   of   the
    Applicant's brother by the UK Home Office in 2016, in which  he  states
    his family status and attention  is  drawn  to  the  lack  of  official
    documents available as the family are stateless Bidoons; that there may
    be some discrepancy in names and surnames and specifically, question  8
    of the interview with the Home Office is highlighted  in  which  it  is
    said that the familial link  is  identified.   This  document  was  not
    available until during the course of the substantive hearing before me.
     As indicated in the memorandum, the Applicant's brother at question  8
    identifies his family in Kuwait, as: "Mum and dad,  four  brothers  and
    one sister, and my wife still in Kuwait".  None of the  family  members
    are identified by name nor by any other features such as age or date of
    birth.


14. The 'Social Report concerning A' dated 17 December 2020 is  written  by
    Theodoraki Elisavet, a care worker at Praksis, which I am  told  is  an
    NGO in Greece.  The report is written in such a way as  to  imply  that
    the author had interviewed the Applicant, but no details are set out as
    to what communication there had been with him  (or  anyone  else  about
    him, for example, it is unknown if there had been any contact with  the
    Sponsor) or on what basis the assessment and conclusions  contained  in
    the report are based.

15. In the Social Report, the Applicant is described as a stateless  Bidoon
    from Kuwait who entered Greece on 12 December 2019, whose date of birth
    is 15 April 2003 (falsely registered with birthdate of 1 October 2000).
     The report refers to support from the Sponsor in  Kuwait  after  their
    father's health deteriorated and provides a general description of life
    in Kuwait for the Applicant and his  family  as  well  as  difficulties
    there from authorities.  The report also describes conditions in Greece
    for the Applicant and states that he has not been given proper  support
    or evaluation by authorities there.  In conclusion, the  author  states
    that it is in the best interests of the Applicant to be  reunited  with
    the Sponsor in an environment with safety and services for  well-being,
    development and success.  The Sponsor is the only person identified  in
    Europe that can take this responsibility for the Applicant and there is
    an urgent need for reunification and support as the Applicant's stay in
    Samos is leading to a deterioration in his condition.

16. On 18 January 2021, the Respondent  contacted  the  London  Borough  of
    Brent as follows:

         "... No specific action is requested by  your  Local  Authority  at
         this time, however, should you  hold  any  evidence  to  assist  in
         verifying the claimed family link or possess any other  information
         that  you  believe  should  be  considered  when   assessing   this
         application please do forward this within  14  days.   Additionally
         should you possess alternative  contact  details  or  if  there  is
         another local authority who may have responsibility/an interest  in
         the case please advise us  as  soon  as  possible.    The  European
         Intake Unit will contact you further should it  be  satisfied  that
         the claimed family link has been demonstrated.


         At this point we will request completion of a Family Assessment  on
         the  UK  relative  which  will  assist  with  the  best   interests
         consideration and the decision on this application."


17. On 20 January 2021, a reply confirmed that neither  the  Applicant  nor
    the Sponsor were known to Brent Social Care so no evidence was held  to
    assist in  verifying  the  claimed  family  link,  nor  was  any  other
    information possessed that should  be  considered  when  assessing  the
    application.


18. The documents included  the  written  consent  form  completed  by  the
    Applicant for the purposes of the TCR which identified him as stateless
    with a date of birth of 1 October 2000.

Respondent's decision dated 26 February 2021

19. The decision letter sets out that a formal TCR has been  made  for  the
    Applicant, a Kuwaiti Bidoun born on 1 October 2000, who claims to  have
    a brother residing in the United Kingdom who he  wishes  to  join.   As
    above, the letter sets out the evidence that has been considered  which
    was submitted with the TCR and the evidence subsequently  available  to
    the decision maker following further inquiries.


20. In relation to the Applicant's age, the decision letter states that  an
    e-mail was sent the Greek authorities on 26 January 2021 to confirm his
    date of birth, to which a response was  received  on  28  January  2021
    stating: "the applicant's date of birth is  1/10/2000.   The  applicant
    mentioned in his registration that he was born  in  15/4/2003  instead,
    but then an age assessment took place and the  results  that  came  out
    stated that he was above 18 years old.  The lawyer of the applicant has
    made an appeal for the age assessment results but the decision is still
    pending until today."

21. This information was accepted by the  Respondent  without  any  further
    inquiry, it therefore being considered that the Applicant was born on 1
    October 2000 and was an adult at the time of the decision.

22. The decision letter then details further information  sought  from  the
    Sponsor in the United Kingdom on 18 January 2021, the  response  on  22
    January 2021 and further request for evidence to  be  submitted  on  26
    January 2021 which the Sponsor complied with  on  30  January  2021  by
    submitting money transfer receipts and a family photo.  The  Respondent
    did  not  accept  that  the  undertaking  letter  or  further  evidence
    confirmed the claimed familial link.

23. Before concluding that the  TCR  has  been  rejected,  the  substantive
    consideration of  the  additional  documents  and  application  was  as
    follows:

         "In addition to the other information  submitted  above,  you  have
         also provided a Social report.  It is noted in  the  Social  report
         that the Applicant  is  vulnerable  with  suicidal  tendencies  and
         thoughts.  However, the relations between the Applicant and the  UK
         Sponsor has not been verified and on the evidence  provided  it  is
         not clear how he is dependent on the assistance of the  UK  Sponsor
         or if indeed the UK Sponsor would be able to provide the  necessary
         care for the applicant if he was to be transferred to the UK.


         Nonetheless it is also considered that even if the relationship had
         been established it is not deemed that  the  circumstances  of  the
         case would lead to an exercise of discretion on the part of the UK.

         When  considering  whether  an  exercise  of  discretion  would  be
         appropriate consideration has been  given  to  the  below,  a  non-
         exhaustive list of relevant considerations;
           - Whether or not the family life existed in the country of origin
           -   Existence   of   other   family   members   in   country   of
             origin/elsewhere and level of contact
           - Strength of ties
           - Level of contact between the parties since time UK Sponsor left
             country of origin

         The money transfer receipts submitted by the UK Sponsor  have  been
         considered.  However, it is noted that the UK  Sponsor  arrived  in
         the UK in December 2015.  Hence, it is  concluded  the  four  money
         transfer receipts do not demonstrate that the UK Sponsor  has  been
         financially supporting the Applicant.  It is noted one of the money
         transfers took place two days after the UK Sponsor was  emailed  to
         request evidence of his link to the Applicant.

         As no further evidence has been offered by the UK  Sponsor  and  in
         line with the consideration of the  claimed  family  link  detailed
         above the familial connection has not been established and as  such
         the requirements of Article 17(2) have not been met."


Pre-action correspondence

24. On 30 March  2021,  a  pre-action  protocol  letter  was  sent  on  the
    Applicant's behalf seeking withdrawal of the decision dated 26 February
    2021 and acceptance of  the  TCR  from  Greece.   The  letter  set  out
    proposed grounds of challenge against the decision, the detail of which
    need not be set out within this decision.


25. The Respondent replied to the pre-action  correspondence  on  13  April
    2021, in which the relief sought was rejected.  Within the letter,  the
    Respondent confirms  that  following  a  review  of  all  the  evidence
    available, she was satisfied that the familial link between the Sponsor
    and the Applicant had been established.  This is explained  further  in
    the written statement of Mr A Tomlinson dated  26  May  2021  which  at
    paragraph 10 explains that when the file was  reviewed,  it  was  noted
    that the  Sponsor  had  made  a  statement  in  relation  to  a  family
    reunification request for another brother in which  the  Appellant  (as
    well as other family members) were named.  This information was held on
    the Sponsor's Home Office file and used to verify the familial link.  A
    copy of the statement and translation was provided  by  the  Respondent
    during the course of the substantive hearing before me.

26. In pre-action correspondence, the Respondent maintained  the  rejection
    of the application under Article 17.2 on the basis that  the  documents
    provided with the TCR were not sufficient to exercise  discretion.   On
    this point, the letter included the following:

         "... (ii) Home Office Guidance,  Dublin  III  Regulations  outlines
         that situations in which it is appropriate to  exercise  discretion
         under Article 17(2) are rare and occurs on exceptional  basis.  ...
         There must be present exceptional  circumstances  or  compassionate
         factors which justify the UK authorities to exercise discretion  in
         accepting responsibility for the claim, notwithstanding that the UK
         is not bound to  do  so  under  the  Dublin  III  Regulation.   The
         evidence provided (or received) must be  coherent,  verifiable  and
         detailed.  It is for the requesting  Dublin  State  to  demonstrate
         what the exceptional circumstances are.  The  SSHD  maintains  that
         the facts of this case do not lead to an  exercise  of  discretion.
         Whilst it is accepted that the degree of relationship between  your
         client and the UK sponsor would  not  automatically  preclude  them
         from the Dublin Regulation III it is not evidenced that there was a
         close relationship between the Claimant and  UK  Sponsor  and  that
         this relationship had existed prior to the application  date.   The
         SSHD maintains that this has  not  been  evidenced  fully  in  this
         case."

27.  In  the  pre-action  correspondence,  the  Respondent   gave   express
    consideration to the fact of the Applicant's  appeal  against  his  age
    assessment and stated that respect had  correctly  been  given  to  the
    Greek Authorities' age assessment pending the appeal.


28. In relation to the Respondent's investigative duty and Article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights, matters which were both challenged
    by the Applicant in pre-action correspondence, the Respondent stated:

         "... (iv) ... It is accepted that  the  SSHD's  investigative  duty
         does extend further than checking and verifying  information  which
         is why she conducted  her  own  evidence  gathering  exercise.   An
         undertaking letter was sent to the UK Sponsor and returned  to  the
         European Intake Unit on 22 January 2021.  On  26  January  2021  an
         email was sent to the UK Sponsor asking for  them  to  provide  any
         further information and evidence to support the case.  A  reply  to
         this email was received from the UK Sponsor  on  30  January  2021.
         The SSHD has  cross-checked  the  evidence  available  to  her  and
         established that the family link has been corroborated.   The  fact
         that the SSHD was unable to be satisfied Article 17.2 had been  met
         from the evidence gathered from this exercise does not lead to  the
         assumption that her investigations were inadequate ...  rather,  it
         simply illustrates that the criteria of Article 17.2 was not met."

         "...  (v)  Whilst  it  is  accepted  that  there  is   clearly   an
         intersection of Article 8 ECHR with the application of  the  Dublin
         Regulation III, in order to engage Article 8  ECHR  (or  Article  7
         CFR) there must be elements of dependency involving more  than  the
         'normal emotional ties' as outlined in Kugathas. ... Although it is
         accepted there may be some degree of emotional  ties,  and  natural
         concern between your client and the UK Sponsor, it has to be  taken
         into consideration the UK Sponsor has been residing in  the  United
         Kingdom since 2015, and although evidence of four  money  transfers
         have been provided dating back to September 2020, they only cover a
         very small timeframe.  The evidence does not demonstrate that  they
         have  been  in  contact  throughout  the  past  years,  or  to  any
         appreciable degree generally.  Further, these money transfers alone
         do not demonstrate that the claimant is dependent on the UK Sponsor
         involving more than 'normal emotional ties'.  ..."



Further evidence not before the Respondent  at  the  time  of  the  decision
under challenge

29. In  the  course  of  this  application  for  Judicial  Review,  further
    documents have been disclosed which existed at the time of the decision
    under challenge but were not submitted with the TCR or separately to it
    and were not before the decision maker at the  time  of  decision;  and
    additional documents which post-date the decision under challenge which
    are relied upon by the  Applicant.   These  are,  broadly  set  out  in
    chronological order, as follows:


30. An information note from the Greek authorities dated 13 May 2020  which
    confirms the Applicant is vulnerable as a person who has been subjected
    to torture, rape or other forms of psychological,  physical  or  sexual
    violence  for  the  requirements  of   reception   and   identification
    procedures.  The Applicant's nationality as declared  and  presumed  is
    listed as Iraqi and his date of birth is recorded as 1 October 2000.

31. A 'Lodging Application Form' dated 15  June  2020,  which  records  the
    Applicant as Iraqi/stateless, with Kuwait  as  the  country  of  former
    habitual residence and a date of birth of 01/10/2000 (15/4/2003).   The
    form states that the Applicant wishes to join his  brother  in  London;
    that he has two brothers there and his parents, one  sister  and  three
    brothers remain in Kuwait.

32. A decision  by  the  Greek  authorities  to  refer  the  Applicant  for
    establishment of juvenile status, dated 17 June  2020.   The  Applicant
    was identified therein as an Iraqi national with a date of birth of  10
    October 2000, but who stated in his registration form a date  of  birth
    of 15 April 2003; such that a  reference  was  made  to  Samos  General
    Hospital for the purpose of establishing the Applicant's real age.

33. A Deed of establishment of the age of an  applicant  for  international
    protection, dated 18 November 2020, in which  it  is  stated  that  the
    Applicant is over 18 years old and therefore an adult.

34. The transcript of the  Applicant's  asylum  interview  with  the  Greek
    authorities, dated 30 November 2020, in which the Applicant is referred
    to as Iraqi with a date of birth of 1 October 2020, but  in  which  the
    Applicant states that he was born on 15 April 2003 and  wants  to  join
    brother in UK.

35. The Applicant's age assessment appeal submitted on 11 December 2020, in
    which detailed reasons  are  given  as  to  why  it  is  said  the  age
    assessment is not correct.  These include that there  were  no  reasons
    for decision or doubt as to Applicant's age; the  legal  procedure  for
    assessment was not followed, only a stage 3 dental x-ray was undertaken
    which is not reliable; procedural guarantees were not adhered  to,  for
    example,  no  guardian   was   appointed;   and   the   reception   and
    identification procedures were not completed within time  limit  of  25
    days.

36. A Medical card created on 12 December 2020, which  is  referred  to  in
    other documents but no copy of the same has been included  within  this
    application for Judicial Review and it was not before the Respondent at
    the time of the decision under challenge.

37. A decision by the Greek authorities to change  basic  particulars  with
    which the Applicant has been registered, dated 22 December 2020;  which
    changed his nationality from Iraqi to stateless and  listed  Kuwait  as
    his country of former habitual residence.

38. A psychological report in respect of the Applicant from  Praksis  dated
    16 March 2021.  This report sets  out  the  Applicant's  situation  and
    concerns as to his presentation,  which  include  indicators  of  PTSD,
    anxiety, possible  intellectual  disability  and  a  concern  that  the
    Applicant has not been responsive to  support.   The  report  concludes
    with a recommendation that the Applicant be moved to  a  protected  and
    stable environment to live, ideally close to persons from  his  family,
    which will give him a feeling of security to enable his  mental  health
    to recover,  away  from  the  RIC  where  evidently  the  psychological
    dysphoria and the accompanying symptoms worsen.  It was stated that  it
    was vital for psychological support to be provided.

39. Blood test results for the Applicant dated 4 April 2021.

40. The Applicant made a written statement in support of  this  application
    for Judicial Review on 7 April 2021 in which he  describes  his  living
    conditions in Greece and encloses further documents.  These included an
    expert medical opinion dated 10 March 2021 from the  Greek  authorities
    in which the Applicant is identified as suffering from anxiety  attacks
    and accompanying  behaviour  disorders  owing  to  physical  disability
    (stammering)  and  because  of  which  he  is   subjected   to   severe
    intimidations by other migrants and attacked.  It is  stated  that  the
    Applicant is in  Samos without any relatives.   The  Applicant's  needs
    are identified as  (i)  social  services  to  intervene  to  assist  in
    relation to living conditions; and  (ii)  Buspirone  10.   The  further
    exhibits include translations only of an  undated  A  &  E  report  for
    difficulty with breathing;  treatment for acute bronchitis; picture  of
    medication and what looks like an undated prescription.

41.  The  Sponsor  also  made  a  written  statement  in  support  of  this
    application for Judicial Review on 7 April 2021.   He  stated  that  in
    Kuwait, his father stopped working when the Sponsor was around 21 years
    old, following which he worked to provide for the family.  The  Sponsor
    fled Kuwait in 2014 and has been in the United Kingdom since 2015.  The
    Sponsor sends money to the Applicant and tries to speak  to  him  every
    day, as well as working with the Applicant's solicitors to get  him  to
    UK.  The Sponsor is worried about the Applicant and his  conditions  in
    Greece.

42. A written statement from Rachel Harger of Bindman's solicitors dated  7
    May 2021 which was primarily in support of an application  for  interim
    relief in these proceedings but which contains information  as  to  the
    Applicant's conditions in Greece and deterioration in his mental health
    and well-being.

43. A written statement from Efthymia Stathopoulou of Refugee Legal Support
    dated 13 July 2021 in which she sets out her role and assistance to the
    Applicant.

44. A written statement from May Bulman, journalist, dated  30  July  2021.
    Ms Bulman first had contact  with  the  Applicant  on  6  May  2021  to
    interview him for a story about his case, following  which  an  article
    was published on 8 May 2021.  The written statement  details  what  the
    Applicant had told her of conditions in Greece and what the Sponsor had
    told her about his concern for the Applicant's welfare.

45. A psychiatric report on the Applicant by Dr D  L  Bell  dated  29  July
    2021.  In the report, Dr Bell reviews the evidence provided to  him  in
    relation to the Applicant and sets out details  of  his  own  interview
    with the Applicant conducted on  19  July  2021.   These  included  the
    Applicant's  current  living  conditions  in  Greece  and  his  current
    physical and psychological presentation, as well  as  deterioration  in
    his condition.  The report includes  a  very  detailed  assessment  and
    analysis of the same with a clear diagnosis and  conclusion.   Dr  Bell
    considers that the Applicant suffers from severe  psychiatric  disorder
    with  symptoms  of  PTSD  which  include   pervasive   anxiety,   sleep
    disturbance, nightmares typical of traumatic  disorder,  volatility  of
    mood including surges of unmanageable rage, panic attacks, marked noise
    sensitivity,  typical  hyper  alerting  and  hypervigilance,  intrusive
    memories, claustrophobia  and  marked  social  isolation.   The  trauma
    includes a number of major traumatic events over a period of  at  least
    three years and the Applicant remains in a  very  damaging  environment
    which  constitutes  further  continuous  trauma.   As  such,  Dr   Bell
    considers that PTSD is not an appropriate diagnosis, a more appropriate
    one is complex-chronic traumatised state.


46. Dr Bell also finds that the Applicant shows typical features of  Severe
    Depressive  Disorder  and  that  he  has  very  limited  emotional  and
    cognitive resources with the possibility of  a  significant  degree  of
    learning disability which it is not currently possible to assess.  This
    is in addition to the Applicant's speech impediment which causes severe
    difficulties not only in the Applicant being able  to  express  himself
    but also a psychological impact which would have  interfered  with  the
    Applicant's  emotional  and   psychological   development.    Dr   Bell
    identifies that the Applicant is  at  a  high  risk  of  self-harm  and
    suicide.

47.  Without  quoting  more  extensively  from  the  detailed  report,  the
    following passage gives a clear impression of the overall assessment by
    Dr Bell and the severity of the situation for the Applicant:

         "I have assessed around 400 traumatised refugees.  I  would  regard
         the severity of [the Applicant's] disorder as being in the  top  5%
         of all those I have examined.  I have  described  above  that  [the
         Applicant] is frequently incontinent of urine when suffering severe
         anxiety or panic attack - this is a measure of the degree of terror
         and the psychological unmanageability of  his  situation.   Urinary
         incontinence is common in very young children who are stressed  and
         therefore this symptom must be taken as a marker of the presence of
         severe emotional and psychological immaturity, that is in  my  view
         he functions as  a  young  child.   This  very  immature  level  of
         functioning results from  a  combination  of  his  already  limited
         resources combined with the impact upon him of his current context.


         Psychiatrists sometimes use a word 'catastrophic  reaction'.   This
         is a word I have hardly  ever  used  in  my  assessment  of  cases.
         However, it would be  appropriate  to  describe  [the  Applicant's]
         state  as  a  catastrophic  reaction  to  the  combination  of  the
         traumatic events he has suffered and his current highly prejudicial
         psychological environment.


         Again it needs to be borne in mind that the trauma is ongoing.


         Psychological disorders such as this are exquisitely  sensitive  to
         the  social  and  environment  context.   Given  the  very   highly
         psychological prejudicial situation  in  which  he  finds  himself,
         (that is the daily terror that he lives in), it is clear to me that
         there will be no recovery from this disorder, as long as he remains
         in this environment.  This is the case regardless of any  treatment
         he  can  be  provided  with,  that  is  I  do  not  consider   that
         pharmacological treatment will have any impact upon this  disorder.
         This is due to the severity, complexity and ongoing effect  of  the
         environmental context - that  is  fact  that  the  major  stressors
         responsible for preventing recovery and causing  deterioration  are
         ongoing.


         A further major factor is the fact  of  being  separated  from  his
         brother.  His older brother [the Sponsor]  has  functioned  in  the
         past as a parent to him - and that parental function continues.


         Some friendly support, perhaps from a counsellor, may  be  of  some
         very limited benefit but this should not be considered 'treatment'.


         If he remains in his current context his condition will continue to
         deteriorate."

48. Finally, there is a written statement from Mr A Tomlinson dated 26  May
    2021 on behalf of the Respondent setting out the information  available
    and decision making in this case.  The  detail  of  this  statement  is
    referred to as needed elsewhere within this decision.

Grounds of challenge

49. The grounds of challenge are, as at the hearing before me (having  been
    recast most  recently  in  the  skeleton  argument  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent, narrowing the grounds from those  originally  claimed),  in
    summary, as follows:

       i) that the  Respondent  irrationally  failed  to  take  account  of
          material considerations in her decision to refuse the TCR  on  26
          February 2021, namely (i) the Applicant's best interests and  his
          vulnerabilities (specifically his history  of  trauma,  arbitrary
          detention and torture, suicidal ideation and  speech  impairment)
          when considering the exercise of discretion, as set  out  in  the
          social work report dated 17 December 2020 (despite  reference  to
          this being made in the decision letter); and (ii) the  fact  that
          the Applicant had submitted an appeal against his age  assessment
          in Greece;


      ii) that the Respondent  unlawfully  fettered  her  discretion  under
          Article 17 of the Dublin III Regulation when considering  whether
          despite the familial link not being  accepted,  discretion  would
          not in any event be exercised  based  on  factors  which  do  not
          correlate either to the terms of Article 17 or  the  Respondent's
          own guidance;

     iii) that the Respondent has failed  to  adequately  comply  with  her
          investigative duties and breached her own policy in  (i)  failing
          to give the Applicant any meaningful opportunity to  address  any
          concerns prior to rejecting the TCR; (ii)  failing  to  interview
          the  Applicant  or  the  Sponsor;  (iii)  failing  to  obtain  an
          assessment from the local authority prior to  rejecting  the  TCR
          which could have assisted in establishing the familial link;  and
          (iv) failing to comply with her obligations to assess  and  treat
          the Applicant's best interests as a primary consideration;

      iv) that the Respondent's decision is in breach of Article 8  of  the
          European Convention on Human Rights and Articles 7 and 24 of  the
          Charter of Fundamental Rights; both in terms  of  the  procedural
          safeguards in relation to family reunification and as a matter of
          substance as a disproportionate interference with  the  Applicant
          and Sponsor's right to respect for family life.

50. It is noted at the outset that the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights  has
    ceased to have any application within the United Kingdom and  will  not
    therefore  expressly  be  considered  further  in  this  decision.   In
    substance, in any event, it has not been suggested  that  consideration
    of Articles 7 and 24 of the Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  would  in
    substance be any different to or materially add to the consideration of
    the Applicant's claim under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.

Ground 1

51. This ground of challenge falls in to two distinct parts, the  first  as
    to whether the Respondent has taken into account the  Applicant's  best
    interests and vulnerabilities and the second whether the Respondent has
    taken into account the Applicant's age and dispute in relation to  that
    in Greece.  The Applicant's best interests  would  of  course  only  be
    relevant if he was accepted as being a minor.


52. In oral submissions it was also initially suggested that the Respondent
    failed to take into account evidence of the familial link  between  the
    Applicant and the Sponsor, specifically, the Sponsor's asylum interview
    record which was provided with the TCR  request.   However,  once  that
    document had been made available during the course of the  hearing,  it
    was apparent that it did not in any event  identify  the  Applicant  by
    name and only went so far  as  to  state  that  the  Sponsor  had  four
    brothers and a sister in Kuwait;  such  that  it  was  of  no  material
    assistance in verifying any familial link in any event.


53. The Respondent's decision letter dated 26 February 2021 refers  to  the
    social work report,  but  it  is  submitted  that  the  nature  of  the
    reference, immediately followed by a statement that the  familial  link
    has not been verified and reference to dependence and care, shows  that
    the contents of the social work report have not in fact been taken into
    consideration in a possible  exercise  of  discretion.   There  was  no
    requirement for any  level  of  dependency  for  the  purposes  of  the
    exercise of discretion and the Respondent would  be  under  a  duty  to
    investigate the Sponsor's ability to provide care (if  anything  beyond
    the evidence already provided by him was required).

54. In the circumstances where the Respondent has now accepted the familial
    link, Ms Chapman submitted that the exercise of discretion pursuant  to
    Article 17.2 of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  is  required.   Specific
    reliance was placed on  the  evidence  showing  that  there  was  clear
    dependency by the Applicant  on  the  Sponsor,  that  the  Sponsor  had
    previously acted in loco parentis in Kuwait and  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the Applicant to be reunited with the Sponsor.

55. In relation to the age assessment, the skeleton argument on  behalf  of
    the Applicant set out a  number  of  matters  in  paragraph  20.2.1  in
    relation  to  the  substance  (or  otherwise)  of  the  age  assessment
    undertaken by the Greek authorities which it  is  said,  together  with
    background evidence about such assessments indicating that they are not
    taken lawfully in Samos in particular,  should  have  been  taken  into
    account by the Respondent but were not.  These matters included a  lack
    of justification for the age assessment in the first  place;  that  the
    prescribed  procedure  was  not   followed  in  that  only   a   dental
    examination was undertaken (without involvement or  assessment  by  any
    paediatric doctor, psychologist  or  social  worker)  which  is  not  a
    reliable method of  age  assessment;  that  procedural  guarantees  for
    minors were breached (in that no guardian was appointed, the  Applicant
    was not fully informed of his rights and the  presumption  of  minority
    was  breached);  and  there  were   delays   in   the   reception   and
    identification process such that the assessment was completed nearly  a
    year after the Applicant's arrival in Samos.


56. As is clear from the factual history and evidence set out above,  these
    matters relied upon in the grounds of challenge  were  not  before  the
    Respondent at the time of the decision.  The information was much  more
    limited to (i) the written consent form and  TCR  request,  which  both
    identified the Applicant's date of birth as 1 October  2000;  (ii)  the
    memorandum and social work report which both identified the Applicant's
    date of birth as 15 April 2003, the memorandum noting registration with
    a different, incorrect date, but without any further  explanation;  and
    (iii)  the  correspondence  between  the  Respondent  and   the   Greek
    authorities quoted in the  decision  letter  which  refers  to  an  age
    assessment which has been appealed by the Applicant.

57. The Applicant's appeal against his  age  assessment  was  made  on  his
    behalf on 11 December 2020, prior to the submission of the TCR, by  the
    same lawyer acting  for  him  in  Greece  as  prepared  the  memorandum
    submitted with the TCR.  The matters of substance raised in the  appeal
    were known and had been identified by the Applicant  and  those  acting
    for him in Greece at the time of drafting the memorandum  and  the  TCR
    and could therefore have been included in the information prepared  for
    that.  There is no explanation as to why that was not  done.   Further,
    there was also no explanation as to how the date of birth of 1  October
    2000 was initially registered for the  Applicant's  asylum  claim.   Ms
    Chapman  indicated  in  her  submissions  that  this  and  the  initial
    registration of the Applicant as an Iraqi national arose from  his  use
    of a false identity document, but that is not in evidence before me and
    there is nothing to indicate that has ever been in evidence before  the
    Respondent either.

58. In oral submissions, the focus of this ground of challenge  shifted  to
    matters covered predominantly  in  ground  3  as  to  the  Respondent's
    investigative duty and compliance with the Respondent's guidance, which
    to the extent that those relate to the age assessment, I deal with them
    here for convenience.

59. Ms Chapman placed specific reliance  on  the  Respondent's  Guidance  -
    'Assessing Age' version 4.0 published 31 December 2020, which  on  page
    43 under the heading 'Age assessments by European Union member  states'
    states:


         "Where it has been identified that a  European  Union  (EU)  member
         state has conducted an age assessment on a claimant  whose  age  is
         doubted  by  the  Home  Office,  you  should  request  through  the
         applicable British Embassy/High Commission that a copy of  the  age
         assessment is provided to the Home Office.  There are currently  no
         standardised processes for conducting age  assessments  within  the
         EU, the weight to be assigned to age assessments  conducted  by  EU
         member states is not standardised and, therefore, must be judged on
         its individual merits in accordance with the guidance  within  this
         instruction.


         In all cases, local authorities must  be  made  aware  of  relevant
         information that supports or casts doubt on the claimed age in  age
         dispute cases as soon as possible."

60. Ms Chapman submitted that the Respondent was aware  that  there  was  a
    dispute as to the Applicant's age, the TCR having been submitted on the
    basis that he was an adult but the Applicant claiming  to  be  a  child
    means that this guidance applied such that the Respondent  should  have
    made a request for a copy of the age  assessment.   If  this  had  been
    done, it would have been clear that the age  assessment  was  conducted
    only on the basis of a dental examination, such that appropriate weight
    should have been attached to it as a flawed assessment  which  was  not
    Merton compliant.  Ms Chapman went so far as to submit  that  in  every
    case where an Applicant disputed his age, the Respondent  was  required
    to make enquiries in relation to the age assessment conducted,  without
    more.


61. It was further suggested that  the  Applicant's  vulnerability,  speech
    impediment and fact that he was illiterate should  have  also  prompted
    the Respondent to request further details  about  the  age  assessment,
    although no specific basis for this submission was identified.

62. The Respondent's treatment of the  Applicant  as  an  adult  led  to  a
    failure to take into account his best interests  as  a  child  and  his
    vulnerabilities; which it was submitted should in any event  have  been
    considered in the alternative.  There  was  evidence  of  vulnerability
    available which as above, remained relevant regardless of  whether  the
    Applicant was a minor or not.  If the Applicant was, or was treated  as
    a minor, this would  trigger  the  requirement  for  a  best  interests
    assessment and also trigger the requirement for  further  inquiries  of
    the local authority which would have been appropriate even  before  the
    familial  link  was  established.   The  approach  made  to  the  local
    authority in Brent was, it was submitted,  insufficient  in  accordance
    with  the  decision  in  R  (on  the  application   of   Safe   Passage
    International) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] EWHC
    1821 (Admin) on the facts of this  case  as  it  did  not  request  any
    specific action to be taken to assist with consideration  of  the  TCR,
    either as to  assessment  of  suitability  or  to  assess  the  claimed
    familial link.  Although it was accepted on  behalf  of  the  Applicant
    that it was not  in  every  case  that  a  full  assessment  should  be
    requested, on the facts of this case it was required and the  delay  in
    doing so was unlawful.

63. The Respondent's position is, in  summary,  that  she  has  taken  into
    account all relevant material in the decision  under  challenge;  which
    expressly refers to the  memorandum and social work report, noting  the
    Applicant's vulnerabilities and suicidal ideation; as well as the  fact
    that there was an appeal  against  the  age  assessment  by  the  Greek
    authorities.  The ground of challenge is said to amount to no more than
    disagreement with the consideration of this evidence by the  Respondent
    and the fact that the circumstances were not sufficient to warrant  the
    exercise of discretion.  That was a decision which was  rationally  and
    lawfully open to the Respondent to make on the evidence available,  the
    exercise  of  discretion   being   rare   and   only   in   exceptional
    circumstances.

64. Mr Murray emphasised in oral submissions  the  documents  and  evidence
    which were before the Respondent at the  time  of  the  decision  under
    challenge; which included very limited evidence of the  claimed  family
    link, lack of evidence of contact and support from the Sponsor and lack
    of any detail as to the age assessment.  The Applicant has been  unable
    to show any failure to take into account  material  considerations  and
    there could be no realistic expectation of  the  decision  maker  being
    aware of or seeking any of the background evidence relied upon in  this
    application for Judicial Review.

65. In relation to the age assessment,  the  Respondent  had  made  further
    inquiries of the Greek authorities and was  entitled  to  rely  on  the
    assessment of another Member State in the absence of  any  good  reason
    not to do so and it was not perverse  or  irrational  to  do  so.   The
    Dublin III Regulation encompasses the expectation that one Member State
    can rely on an assessment made in another.  The  Respondent's  guidance
    on age assessment is directed to caseworkers in the United  Kingdom  in
    relation to individuals within  the  United  Kingdom  and  within  this
    context, the passage relied upon by the Applicant is  of  only  limited
    relevance.

Ground 2


66. On behalf of the Applicant it is submitted that on the  facts  of  this
    case, in particular the  closeness  of  the  relationship  between  the
    Applicant and the Sponsor, supported by evidence in the memorandum  and
    social  work  report  which  formed  part  of  the  TCR;   any   proper
    consideration required the Respondent to exercise discretion and accede
    to the TCR request under Article 17.2.


67. Ms Chapman submitted that the factors listed by the Respondent  in  the
    decision letter as  those  taken  into  account  for  the  exercise  of
    discretion are not on all fours with the terms of Article  17.2  itself
    which are  only  humanitarian  grounds  with  reference  to  family  or
    cultural considerations.  There is no  requirement  for  dependency  or
    care, which could in any event have been satisfied on the  evidence  or
    through investigation by the local authority had they been asked to  do
    so.  Further, the factors listed in the decision letter have  no  basis
    in the Respondent's guidance on Dublin III, which  on  page  26  states
    only as follows:

         "Where an Article 17(2) request is  received  from  another  Dublin
         State,  caseworkers  should  consider   whether   there   are   any
         exceptional  circumstances  or  compassionate  factors  which   may
         justify the UK exercising discretion and  accepting  responsibility
         for the claim, notwithstanding that the UK is not bound  to  do  so
         under  the  Dublin  III  Regulation.   There  may  be   exceptional
         circumstances raised by the evidence  submitted  with  the  request
         from the other Dublin state which  would  result  in  unjustifiably
         harsh consequences for the Applicant or their family relations.  It
         is  for  the  requesting  Dublin  State  to  demonstrate  what  the
         exceptional circumstances or compassionate  factors  are  in  their
         case:  the  evidence  submitted  with  the  request   to   exercise
         discretion must be coherent, verifiable and detailed in  line  with
         the Dublin III Regulation's general provisions on evidence.


         Each request must be decided on its  individual  merits.   However,
         situations in which it would be appropriate to exercise  discretion
         will be rare and on an exceptional basis.  In  considering  whether
         or not to exercise discretion caseworkers should  act  consistently
         with the Immigration Rules and  policies  on  family  members,  for
         example the Immigration Rules Appendix FM - Family Members."

68. On the basis of the wording of Article 17.2  and  the  guidance  quoted
    above, Ms Chapman submitted that it was difficult  to  tell  where  the
    factors in the decision letter come from as they do not correspond with
    either.  The Respondent failed to consider, as required, whether  there
    were exceptional circumstances, compassionate factors or  unjustifiably
    harsh consequences and therefore failed to apply her own  guidance  and
    that amounts to an unlawful fettering of her discretion.


69. In relation to this ground of challenge, the Respondent reiterates  the
    submissions already made in relation to the first ground  of  challenge
    which overlaps with this to an extent - the  decision-maker  considered
    all the relevant factors and came to a conclusion on the  evidence  and
    the exercise of discretion applying the correct test which was lawfully
    open to her to make.

70. Mr Murray submitted that the non-exhaustive  list  of  factors  in  the
    decision letter as to the exercise of discretion were simply a  logical
    extension of the consideration of the Applicant's family  circumstances
    and not a fettering of the discretion in Article 17.2 of the Dublin III
    Regulation.  The factors taken  into  account  properly  reflected  the
    guidance on consideration of a TCR and the decision was taken  in  that
    context.

Ground 3

71. The skeleton argument on behalf of the Applicant identifies four  areas
    in which the Respondent is said to  have  failed  to  comply  with  her
    investigative  duties  in  (i)  failing  to  give  the  Applicant   any
    meaningful opportunity to address any concerns prior to  rejecting  the
    TCR; (ii) failing to interview the  Applicant  or  the  Sponsor;  (iii)
    failing to obtain an assessment  from  the  local  authority  prior  to
    rejecting the TCR; and (iv) failing to assess and treat the Applicant's
    best interests as a primary consideration.


72. The written submissions in support of these  four  areas  however  only
    included in any detail submissions on (iii)  to  the  extent  that  the
    Respondent failed to act in accordance with her  own  guidance  for  an
    initial notification  to  the  local  authority  as  soon  as  possible
    inviting them to provide any information they hold to allow a  decision
    to be taken on the familial  link  and  failing  to  implement  in  the
    guidance, the revision to it proposed by the  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in paragraphs 78 to 81 of R (on  the  application  of  BAA)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (Dublin  III:  judicial
    review; SoS's duties) [2020] UKUT 00227 (IAC) for the  guidance  to  be
    compatible with Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights
    and Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Freedoms.

73. Following disclosure of the correspondence between the  Respondent  and
    the London Borough of Brent, the Applicant claims that  the  Respondent
    has failed in her duty identified in that correspondence to request  an
    assessment if  a  family  link  is  established  following  that  being
    subsequently accepted.


74. In relation to the third ground of challenge, in oral submissions,  the
    Applicant relied specifically on the Respondent's  guidance  on  Dublin
    III which at page 27 states as follows:


       "If the person in the UK is an asylum  seeker,  refugee,  a  British
       citizen having previously granted asylum, or has been granted  leave
       in any other capacity, the Home Office file must  be  obtained,  and
       you must consider any family information it contains.  This must  be
       cross-referenced against the evidence submitted in  support  of  the
       transfer request to identify and help determine whether or  not  you
       are satisfied that the relationship is genuine."

75. There is nothing to indicate in the present  case  that  the  decision-
    maker followed this guidance and checked the Sponsor's Home Office file
    for information to verify the familial link; such that  the  Respondent
    failed to follow her own guidance and her investigative duty.  The fact
    that this was later done in the course of pre-action correspondence  is
    not sufficient.  If the information which was later used to verify  the
    family link was available before the decision was made on  26  February
    2021, then the Respondent's contact with the local authority would have
    been of a different nature and a  full  safeguarding  assessment  would
    have been requested and undertaken upon which an informed assessment of
    the exercise of discretion would have been taken when  determining  the
    TCR.  Such an assessment is mandatory once the familial link  has  been
    accepted; although Ms Chapman accepted this was only the  case  if  the
    Applicant was accepted as or treated as a minor.


76. There were also two documents, a medical card dated  12  December  2019
    and an RIC note which were referred to  in  the  TCR  request  but  not
    provided to the Respondent with it;  which  Ms  Chapman  submitted  the
    Respondent was required as part of her investigative duty  to  request.
    It was not  however  identified  how  this  evidence  specifically  was
    material either to the assessment of the familial link, the Applicant's
    age or the overall exercise of discretion.


77. As above, the Respondent's position in relation to the  age  assessment
    is that appropriate inquiries were made to the  Greek  authorities  and
    she was entitled to proceed on the  basis  that  the  TCR  request  was
    properly made under  Article  17.2;  taking  into  account  the  appeal
    against the age assessment.

78. The Respondent does not accept that she was under any duty on the facts
    of this case to contact the Applicant or the  Sponsor  to  address  any
    concerns before a decision was made on the TCR.  The  primary  role  of
    the Respondent is said to be to examine the evidence  provided  and  in
    any event, sought further evidence from the Sponsor  following  receipt
    of the undertaking letter which specifically requested further evidence
    as to the link between the Applicant and the Sponsor;  which  indicated
    at that point the material required to establish the claim.

79. In relation  to  inquiries  with  the  London  Borough  of  Brent,  the
    Respondent contacted them on 18 January 2021,  with  a  reply  received
    that no information was held.  On the facts of this case, there was  no
    further investigation required and there were nothing to  suggest  that
    the local authority could have undertaken any further investigation  to
    establish the  familial  link  in  circumstances  where  they  held  no
    information on either  the  Applicant  or  the  Sponsor.   Any  further
    request would have likely involved unreasonable delay to the Respondent
    being able to make a decision on the TCR.

Ground 4

80. The Applicant seeks to rely on a corresponding breach of Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights and Articles 7 and  24  of  the
    Convention on Fundamental Freedoms; duties which  exist  alongside  the
    Dublin III Regulation and not subsumed or replaced by it  The Applicant
    specifically relies on the positive obligation under Article  8  for  a
    state to admit persons to its territory for  family  reunification,  as
    acknowledged by the Court of Appeal in ZT (Syria) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 810, with a particular emphasis
    for applications by minors and unaccompanied minors to ensure the rapid
    examination of any application for reunification.


81. The Applicant's claim is that he was a minor at the material  time  and
    was not therefore required to demonstrate dependency  to  share  family
    life with the Sponsor, but in any event, even if he was  an  adult,  he
    was a  young  and  vulnerable  person  (with  evidence  supporting  the
    submission that the Applicant was not functioning  in  accordance  with
    his chronological age, on either  date  of  birth)  such  that  a  fact
    specific approach was required to determine whether family life  exists
    between the Applicant and the Sponsor;  which  is  established  on  the
    facts in this case.  Although Ms Chapman accepted  that  there  was  no
    evidence of any contact between the Applicant and the  Sponsor  between
    the latter leaving Kuwait in 2014 and the former arriving in Greece  in
    late  2019;  family  life  had  not  been  broken  during   this   time
    particularly when considering that  the  enjoyment  of  this  had  been
    interrupted for asylum reasons.

82. The Applicant and the Sponsor are stateless, unable to return to Kuwait
    and therefore family life could not be enjoyed anywhere other  than  in
    the United Kingdom.  In circumstances  where  the  Applicant  is  in  a
    dangerous and insecure situation in Greece, the refusal to admit him to
    the  United  Kingdom   for   an   indefinite   period   constitutes   a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life.  Ms Chapman placed emphasis on the  most  recent  evidence
    from  Dr  Bell  as  to  the  Applicant's  current   circumstances   and
    difficulties, risks to  the  Applicant  and  his  very  poor  prognosis
    without being reunited with his brothers in the United Kingdom.

83. Ms Chapman accepted that in all but the most exceptional circumstances,
    Article 8 could not be relied upon in the absence of a breach of Dublin
    III, but the two are not equivalent and both can be argued;  albeit  in
    practice there may not  be  very  much  difference  in  the  applicable
    threshold.  Where Article 8 is said to  add  to  this  application  for
    Judicial Review, is the consideration of the facts as at  the  date  of
    hearing.  Ms Chapman submitted that it is open to the Upper Tribunal to
    remake the Article 8 proportionality assessment if there is an error in
    the decision under challenge and family  life  is  accepted  to  engage
    Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human Rights.

84. The Respondent relies on the Court of Appeal's decision in  R  (on  the
    application of FWF) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021]
    EWCA Civ 88  that  even  where  a  Member  State  acted  unlawfully  in
    discharging its obligations under the Dublin III Regulation, it did not
    follow that that unlawfulness was also a breach of  Article  8  of  the
    European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  absent  very  exceptional
    circumstances, Article 8 could not be relied upon to supplement, or  to
    increase, the rights given  to  an  individual  under  the  Dublin  III
    Regulation.  Mr Murray submitted that the Applicant's Article 8  ground
    of challenge can not succeed as a separate challenge and  the  evidence
    post-dating the  decision  could  only  be  relevant  if  the  decision
    entailed a human rights refusal, and only if the original decision  was
    unlawful on that basis could the Upper Tribunal reconsider the position
    as at the date of hearing.

85. In any event, the Respondent's  position  is  that  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human  Rights  is  simply  not  engaged  on  the
    evidence available in this case.  The Applicant has not  been  accepted
    as a minor and therefore, as an  adult  sibling,  would  need  to  show
    elements of dependency involving more than  normal  emotional  ties  in
    accordance with Kugathas v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  The only evidence of  dependency  in  the  present
    case was four money transfers within a short period of time,  including
    one after the Respondent requested further  evidence.   Further,  there
    was no evidence of any ongoing relationship between the  Applicant  and
    Sponsor between 2014 and 2019 (in fact, the  Applicant  stated  in  his
    asylum interview that there had been  no  contact  whatsoever  in  this
    period).  Even if the Applicant was a minor at the time of application,
    he ceased to be so two days after the familial link was accepted in the
    pre-action correspondence.

Discussion - grounds 1 to 3

86. The first three grounds of  challenge  relied  upon  by  the  Applicant
    overlap and/or are inter-twined, with a number of the specific  grounds
    being predicated on positive findings on behalf  of  the  Applicant  in
    relation to his familial link with the Sponsor  and/or  his  age.   For
    example,  the  references  to  best  interests  assessment  and   local
    authority assessment are to  a  significant  extent  dependent  on  the
    Applicant being accepted as a minor at the date of decision, or at  the
    very least, the Respondent erring in treating him as an adult  at  that
    time.  For these reasons, I deal first with these two key issues as  to
    family link and age before moving on to the more  specific  grounds  of
    challenge.


87. In relation to the Applicant's age, I do not  find  any  error  in  the
    Respondent's treatment of him as an adult for the purposes of  deciding
    the TCR, it was entirely lawful, rational and reasonable for her to  do
    so on in all of the circumstances.

88. I do not find that the Respondent's guidance  on  'Age  Assessment'  is
    directly applicable to consideration of a TCR  within  the  context  of
    Dublin III nor does it assist the Applicant's claim for  the  following
    three reasons.  First, the guidance is  expressly  written  principally
    for caseworkers to set out the  policy  and  procedures  that  must  be
    followed when an asylum seeker or migrant claims  to  be  a  child  and
    their claimed age is doubted by the Home Office or vice versa.   It  is
    evidently directed to the situation where a person has made a claim for
    asylum in the United Kingdom, which the Applicant has not,  unless  and
    until his TCR is accepted.  Further, the Applicant is  not  present  in
    the United Kingdom for the majority,  if  not  all  of  the  procedures
    contained within the guidance to be followed in respect of him and  any
    claim made.  Although the guidance states that the general substance of
    it can equally be applied to other persons subject to  decisions  under
    the immigration acts and rules, there is no specific mention of  Dublin
    III cases.  The fact that there is reference within the guidance to age
    assessments conducted in other member states does not per  se  indicate
    any relevance or application of the guidance to consideration of a TCR.

89. Secondly, the part of the guidance  specifically  relied  upon  by  the
    Applicant is in relation to seeking information such that a person  who
    is undertaking an age assessment in the United Kingdom can consider the
    weight to be attached to an age assessment conducted in another  member
    state given there is no standardised process for doing this within  the
    EU.  On  its  face,  the  guidance  is  to  ensure  that  all  relevant
    information supporting or casting doubt on the claimed age is available
    as soon as possible.  This is not on all fours with  the  task  of  the
    Respondent when considering a TCR, which on the Applicant's case  would
    require a decision maker to request details of the age assessment  made
    by another  member  state  to  determine  whether  that  assessment  is
    accepted as valid or not, thereby requiring the Respondent to make  her
    own decision as to the Applicant's age but without being able to follow
    the usual procedures for doing so and in a  vacuum  of  other  relevant
    evidence.  Even if the Respondent did not accept the Greek authorities'
    age assessment, it would remain the case that the  Applicant's  age  is
    disputed and it is entirely unclear as to how the Respondent  could  be
    expected to resolve that dispute in the circumstances of this case.

90.  Thirdly,  such  an  approach  would  be  directly  contrary   to   the
    Respondent's guidance 'Requests made to the UK  under  the  Dublin  III
    Regulation prior to the end of  the  Transition  Period',  version  1.0
    dated 31 December 2020 (the  "Respondent's  guidance  on  Dublin  III")
    which at page 24 states: "UK practice is not to conduct age  assessment
    on cases before they are transferred to the UK  as  the  child  is  not
    within the UK's jurisdiction."  The guidance goes on to state that once
    a person is transferred to the United Kingdom, they will  be  allocated
    to be processed and age assessed if needed.

91. In the present case, the Respondent was aware of a dispute  as  to  the
    Applicant's age which  was  apparent  on  the  face  of  the  documents
    contained within the TCR, albeit with no detail as to how  the  dispute
    arose or the substance of it; and made further inquiries with the Greek
    authorities in relation to it.  There  was  no  failure  to  take  this
    information or the fact of the appeal into account and no  requirement,
    in accordance with the  Respondent's  guidance  on  age  assessment  or
    otherwise, to investigate the matter further.  The Respondent could not
    have taken into account the substantive  reasons  for  the  Applicant's
    appeal against the age assessment as these were  not  provided  to  her
    with the TCR request (even though  the  Applicant's  lawyer  in  Greece
    drafted the memorandum in support of the TCR and  had  also  only  very
    shortly before submitted the age assessment appeal  on  his  behalf  as
    well such that this information could have been included), nor is there
    any basis for  suggesting  that  she  should  have  been  aware  of  or
    researched the background information submitted with  this  application
    for Judicial Review about age assessments in Greece and on  the  island
    of Samos in particular.  Those  were  matters  which  were  simply  not
    before the Respondent at the time of the  decision  and  even  if  they
    were, the situation would be as  above  that  the  Applicant's  age  is
    disputed with no practical or realistic way that the  Respondent  could
    be expected to resolve the dispute to decide the TCR.

92. On the evidence available to the Respondent at the  date  of  decision,
    there was no rational basis to do anything other than to  give  respect
    to the age assessment undertaken  by  the  Greek  authorities.   To  do
    otherwise would have in substance required the Respondent to  undertake
    her own age assessment in circumstances where the usual procedures  for
    doing so could not have been complied with as the Applicant was not  in
    the United Kingdom and would likely have delayed a decision on the TCR.
     The Applicant has not identified any basis for such a  requirement  to
    be placed  on  the  Respondent  generally  or  on  the  facts  of  this
    particular case.  In all of the  circumstances,  it  was  open  to  the
    Respondent to assess the TCR on the basis that  the  Applicant  was  an
    adult with no public law error in doing so.

93. On this basis, there is no merit to any of the Applicant's  grounds  of
    challenge that rely on the  Applicant  being  a  minor,  including  the
    Respondent failed to assess or take into account his best interests  as
    a child in accordance with the duty under section 55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act  2009  or  the  'Every  Child  Matters'
    guidance  thereunder  which  applies  the   spirit   of   this   extra-
    territorially and that the Respondent failed to make a request  to  the
    London Borough of Brent for a full  safeguarding  assessment  which  Ms
    Chapman accepted would only be relevant if the Applicant were a minor.

94. In relation to the Applicant's claimed familial link  to  the  Sponsor,
    this was initially rejected by the Respondent on the basis of a lack of
    sufficient information and evidence to verify the same;  but  later  in
    pre-action correspondence  was  verified  and  accepted.   The  primary
    challenges in relation to this as set out in the grounds  of  challenge
    and skeleton argument were  that  (i)  the  Respondent  had  sufficient
    information submitted with the  TCR  to  establish  the  familial  link
    (namely the statements from the Applicant and  Sponsor,  with  specific
    reliance on the Sponsor's asylum interview  record  from  2016  in  the
    United Kingdom) and (ii) the Respondent's failure to make  any  further
    inquiries with the London Borough of Brent or request a full assessment
    by them which may have assisted with establishing the familial link  as
    well as information which could inform the exercise of discretion under
    Article 17.2 more generally.

95. The information submitted with the TCR that was before  the  Respondent
    in relation  to  the  familial  link  was  very  limited  and  extended
    essentially only to  statements  by  the  Applicant  and  the  Sponsor,
    repeated  in  the  memorandum  and  Social  Report  (but  without   any
    suggestion of any investigation or assessment of the familial  link  by
    the author of either).  As above, the Sponsor's asylum interview record
    did not contain any specific family information to link  him  with  the
    Applicant; stating only that he had parents and siblings in Kuwait.

96. Annex II of Implementing Regulation 118/2014 specifies the elements  of
    proof and circumstantial evidence  that  the  requesting  member  state
    should submit in support a TCR on the basis of family unity  provisions
    within the Dublin III Regulation.  The Respondent sets this out on page
    26 of the Respondent's guidance on Dublin III,  listing  the  documents
    required  to  confirm  a  familial  link  for  a  TCR  as  (i)  written
    confirmation of  the  information  by  the  other  Dublin  State;  (ii)
    extracts from registers; (iii) residence permits issued to  the  family
    member; (iv) evidence that the persons are related, if  available;  (v)
    failing this, and if necessary, a DNA,  or  blood  test  (this  is  not
    essential but an applicant may choose to submit such evidence at  their
    own expense).  In addition, the guidance identifies  circumstantial  or
    indicative evidence that may be submitted with  a  TCR,  including  (i)
    verifiable information from the applicant;  (ii)  statements  from  the
    family members concerned; (iii)  statements  or  information  from  the
    authorities with responsibility for the child in the requesting  Dublin
    State; and (iv) reports  or  confirmation  of  the  information  by  an
    international organisation such as UNHCR,  International  Committee  of
    the Red Cross or Save the Children.


97. The evidence before the Respondent submitted with the TCR was  limited,
    did not clearly  fall  within  the  categories  or  types  of  evidence
    expected and was not added to in  any  material  way  by  the  evidence
    submitted by the Sponsor when further evidence  of  familial  link  was
    requested from him or from the response  from  the  London  Borough  of
    Brent, who held no information on either the Applicant or Sponsor.

98. As identified in BAA, there are likely to  be  circumstances  in  which
    information from the relevant local  authority,  deriving  from  direct
    engagement with the Sponsor in the  United  Kingdom,  will  inform  the
    making of the Respondent's decision as to the existence of  a  familial
    link and the exercise of discretion; but it is not the  case  that  the
    Respondent is required  to  seek  a  full  assessment  from  the  local
    authority (see paragraphs 78 to 81 in particular) in  every  case.   In
    particular, the Respondent may be satisfied  that  the  relevant  local
    authority assessment could not possible  cast  any  relevant  light  on
    whether the alleged family relationship exists.  Although this point is
    not expressly referred to in the decision letter  or  the  Respondent's
    evidence, it is very  difficult  to  see  what  more  could  have  been
    obtained from a further request to the London Borough of Brent  (beyond
    the initial inquiry on 18 January 2021)  in  circumstances  where  they
    held no information about the Applicant or the Sponsor;  where  further
    inquiries had also been made of the Sponsor in the United  Kingdom  and
    only limited documents provided in response; and  where  the  Applicant
    was legally represented in Greece with  the  preparation  of  a  social
    report there.


99. On the facts of this case, I do not find that the  Respondent  breached
    any investigative duty to request a fuller  assessment  by  the  London
    Borough of Brent; nor do I find that there was anything  irrational  or
    perverse in  the  conclusion  that  the  familial  link  had  not  been
    established on the  basis  of  evidence  submitted  with  the  TCR  and
    subsequently by the Sponsor.

100. The secondary challenge in relation to the familial link  only  emerged
    in Ms Chapman's oral submissions during which reliance  was  placed  on
    the Respondent's guidance on Dublin III  requiring  the  Respondent  to
    obtain the Home Office file for the Sponsor  and  consider  any  family
    information it contains,  cross-referencing  it  against  the  evidence
    submitted with the TCR.  This part of the guidance had  not  previously
    been referred to or relied upon at all in  the  grounds  of  challenge,
    amended grounds of challenge or  skeleton  argument  submitted  shortly
    before the substantive hearing and there is no good reason for this not
    having been raised before the hearing.  However, given the strong merit
    of this point and in circumstances where  there  was  no  objection  on
    behalf of the Respondent to this point being  raised  only  during  the
    hearing, I deal with it as part of the claim.

101. Mr  Tomlinson's  written  evidence  was  that  the  familial  link  was
    verified and established at the time of the  pre-action  correspondence
    by reference to a statement made by the Sponsor on his Home Office file
    in connection with his sponsorship of  a  TCR  and/or  application  for
    family reunification in respect of his other brother  who  now  resides
    with him in the United Kingdom.  There is nothing in  the  evidence  to
    suggest that this Home Office file was  sought  or  considered  by  the
    original decision maker in  accordance  with  or  as  required  by  the
    Respondent's guidance on Dublin III.  There is also nothing to  suggest
    that if this had been done at the time, the  familial  link  would  not
    have been verified and accepted as it subsequently was on the basis  of
    this information available to the Respondent.

102. In these circumstances, it can only be concluded  that  the  Respondent
    failed to follow her own guidance on Dublin III set out at page  27  to
    obtain  the  Sponsor's  Home  Office  file  and   cross-reference   the
    information contained therein to the evidence submitted with  the  TCR.
    The Respondent therefore erred in rejecting the TCR on the  basis  that
    the familial link had not been established, in circumstances where  she
    failed to verify the claim  in  accordance  with  Home  Office  records
    available to her.

103. In the decision under  challenge,  the  Respondent  considered  in  the
    alternative whether this was a case in which discretion would have been
    exercised if the familial link had been established and refused it also
    on  this  basis.    That   refusal   was   maintained   in   pre-action
    correspondence following acceptance of the  familial  link.   In  these
    circumstances and in combination with the decision above as to the  age
    dispute, the failure to follow the guidance  to  establish  a  familial
    link at the time of the TCR decision could only be  material  if  there
    was also a public law error  in  the  refusal  to  exercise  discretion
    considered in the alternative.   I do  not  accept  the  submission  on
    behalf of the Applicant that the subsequent acceptance of the  familial
    link automatically required a fresh consideration of  the  exercise  of
    discretion.

104. The Applicant challenges the exercise of discretion under Article  17.2
    in the alternative in the decision letter on the  basis  that  (i)  the
    Respondent  has  failed  to   take   into   account   the   Applicant's
    vulnerabilities  (specifically  his  history   of   trauma,   arbitrary
    detention and torture, suicidal ideation and speech  impairment);  (ii)
    the Respondent has fettered her discretion by making  the  decision  by
    reference to a list of factors which do not correlate with the terms of
    Article  17  or  the  Respondent's  own  guidance  on  this,  including
    requiring a level of dependency between the Applicant and Sponsor;  and
    (iii) the Respondent has failed to undertake any investigation  through
    the local  authority  as  to  the  Sponsor's  ability  to  provide  the
    necessary care for the Applicant.   The  final  point  is  however  not
    relevant on the basis that the Applicant was not accepted to be a minor
    at the date of decision.

105. The Respondent's decision letter expressly  refers  to  the  memorandum
    and social report, noting the Applicant is considered to be  vulnerable
    with suicidal tendencies and thoughts; such that it  can  not  be  said
    that this evidence has not been considered at all; the Applicant's case
    is that it has not been properly considered or given sufficient  weight
    given that the claim had already been rejected for failure to establish
    the familial link (at  that  time)  and  because  the  decision  letter
    immediately proceeded to refer to a lack of dependence and provision of
    necessary care if the Applicant were to be transferred  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

106. In the Respondent's pre-action correspondence, it was  maintained  that
    the facts of this case do not lead to an exercise of  discretion,  with
    reference to the lack of evidence of any close relationship between the
    Applicant and the Sponsor and that this relationship existed  prior  to
    the application.

107. The evidence before the Respondent as to the relationship at  the  date
    of decision (and as at the  stage  of  pre-action  correspondence)  was
    limited to relatively brief statements from the Applicant and  Sponsor,
    repeated  in  the  memorandum  and  social  report  about  the  Sponsor
    previously supporting the Applicant and other family members in  Kuwait
    when their father became ill and current contact most  days  since  the
    Applicant had  been  in  Greece  (but  with  no  telephone  records  or
    documentary evidence of contact); the Sponsor's willingness to  support
    the Applicant and  evidence  of  available  accommodation;  four  money
    transfer receipts between October 2020 and August 2020; and  statements
    that the Applicant and Sponsor had had no contact at  all  between  the
    Sponsor leaving Kuwait in 2014 and the Applicant arriving in Greece  in
    December 2019.

108. On behalf of the Applicant,  it  has  been  repeatedly  submitted  that
    there was clear evidence of a close relationship and of  dependence  by
    the Applicant on the Sponsor; but this has not been  made  out  on  the
    evidence outlined above.  Whilst there was some evidence of contact and
    support, it could not properly be described as clear or  comprehensive.
    It was rationally open to the Respondent to consider this  evidence  in
    the way that she did and conclude that there was a lack of evidence  of
    a close relationship or relationship existing prior to the TCR request.

109. Overall, contrary  to  the  grounds  of  challenge,  I  find  that  the
    Respondent has taken into account the evidence before  her  as  to  the
    Applicant's vulnerabilities, conditions in Greece and relationship with
    the Sponsor when  considering  the  exercise  of  discretion;  with  no
    failure to take any relevant material into account.  The real issue  in
    this case is whether those matters have been weighed appropriately.

110. Article 17.2 refers only to a request to take charge  of  an  applicant
    "... in order to bring together any family relations,  on  humanitarian
    grounds based in particular on family or cultural considerations  ...".
    There are no specific criteria or particular factors listed beyond  the
    reference to family or cultural considerations and it is accepted  that
    Article 17.2 permits a very wide  discretion  challengeable  on  normal
    public law grounds.

111. The Respondent's guidance on Dublin III refers to situations  in  which
    it would be appropriate to exercise discretion being  rare  and  on  an
    exceptional basis.  There are references to  exceptional  circumstances
    which  would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for   the
    applicant  or  their  family  relations,  or   compassionate   factors;
    supported by coherent verifiable and detailed evidence.   Finally,  the
    guidance refers to caseworkers needing to  act  consistently  with  the
    Immigration Rules and policies on family  members,  including  Appendix
    FM.

112.  The  list  of  factors  considered  within  the  decision  letter  are
    expressly stated to be a non-exhaustive list and although they  do  not
    refer to humanitarian grounds, they are a logical and  reasonable  list
    of factors to assist  in  considering  'family  considerations'.    The
    evidence on humanitarian grounds had  also  already  been  referred  to
    earlier in the decision letter with express reference to the memorandum
    and social report.  The references to dependency and care are  relevant
    to a potential application of Article 8 and are also in accordance with
    the guidance to caseworkers  that  the  exercise  of  discretion  under
    Article 17.2 should be undertaken  consistently  with  the  Immigration
    Rules, which on the facts of this case, would most likely be  those  in
    relation to adult dependent relatives.   Whilst  the  factors  are  not
    squarely on  all  fours  with  the  wording  of  Article  17.2  or  the
    Respondent's guidance on Dublin III; they are factors which  relate  to
    matters contained within both and do  not  indicate  any  fettering  of
    discretion.

113. Taking into account all of these factors in relation to  the  evidence,
    the requirements of Article 17.2 itself and the  Respondent's  guidance
    in relation to it; as against the  substance  of  the  decision  letter
    under challenge; I do not find that the Respondent has failed  to  take
    into account  any  relevant  considerations;  has  taken  into  account
    irrelevant considerations; has fettered her discretion; or has  reached
    an irrational, unreasonable or perverse decision overall in refusing to
    exercise discretion when considering this in  the  alternative  to  the
    family link being established.  As such, I find no public law error  on
    conventional grounds in the exercise of  discretion  contained  in  the
    decision under challenge.  That is so even when taking into account the
    error in concluding that the familial link had  not  been  established,
    given that even if this had been accepted at the date of  decision,  it
    is far from clear that this would have had any impact on  the  exercise
    of discretion.  In particular I take into account that as the Applicant
    was lawfully treated as an adult, there  would  have  been  no  further
    requirement for the  Respondent  to  request  the  local  authority  to
    undertake a safeguarding assessment; nor would the  acceptance  of  the
    familial link  have  otherwise  changed  the  nature  of  the  evidence
    available or investigation required.

114. The only remaining parts of the first three grounds of challenge  which
    have not otherwise already been dealt with in the  decision  above  are
    the first two parts of ground  3  as  to  whether  the  Respondent  has
    complied with her investigative duties when assessing the claim, as  to
    whether the Applicant should have been given a  meaningful  opportunity
    to address any concerns prior to rejecting the TCR and/or  whether  the
    Applicant  or  Sponsor  should  have  been  interviewed  prior  to  the
    decision.   The remaining parts about the level of request to the local
    authority and assessment of the Applicant's best interests have already
    been considered above.  These were matters which were not developed  in
    any detail either in the  Applicant's  skeleton  argument  or  in  oral
    submissions.

115. The Respondent's primary role in assessing a TCR  is  to  consider  the
    evidence submitted with it; which in the present case included evidence
    directly from the Applicant and the Sponsor; a  memorandum  and  social
    report prepared  on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  other  supporting
    documents as listed already above.  The Respondent twice sought further
    information from the Sponsor which clearly  identified  on  the  second
    occasion that further evidence was required  to  establish  the  family
    link as well as  making  further  inquiries  with  the  relevant  local
    authority and the Greek authorities.  In these circumstances, there was
    no further duty on the Respondent to interview  the  Applicant  or  the
    Sponsor or to provide any further gist of the reasons for refusal.

Discussion - ground 4 - Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
Rights

116. As in BAA and for the reasons set out therein, irrespective  of  public
    law errors or otherwise identified above, it is  necessary  for  me  to
    consider on the totality of the evidence  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    including that not before  the  Respondent  and  that  post-dating  the
    decision under challenge, whether family life  is  established  between
    the Applicant and the Sponsor for the purposes of engaging Article 8(1)
    of the European Convention on Human  Rights  and  if  so,  whether  the
    decision is a disproportionate  interference  with  the  Applicant  and
    Sponsor's rights protected by Article 8.  In  any  event,  this  is  an
    exceptional case on its facts which would, on the evidence  now  before
    the Upper Tribunal, warrant substantive consideration of Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights in addition to or separately to
    consideration  of  this  claim  within  the  Dublin   III   provisions,
    particularly in circumstances where the decision under challenge  erred
    in accepting the familial link.


117. As above, whilst the  evidence  as  to  the  relationship  between  the
    Applicant and the Sponsor before the Respondent at the date of decision
    was relatively limited and not comprehensive,  the  available  evidence
    has been considerably strengthened since that date in what is available
    before the Upper Tribunal both in the more detailed written  statements
    of the Applicant  and  the  Sponsor  (and  others  submitted  on  their
    behalf); as well as supporting evidence in Dr Bell's report  about  the
    daily telephone contact  for  extended  periods  of  time  between  the
    Applicant and both of his brothers in the  United  Kingdom.   I  attach
    significant weight to Dr Bell's comprehensive report and his assessment
    of the relationship between the Applicant and the Sponsor,  emphasising
    the emotional support provided to the Applicant and his  dependency  on
    his family in the United Kingdom.

118. Whilst it remains the case that there are  gaps  in  the  evidence  and
    aspects  of  the  claimed  relationship  remain  entirely   unexplained
    (including, for example the extended period  from  2014  to  2019  when
    there was no contact at all between the Applicant and the  Sponsor  and
    no evidence as to how contact was re-established); there is in my  view
    sufficient evidence before me to establish the existence of family life
    now for the purpose of Article 8(1) of the European Convention on Human
    Rights.  The familial link has been accepted by the Respondent  and  on
    the basis that the Applicant is an adult, there is sufficient  evidence
    of emotional  dependency  (and  some  much  more  limited  evidence  of
    financial support) to show ties which go beyond that normally  expected
    between adult siblings.

119. The refusal of the exercise of discretion in the present case to  admit
    the Applicant to the United Kingdom for his asylum claim to be examined
    here would constitute a significant  interference  with  his  right  to
    respect for private and family life and the  only  remaining  issue  is
    whether that refusal is disproportionate.

120. I have no hesitation in the present case in accepting on the  basis  of
    the evidence before me that there is  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the Applicant's Article 8 rights.  I attach significant weight  to
    the very detailed and thorough report of Dr Bell, which  has  not  been
    challenged in substance by the Respondent at all which  identifies  the
    Applicant's current condition and living circumstances at the very high
    end of serious and compelling; together with his  very  poor  prognosis
    for the Applicant should those circumstances persist in Greece  and  he
    is denied the support of his brother in the United Kingdom (or even the
    hope of being able to join him here in the future).   On  any  rational
    view,  Dr  Bell's  report  sets  out  exceptional   and   compassionate
    circumstances which far outweigh any public interest considerations  in
    the Respondent's favour in the proportionality balancing exercise, even
    taking into account that the TCR was  only  for  the  Applicant  to  be
    admitted to the United Kingdom for the examination of his asylum  claim
    here.

121. In so deciding,  I  emphasise  that  this  decision  is  based  on  the
    evidence before me at the date of hearing; primarily the report from Dr
    Bell; which is both significantly more detailed and comprehensive  than
    that which was before the Respondent at the date of the decision  under
    challenge and which in substance refers repeatedly to  a  deterioration
    in the Applicant's condition over time  and  since  the  TCR  was  made
    (consistent with other evidence post-dating the decision).  It  is  not
    to be inferred that the same conclusion would have been reached on  the
    evidence before the Respondent at the date of decision (either  on  the
    engagement of  Article  8(1)  or  whether  the  interference  would  be
    disproportionate), nor that there is any finding that the decision when
    made was in breach of Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.

Remedy

122. The parties are invited to make submissions  as  to  the  form  of  the
    order as a result of the decision set out above, if the same can not be
    agreed; which may include submissions on the issue of damages.



                                  ~~~~0~~~~


