
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/1592/2020 |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |             |
|              |Judicial Review                              |             |
|                                                                          |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                       |
|                                                                          |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |             |
|              |SM                                           |             |
|              |                                             |Applicant    |
|              |versus                                       |             |
|              |                                             |             |
|              |Secretary of State for the Home Department   |             |
|              |                                             |Respondent   |
|                                                                          |
|ORDER                                                                     |
|              |                                             |             |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

HAVING considered all documents lodged and having  heard  hearing  Charlotte
Kilroy QC and Michelle Knorr, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP,  for  the
applicant and Mr G. Lewis, of counsel, instructed by  the  Government  Legal
Department, for the respondent at a hearing on 25 January 2021

AND UPON considering further  submissions  in  writing  from  both  parties,
received on 8 February 2021

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) For the reasons set out in the judgment dated 5 March 2021, the
       application for judicial review is granted to the extent that the
       Respondent's processing of the take-charge request made by Greece and
       refusal to accept responsibility for the Applicant's asylum claim
       until 11 February 2021 was (i) a breach of the Dublin III Regulation;
       and (ii) a breach of the Applicant's right to respect for his private
       life under Article 7 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, and
       there shall be a declaration accordingly.
    2) The claim is otherwise dismissed.
    3) The Respondent's decisions dated 18 February 2020, 17 March 2020, 27
       April 2020 and 1 June 2020 refusing to accept the take-charge request
       are quashed.
    4) By 4pm on 16 March 2021, the Applicant is to file and serve written
       submissions, no longer than 10 pages in length, on (i) whether any
       further relief is required; and (ii) costs.
    5) By 4pm on 30 March 2021, the Respondent is file and serve written
       submissions, no longer than 10 pages in length, on the same matters
       (i) and (ii) identified in paragraph (4) above, with those matters
       then to be determined by Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith, on the
       papers if appropriate.
    6) Costs are, therefore, reserved at this stage.
    7) The applicant's application for  permission  to  appeal  against  the
       tribunal's Article 8 findings  is  refused.   None  of  the  proposed
       grounds of appeal have a realistic prospect of success and  there  is
       no other  compelling  reason  why  permission  to  appeal  should  be
       granted.
    8) Time to file the Applicant's Notice and  Grounds  of  Appeal  in  the
       Court of Appeal is not extended and the  applicant's  application  to
       stay these proceedings pending final determination of any  appeal  is
       refused.  The tribunal considers that whether to extend the  time  to
       file a notice and grounds of appeal in  the  Court  of  Appeal  is  a
       matter for the Court of  Appeal.   Staying  the  proceedings  pending
       resolution of any final appeal would could lead to a  lengthy  delay.
       It is plainly not in the best interests of this child applicant  that
       the question of relief arising from his success in these  proceedings
       should be postponed for a potentially lengthy period, nor would it be
       compatible with the overriding objective of this tribunal,  which  is
       to avoid delay, so far as is compatible with proper consideration  of
       the issues  (see  rule  2(2)(e)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008).



      Signed:     Stephen H Smith


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


      Dated:           5 March 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
05/03/2021

Solicitors:
Ref  No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


                                    [pic]
                                                       Case No: JR/1592/2020
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                                5 March 2021
                                   Before:

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                         (on the application of SM)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                      Ms C. Kilroy, QC, and Ms M. Knorr
          (instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP), for the applicant

                                 Mr G. Lewis
     (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the respondent

                        Hearing date: 25 January 2021
                Further submissions received: 8 February 2021

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               J U D G M E N T

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

This has been a remote hearing which has been consented to / not objected
to by the parties.  The form of remote hearing was V: partly remote.

A face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable, and all
issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

The documents that I was referred to were primarily contained in a bundle
of 397 pages, the contents of which I have recorded. The order made is
described at the end of these reasons.

The parties said this about the process: they were content that it had been
conducted fairly in its remote form.

Covid-19: this judgment was handed down remotely by circulation to the
parties' representatives by email, release to BAILII and publication on
https://tribunalsdecisions.service.gov.uk/utiac.  The date and time for
hand-down is deemed to be 2.30PM on 5 March 2021


                                JUDGMENT (V)


Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith:


Introduction


 1. This application for judicial review concerns  a  series  of  decisions
    taken by the Secretary of State to refuse requests made  by  the  Greek
    authorities to 'take charge' of an unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child
    under Regulation (EU) 604/2013 of the European Parliament  and  of  the
    Council establishing the criteria and mechanisms  for  determining  the
    Member State responsible for examining an application for international
    protection lodged in one  of  the  Member  States  by  a  third-country
    national or a stateless person (recast), known as 'Dublin III'.


 2. In this decision, 'TCR' means a 'take charge request' under Dublin III.


 3. I maintain the anonymity direction already in force.


Impact of EU exit: saving provision


 4. Although the United Kingdom has now left the European Union,  the  take
    charge requests in these  proceedings  were  made  before  11pm  on  31
    December 2020.  Pursuant to Part 3 of Schedule 2  to  the  Immigration,
    Nationality and Asylum (EU Exit) Regulations 2019/745, paragraph 9, the
    Dublin III Regulation continues to have effect for the purposes of such
    requests.  Paragraph 9(8) of Schedule  2  provides  that  the  relevant
    provisions of Dublin III are to  be  construed  as  though  the  United
    Kingdom continued to be a Member State of the European Union.


Factual background


 5. The applicant, SM, is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 22  March  2003.
    He arrived in Greece in May 2019.  On 8 October 2019, he claimed asylum
    there.  He lives with a group of adult men, in substandard  conditions,
    outside the Greek child protection system.  He has an uncle and  sister
    residing legally in this country.  On 7 January 2020, the Greek  Dublin
    Unit ('the GDU') requested that the United Kingdom 'take charge' of the
    applicant under Article  22(1)  of  Dublin  III,  on  the  basis  that,
    pursuant to Article 8 of the Regulation, the  United  Kingdom  was  the
    Member State responsible.  The request was expressly made  in  relation
    to the applicant's uncle, but under 'other useful information' featured
    details of his sister,  including  her  date  of  birth  and  telephone
    number.


 6. The Secretary of State refused the request on 18 February 2020, on  the
    basis that the documentary information supporting the application  left
    the respondent 'unable to confirm' that the applicant  was  related  to
    his claimed uncle, SU.  Additionally, the English  translation  of  his
    Bangladeshi birth certificate  was  not  accompanied  by  the  original
    version.  A so-called 'undertaking letter' sent  to  SU  had  not  been
    returned.


 7. The Secretary of  State's  guidance  states  the  following  concerning
    'undertaking letters':


             'Whilst not a legal requirement of the Dublin  III  Regulation
             or Implementing Regulation, the sponsorship  undertaking  form
             will require the family to  state  clearly  whether  they  are
             willing and able to receive the child. It will  bring  to  the
             attention  of  the  UK  family  member  or   relative,   their
             obligations and responsibilities, and it will provide them the
             opportunity to raise  any  issues  or  questions  about  their
             obligations or responsibilities prior to a child's arrival.'


 8. The 18 February 2020 refusal decision is the first decision  challenged
    by the applicant.


The first reconsideration request


 9. On 6 March 2020, the GDU requested the Secretary of State to reconsider
    the refusal, under Article 5(2) of Commission Regulation (EC) 1560/2003
    ('the Implementing Regulation').  The reconsideration request  included
    the Bengali original documents, and informed  the  Secretary  of  State
    that,  in  any  event,  the  Bangladeshi  authorities  issued  original
    documents in English.  The English  documents  initially  provided  had
    been issued in that form,  and  there  was  no  need  for  a  certified
    translation from the original.  SU had, said the request, not  received
    the undertaking letter.  He had telephoned  the  Secretary  of  State's
    intake unit to ask about the case.  Contact details for SU and LB  were
    re-provided.


10.  On  17  March  2020,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused   the   first
    reconsideration request.   No further evidence  had  been  provided  to
    demonstrate the claimed familial link, the refusal said.  Although  the
    undertaking letters sent to SU had been 'signed for', they had not been
    returned:


             'Therefore we also  have  no  evidence  that  the  UK  sponsor
             remains willing and able to accommodate the above named.'


11. The 17 March 2020 refusal decision is the second decision challenged by
    the applicant.





The second reconsideration request


12. On 2 April 2020, the GDU submitted a further  reconsideration  request.
    It maintained that sufficient evidence had been provided  to  establish
    the claimed familial link.  In relation to  the  sponsor's  willingness
    and ability to accommodate the applicant, the GDU stated:


             'Article 6 of the Dublin III  regulation  provides  that  both
             requesting and requested member  states  are  responsible  for
             assessing the best interests of the child. In this respect  we
             kindly ask you to reach a conclusion as to whether  the  uncle
             is willing and able to take care of his nephew.


             If the UK reaches the conclusion that the uncle  is  unwilling
             or unable to take  care  of  the  child  then  the  UK  should
             investigate whether the child's sister  (article  8.1  DR)  is
             willing to take care of the  boy!  We  are  waiting  for  your
             assessment of  the  uncle  AND  of  the  sister...'  (emphasis
             original)


13. On 27 April 2020, the Secretary of State  declined  to  reconsider  the
    refusal request further.  She stated:


             'It is important to note that the  case  was  rejected  on  18
             February 2020 and as such the required deadline for a  request
             for re-consideration  as  outlined  in  Article  5(2)  of  the
             Implementing Regulation has now passed. As made clear  in  the
             CJEU case of C-47/17 and C-48/17 X and X  the  timeframes  set
             out in the Implementing Regulation should be read as 'strictly
             circumscribed' in order to  respect  the  objective  of  rapid
             processing (paragraph 74).


             You have also provided new information, you have requested 'if
             the uncle is unwilling or unable to take  care  of  the  child
             than the UK should  investigate  whether  the  child's  sister
             (article 8.1 DR) is willing to take care of the  boy.  We  are
             waiting for your assessment of the uncle AND of the sister'.


             However, for the reasons given above regarding the ruling in C-
             47/17 and C-48/17 X and X the UK  is  not  in  a  position  to
             consider this information in the form of  a  request  for  re-
             examination with reference to Article 5(2) of the Implementing
             Regulation. In accordance with the  aforementioned  case  law,
             the UK now considers Greece to be the responsible member state
             for examining the claim, unless you have  the  possibility  to
             make a further take charge or take back request.'


14. The 27 April 2020 is the third decision challenged by the applicant.


The third reconsideration request


15. On 18 May 2020, the  GDU  invited  the  respondent  to  reconsider  her
    refusal a further time:


             'In your third rejection  letter  sent  on  27/04/2020...  You
             simply invoke [the] CJEU case of C-47/17 and C-48/17 X  and  X
             in order to close the case.


             We must be clear that the CJEU judgement [sic] in question  is
             neither an excuse of unaccountability nor a justification  for
             arbitrariness.  It  ensures  and  protects   the   rights   of
             applicants;  it  does  not   uphold   the   right   of   state
             administrations to evade responsibility by  presenting  merely
             formal or plainly false argumentation.


             This request  should  be  accepted  from  the  beginning.  You
             rejected it because supposedly the family link  has  not  been
             proven in the uncle  does  not  consent.  We  provided  enough
             supporting proof/evidence in our two  re-examination  requests
             for the request to be accepted. The family link is  proven  by
             the submitted documentation and the will of the uncle and  the
             sister to welcome the child in the UK is known  to  the  Greek
             Authorities. We remind you that article 8. 1 of the Dublin III
             Regulation does not provide for the  sibling  to  be  able  to
             <<take care>> of the unaccompanied minor.


             We therefore ask you one more time to reconsider your negative
             decision.


             In any case we will keep the case  open  since  we  have  been
             informed that the  NGO  Safe  Passage  will  pursue  the  case
             further in the UK.


             In light of the above we kindly ask you to re-examine the case
             according to article 8 of the Dublin  III  Regulation  in  the
             principle of the  best  interests  of  the  child.'  (emphasis
             original)


16. On 1 June 2020, the Secretary  of  State  responded,  setting  out  key
    events in the chronology from her perspective, again relying on Cases C-
    47/17 and C-48/17 X and X and  the  fact  that  the  time  limits  were
    'strictly circumscribed'. Written consent from the  applicant  and  his
    sister had not been received, and it was not in the best  interests  of
    the applicant to  be  transferred  to  the  UK  to  join  his  'claimed
    relatives'.  The letter concluded in these terms:


             'In accordance with the aforementioned case law,  the  UK  now
             considers Greece  to  be  the  responsible  member  state  for
             examining the claim. If appropriate, it remains open to you to
             make a further take charge request, as indicated in the X  and
             X judgment.'


17. The 1 June 2020 decision is  the  fourth  decision  challenged  by  the
    applicant.


The fourth reconsideration request from the GDU


18. The GDU submitted a fourth and  final  request  on  31  December  2020,
    before 11PM. By this stage, the applicant had  issued  proceedings  for
    judicial review, and, through his solicitors, had engaged directly with
    the GDU about the progress of the take charge request, and the approach
    of the  Secretary  of  State.   By  definition,  this  judicial  review
    application does not encompass the Secretary of State's response to the
    fourth request and, as set  out  below,  Mr  Lewis  contends  that  the
    Secretary  of  State's  forthcoming  response  to   it   renders   this
    application for judicial review academic.


19. The 31 December 2020 request was in these terms:


             'We have been informed that the responsible member state about
             this case will be decided by the British courts.


             We would like to confirm that the Greek authorities have  kept
             the Dublin case of the child open, as is our standard practice
             for family reunification cases, that no decision on the asylum
             claim of the boy has been issued and that we  are  willing  to
             receive an acceptance letter under article 8, if the court  so
             decides.


             Regarding your informal request for a new take charge  request
             under article 17.2 in order for you to be able to make a fresh
             decision, we believe that a new TCR in the present case  would
             amount to procedural hoops that will cause further delay  [to]
             the allocation of responsibility and thus it  is  contrary  to
             the best interests of the child.


             You have also  informally  submitted  some  documents  to  our
             authorities in order for us  to  be  able  to  justify  a  new
             article  17.2  TCR  (since  new  evidence  would   have   been
             provided). Sending the Greek  authorities  documents  at  your
             disposal and then asking the Greek authorities  to  send  them
             back to you does not make much sense according to my opinion -
             but perhaps I am not  able  to  understand  the  hidden  logic
             behind it.


             More  importantly  though,  adding  the  documents  you   have
             submitted to this boy's file is against Greek  law.  Only  the
             authorised legal guardian/legal representative of the child is
             allowed to submit documents to the child's official  file  and
             this only when it serves the best interests of the child.  The
             British authorities are in no way allowed  to  send  documents
             and asked to be included in an unaccompanied minor's file.


             Furthermore, we would appreciate if  the  British  authorities
             instead of asking for new TCRs in order to make  discretionary
             'fresh decisions' would communicate to the  Greek  authorities
             what they communicate to  the  British  courts.  Specifically,
             SSHD admits to the court that the previous negative  decisions
             were unlawful, the Greek authorities should be informed  about
             this fact and we assure you that we would cooperate closely in
             organising the transfer.


             If a newly received TCR is indeed really necessary for you  in
             order to make new decisions we are resubmitting  the  original
             TCR, as proof that the Dublin case is still open for Greece.'


20. The reference to the Secretary of State admitting  to  the  court  that
    'previous negative decisions were unlawful' must have been a  reference
    to the Secretary of State's position as set out in her Detailed Grounds
    of Defence ('the  DGRs')  submitted  in  these  proceedings,  dated  13
    November 2020.  At paragraphs 21-22 and 25 of the DGRs,  the  Secretary
    of State accepted that the 18 February  and  17  March  decisions  were
    unlawful and did not seek to defend them.


21. By the date of the substantive hearing  before  me,  the  Secretary  of
    State accepted the family link between the applicant  and  SU  and  LB,
    with the only remaining issue outstanding being whether it was  in  the
    best interests of the applicant to be  reunited  with  them.   In  that
    respect, on 11 January 2021, the applicant applied for an interim order
    compelling the  Secretary  of  State  to  request  the  relevant  local
    authorities  to  conduct  urgent  assessments  in   relation   to   the
    suitability of SU and LB to receive the applicant.


22. At the hearing before me, Mr Lewis did not resist the  proposed  order,
    and committed the Secretary of State to using all reasonable endeavours
    to secure family assessments from the local authorities on an expedited
    basis.  The  order  also  required  the  respondent  to  communicate  a
    decision on the TCR to the Greek authorities within two working days of
    receiving a positive local authority assessment in relation  to  either
    SU or LB.


23. I made the order, a copy of which may be found in  the  Annex  to  this
    judgment.








Issue of proceedings


24. The applicant lodged this application for judicial review  on  15  June
    2020, challenging the lawfulness of all four refusal decisions, on  the
    following grounds:


        a. Ground 1: the Secretary of State's processing  of  the  TCR  and
           refusal to accept responsibility is unlawful and in breach of EU
           law, common law and Article 8 ECHR.


        b. Ground 2: the  UK  is  the  responsible  Member  State  for  the
           applicant's asylum claim, and the applicant's fundamental rights
           have been breached.


25. The above two grounds are officially pleaded as  the  two  grounds  for
    judicial review.  The applicant's statement of facts and  grounds,  and
    Ms Kilroy's skeleton argument, feature  additional  criticisms  of  the
    respondent's general approach, as well as more specific  criticisms  of
    different facets of the decisions under consideration, and what is said
    to have been a reversal of the Secretary of State's  standard  practice
    concerning  the  withdrawal  of   incorrect   reconsideration   refusal
    decisions.  Not all such  criticisms  are  articulated  under  specific
    submissions advanced pursuant to each ground for judicial review.  They
    are buried throughout the statement  of  facts  and  grounds,  and  the
    skeleton argument.  The applicant's statement of facts and grounds  and
    his main skeleton argument run to 49 pages in total.  The  respondent's
    detailed grounds of resistance and main skeleton argument, to 46 pages.
     I have sought to respond to salient arguments  advanced  in  this  way
    where necessary to do so in order to consider the primary  grounds  for
    judicial review.  Mindful of the need for  procedural  rigour  in  this
    jurisdiction, the now well-established need for permission to amend the
    grounds for judicial review, and the deprecation with which attempts to
    engage in any form of 'rolling review' should be met, I have sought  to
    confine the focus of this judgment to  the  two  grounds  for  judicial
    review.  That necessarily means that there are some  submissions  which
    it has not been necessary to engage with in depth.


26. In her Acknowledgement of Service dated 8 July 2020, the  Secretary  of
    State agreed to reconsider the applicant's case 'subject to receiving a
    fresh Take Charge Request' from  the  Greek  authorities,  agreeing  to
    contact them  within  five  days,  presumably  to  catalyse  a  further
    request.  A decision on the TCR would then be taken within two  months.
    The Tribunal was invited to refuse permission on the papers.


27. Upper Tribunal Judge Gill initially refused permission on  the  papers.
    She declined to admit the application in relation to  the  18  February
    2020 decision, on the basis the challenge was out of time.  In relation
    to the remaining decisions,  Judge  Gill  considered  the  respondent's
    concerns about the absence of an undertaking from SU to be  dispositive
    of refusing permission, and said that the grounds for  judicial  review
    failed to engage with the respondent's arguments concerning the  import
    of X and X.


28. Following a renewal hearing on 23 October 2020,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Norton-Taylor  granted  permission  on  both  grounds.    He   accepted
    submissions advanced on behalf of the applicant that the  decision  was
    not out of time and considered that it was appropriate to  extend  time
    in any event.  In his decision granting permission, Judge Norton-Taylor
    said:


             '...there is a matter of some importance in this case,  namely
             the respondent's current practice of requiring the  requesting
             state (here, Greece) to make a  new  take  charge  request  in
             order for any reconsideration to occur.'


29. The substantive hearing on 25 January 2021 was conducted  remotely,  in
    order to take precautions against the spread of Covid-19.  The  parties
    were content that the hearing had been conducted fairly in  its  remote
    form.  I received further submissions from both parties on  8  February
    2021, as set out below.


LEGAL FRAMEWORK


30. Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  ('the  ECHR')
    provides:


             '1. Everyone has the right to  respect  for  his  private  and
             family life, his home and his correspondence.


             2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with
             the exercise of this right except such  as  is  in  accordance
             with the law and is necessary in a democratic society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.'


31. Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  European  Union
    provides:


             'Everyone has the right to respect for his or her private  and
             family life, home and communications.'


32. The 'broad purpose' of the Dublin III regime was described by Laing  LJ
    in Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  R  (oao  FWF  &  Anr)
    [2021] EWCA Civ 88 at [13] as:


             '...to continue the EU's system for regulating the  allocation
             of responsibility between member states  for  deciding  claims
             for international protection made in different member  states,
             particularly where one person makes such a claim in more  than
             one member state.'


33. The Recitals to the instrument outline its objectives in further depth.
     Recital (4) highlights the importance of a 'clear and workable method'
    for determining the responsible member state, which should be based  on
    'objective and fair criteria' for both the member state, and the person
    concerned.


34. Recital (13) provides that, in accordance with the UN Convention on the
    Rights of the Child, and the Charter of Fundamental  Rights,  the  best
    interests  of  the   child   should   be   a   primary   consideration.
    Unaccompanied minors are to enjoy specific  procedural  guarantees  'on
    account of their  particular  vulnerability.'   Recital  (14)  provides
    that, in accordance with the ECHR, and the Charter, respect for  family
    life should be a 'primary consideration'  in  the  application  of  the
    regulation.


35. Pursuant to Recital (16), a relationship of dependency between a  child
    applicant  and  their  sibling  is  to  be  regarded   as   a   binding
    responsibility criterion.   When  the  applicant  is  an  unaccompanied
    minor, the presence of a family member or relative on the territory  of
    another member state who can take care of him or her should also become
    a binding responsibility criterion.


36. Turning to the substantive provisions  of  the  regulation,  Article  1
    outlines the purpose of  the  regulation  as  being  to  prescribe  the
    criteria and mechanisms for examining international protection claims.


37. Article 2 defines certain terms.  Under paragraph (g), certain  'family
    members' are defined.  Paragraph  (h)  defines  'relative'  as  meaning
    '...the applicant's adult aunt or uncle or grandparent who  is  present
    in the territory of a Member  State...'   The  term  'sibling'  is  not
    defined, suggesting its ordinary meaning applies.


38. Article 6(1), headed Guarantees for minors, provides:


             'The  best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be   a   primary
             consideration for Member States with respect to all procedures
             provided for in this Regulation.'


39. Turning to the operative criteria for  determining  responsibility  for
    the examination of a protection claim, Article 8  is  relevant  in  the
    case of an unaccompanied minor.  Under paragraph (1),  where  a  family
    member or sibling of the unaccompanied minor is legally  present  in  a
    member state, that member state is responsible, provided it is  in  the
    best interests of the applicant.  Paragraph (2) makes similar provision
    for a 'relative' provided, based  on  an  individual  examination,  the
    relative can take care of him or her.


40. Article 17 features a discretionary procedure, whereby a  member  state
    may choose to examine (paragraph (1)) or be invited to take  charge  of
    (paragraph (2)) the examination of an asylum claim for which  it  would
    not otherwise be responsible.  In the case of a request  under  Article
    17(2), the paragraph suggests a member state may wish  to  do  so,  'in
    order to bring together any family relations, on  humanitarian  grounds
    based in particular on family or cultural considerations.'  The persons
    concerned must express their consent in writing.


41. Article 21 makes provision for the requesting member state to submit  a
    take  charge  request,  which  must  be  within  three  months  of  the
    application for international protection being lodged.


42. Article 22(1) provides:


             'The requested Member State shall make the  necessary  checks,
             and shall give a decision on the request to take charge of  an
             applicant within two months of receipt of the request.'


    The consequences of failing to respond within the two month period  are
    addressed in Article 22(7):


             'Failure to act  within  the  two-month  period  mentioned  in
             paragraph 1... shall be tantamount to accepting  the  request,
             and entail the  obligation  to  take  charge  of  the  person,
             including the obligation to provide  for  proper  arrangements
             for arrival.'


43. Article 27 provides for an effective remedy  by  which  a  take  charge
    request may be challenged.


44. The European Commission has adopted two implementing regulations making
    practical provision for the implementation of the Dublin  regime.   The
    first, Commission Regulation (EC) 1560/2003, concerned  the  Dublin  II
    regime.  It has been updated by  the  second  implementing  regulation,
    Commission Regulation (EC) 118/2014.  In this judgment, I use the  term
    'Implementing Regulation' to refer to Regulation 1560/2003, as  amended
    by Regulation 118/2014.


45. Article 5(2) of the Implementing Regulation provides:


             'Where the requesting Member State feels that such  a  refusal
             is based  on  a  misappraisal,  or  where  it  has  additional
             evidence to put forward, it may ask for its request to be  re-
             examined. This option must be  exercised  within  three  weeks
             following receipt of the negative reply. The requested  Member
             State shall endeavour to reply within two weeks. In any event,
             this additional procedure shall not  extend  the  time  limits
             laid down in Article 18(1) and (6)  and  Article  20(1)(b)  of
             Regulation (EC) No 343/2003.'


    Pursuant to the correlation table  at  Annex  II  to  Dublin  III,  the
    references to Article 18(1) and (6) are to be  read  as  references  to
    Articles 22(1) and (6), and 29(2) of Dublin III, and the  reference  to
    Article 20(1)(b) has  effect  as  though  it  concerned  Article  25(1)
    (replying to take back requests).


46. Article 12(2) of the Implementing  Regulation  is  also  relevant;  see
    paragraph 94, below.


Secretary of State for the Home Department v R (oao FWF & Anr)  [2021]  EWCA
Civ 88


47. On 28 January 2021, three days after the hearing in these  proceedings,
    the Court of Appeal handed down judgment in Secretary of State for  the
    Home Department v R (oao FWF & Anr)  [2021]  EWCA  Civ  88,  addressing
    matters including the interaction between the  Dublin  III  regime  and
    Article 8 ECHR.  I permitted the parties to make written submissions in
    response to the judgment, and I am grateful to both parties  for  doing
    so, as directed, by 8 February 2021.


48. FWF concerned the relationship between obligations  imposed  by  Dublin
    III, the Charter of  Fundamental  Rights,  and  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    central issue was whether, if a member state acts unlawfully in any way
    in the course of discharging its Dublin III obligations, that  is  ipso
    facto a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR, and Article 7 of the  Charter:
    see [4].  The Secretary of State purported to refuse a  TCR  after  the
    two month limit for responding had passed, with the effect that, by the
    time of the purported refusal, the UK was the responsible member  state
    by default, pursuant to Article 22(7).   A  fresh  TCR  was  made,  and
    subsequently accepted by the Secretary of  State.   The  children  were
    transferred to the UK within eight months of  the  original  TCR,  that
    being the 'longstop' for lawful transfer under the regulation.


49. The court held that a refusal post-dating  default  acceptance  had  no
    legal effect [133].  Any breaches of Dublin  III  along  the  way  were
    incidental and not operative, provided there was  compliance  with  the
    overall  timescales.   Article  8  ECHR  did  not   impose   additional
    obligations on the requested member state where there had been  overall
    Dublin III compliance, for the Dublin III regime goes further  than  is
    required by Article 8 ECHR.  For there to be a breach of Article 8 ECHR
    in those circumstances, it would  be  necessary  to  demonstrate  'very
    exceptional circumstances' [140].  On the facts of  the  case,  because
    the Secretary of State complied with the longstop Dublin  III  timings,
    there had been no breach  of  Dublin  III,  or  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    Secretary of State's appeal was successful, and  the  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal to the contrary was set aside.


SUBMISSIONS


Ground 1 - the Secretary of State's processing of the  TCR  and  refusal  to
accept responsibility is unlawful and in breach of EU law,  common  law  and
Article 8 ECHR


Decisions of 18 February and 17 March 2020


50. First, Ms Kilroy submits that the evidence provided with each  TCR  was
    extensive, and clearly proved the relationships between the  applicant,
    SU and LB.  The requests could  not  reasonably  be  refused,  and  the
    Secretary of State has not sought to contend otherwise.  The TCR should
    have been accepted.


51. Secondly, the Secretary of State breached her investigative duty by:


        a. Failing to give the applicant,  SU  or  LB  any  opportunity  to
           address her  concerns  about  the  claimed  relationship  before
           rejecting the TCR.


        b. Failing, contrary to Dublin III, the applicant's best interests,
           and her own policy, to obtain an assessment  from  the  relevant
           local authority, before rejecting the TCR.


        c. Failing to investigate, assess and treat  the  applicant's  best
           interests and his right to  family  unity  under  Article  6  of
           Dublin III, Article 24 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, and
           Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  ('the
           ECHR') as a primary consideration in any of the decisions.


        d. Failing to liaise with Greece to secure  DNA  testing  prior  to
           issuing a refusal, as was incumbent upon the Secretary of  State
           in the event she legitimately harboured doubts about the claimed
           family relationship which could not be  resolved  in  any  other
           way.


52. Thirdly, the Secretary of State should not  have  relied  on  the  non-
    return of the undertaking forms as a basis for  refusing  the  request,
    even if they were successfully delivered.  Completing the forms was not
    a legal requirement, as recognised by the Secretary of State's  policy.
    Even if the undertaking  form  could,  in  principle,  serve  a  useful
    purpose in helping to determine an applicant's best interests, it could
    never be in an applicant's best interests to adopt  a  blanket  refusal
    policy in the event of the non-return of an optional form.  Only if the
    non-return of the form revealed safeguarding or  other  concerns  could
    that be relevant to refusing a TCR, and only then if it were not in the
    child's best interests for family unification to take place.


53.  Fourthly,  the  Secretary  of  State  failed  to   comply   with   the
    investigative  duty  imposed  by  Article  3(2)  of  the   Implementing
    Regulation.  Given the GDU provided information relating to SU and  LB,
    the Secretary of State was required to investigate the TCR  request  in
    relation to each.  LB's information was clearly provided.  The  Article
    3(2)  duty  required  the  Secretary  of  State  to  investigate   both
    possibilities for reunification, prior to refusing  the  TCR.   To  the
    extent the Secretary of State relied on the absence of consent from  LB
    (as she later suggested in the third reconsideration refusal on 1  June
    2020), there was no requirement  for  consent  of  the  family  member,
    sibling or relative under Article 8 of Dublin III.  If the Secretary of
    State considered that LB's consent  was  desirable,  her  investigative
    duties required her to  seek  her  consent  through  either  the  Greek
    authorities, or to approach LB directly, using the contact  details  in
    the TCR.


54. Ms Kilroy submits that, irrespective of whether the 27 April and 1 June
    2020 decisions were unlawful, the applicant is entitled to an effective
    remedy in relation to the accepted unlawfulness contaminating the first
    two decisions.


Decisions of 27 April and 1 June 2020


55. The applicant accepts that the approach taken by the Secretary of State
    in the 27 April and 1 June  2020  decisions  was  consistent  with  her
    policy then in force, Dublin III Regulation, version 3, 30 April  2020,
    at pp37-38.  He contends that both the decisions  and  the  policy  are
    unlawful.


56. It will be recalled that in the 27 April  and  1  June  decisions,  the
    Secretary of State contended that  Article  5(2)  of  the  Implementing
    Regulation, as interpreted by  the  CJEU  in  X  and  X,  entailed  the
    conclusive rejection of the TCR.  The policy puts the position in these
    terms, at page 38:


             'A  rejected  request  can  only  trigger  one  re-examination
             procedure, it  is  not  possible  to  call  for  repeated  re-
             examinations in the same procedure.  Only  a  new  request  to
             take charge or take  back,  if  rejected,  would  attract  the
             possibility of a  new  re-examination  request  (of  that  new
             rejection).'


57.  The  Secretary  of  State  should  have  used  the  second  and  third
    reconsideration  requests  as  an  opportunity  to  reverse  the  plain
    unlawfulness of her first two  decisions.   The  strict  timeframes  of
    Article 5(2) of the Implementing Regulation, as amplified by X  and  X,
    do not apply to cases involving unaccompanied minors.  The  primacy  of
    the best interests of the child is a primary  consideration  under  all
    Dublin III procedures, pursuant to Article 6.  As held in MA  (Eritrea)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department Case C-648/11 [2013] 1 WLR
    2961 at [59] to [61],  such  primacy  is  an  interpretative  principle
    guiding  the  overall  interpretation  of  the  Regulation.   X  and  X
    concerned the quite different situation of calculating the time  within
    which the Member State responsible  for  examining  an  adult's  asylum
    claim must do so.


58. In the case of an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child,  there  are  such
    compelling  reasons  militating  in  favour  of   family   unification,
    recognised by  Dublin  III  itself  and  the  leading  authorities  and
    international materials, that the strict time limits of the  Regulation
    must be applied flexibly, Ms Kilroy submits.  The CJEU could  not  have
    intended to enable Member States to abrogate the responsibility for  an
    asylum claim of an unaccompanied child they  would  otherwise  have  to
    bear, simply because the Article 5(2) timescales were not met.  That is
    especially so  where,  as  here,  the  Secretary  of  State  has  acted
    unlawfully by rejecting the TCR.  X  and  X  was  designed  to  protect
    applicants, not to clothe Member States with a shroud of  impunity  for
    unlawfully rejecting TCRs.  If X and X is authority  for  anything,  it
    underlines the proposition that  Dublin  III  must  be  interpreted  in
    accordance with its aims and purpose, which  resolutely  cannot  entail
    leaving unaccompanied minors in the dangerous  limbo  suffered  by  the
    applicant in these proceedings.


Ground 2 - the UK is  the  responsible  Member  State  for  the  applicant's
asylum claim, and the applicant's fundamental rights have been breached


59. Ms Kilroy submits that all four decisions of  the  Secretary  of  State
    should be quashed, and that I should  decide  for  myself  whether  the
    applicant's rights under EU law, or the ECHR, have been breached.


60. 'For the purposes of reunification  with  LB  under  Article  8(1)  [of
    Dublin III], there is no requirement to show her ability  to  care  for
    the [a]pplicant': see the applicant's skeleton argument at  [47].   The
    best interests  assessment  is  primarily  the  responsibility  of  the
    requesting state, as recognised by the Secretary of State's  policy  at
    page 8.  There is a presumption that reunification with family  members
    is in the best interests of unaccompanied  minors.   The  Secretary  of
    State was required to undertake safeguarding checks upon receipt of the
    TCR; no safeguarding concerns have been raised.


61. Given the Dublin III criteria for the  applicant's  reunification  with
    his uncle and sister are met, 'that alone is a strong indication'  that
    the applicant's rights under Article 7 of the  Charter  of  Fundamental
    Rights and Article 8 of the ECHR are engaged, Ms Kilroy  submits.   The
    rationale behind the Article 8 of  Dublin  III  includes  the  need  to
    ensure respect for family unity and the best interests  of  the  child;
    see Recitals (16) and (39).  Article 7 of the Charter, Article  8  ECHR
    and Dublin III must  be  interpreted  harmoniously.   Article  8  ECHR,
    interpreted in light of the Convention on the Rights of the  Child,  as
    expressed by the UN Committee on the Rights of the  Children's  General
    comment No. 14 (2013) on the right of the child to have his or her best
    interests  taken  as  a  primary  consideration  (art.   3,   para   1)
    (CRC/C/GC/14), places a  significant,  and  primary,  emphasis  on  the
    importance of family unification and the prevention of disruption.  The
    criteria in Mathieson v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015]
    UKSC 47 at [39] concerning the three-fold concept of the best interests
    of the child underlines the centrality of the  best  interests  of  the
    applicant  in  the  Secretary  of  State's  decisions,  and  in   these
    proceedings.


62. As an unaccompanied minor with  no  alternative  care  arrangements  in
    Greece, a decision by the Secretary of State concerning  his  potential
    reunification with SU and LB plainly engages his  right  to  family  or
    private life.  The jurisprudence on Article 8 ECHR supports  a  finding
    of the existence of family life based on the potential for family  life
    to be strengthened: see Pawandeep Singh v Entry Clearance Officer,  New
    Delhi [2005] QB 608, [2004] EWCA Civ 1075.


63.  In  Pawandeep  Singh,  Dyson  LJ  drew  heavily  on  Pini  v   Romania
    (Application Nos 78028/01, 78030/01) (unreported) 22 June 2004, and  Ms
    Kilroy placed significant reliance on the case accordingly.  The matter
    concerned two Italian citizens seeking  to  adopt  two  nine  year  old
    Romanian girls living in a private orphanage in Romania.  The  children
    had been selected by their adoptive parents on the basis of photographs
    alone.  Adoption orders were in place but were not carried into effect.
     The applicants contended that the  Romanian  authorities'  refusal  to
    allow the children to join them  in  Italy  violated  their  Article  8
    rights.  The Strasbourg Court held that Article 8  ECHR  'family  life'
    existed between the children and the parents, but  that  there  was  no
    violation of Article 8, as the positive obligations under Article 8 did
    not oblige the Romanian authorities to  ensure  the  children  went  to
    Italy against their will.   The  orphanage  had  opposed  the  adoption
    arrangements, as did a number of third  parties.     Significantly,  it
    said this, at [143]:


             'Admittedly, by guaranteeing the right to respect  for  family
             life,  Article  8  presupposes  the  existence  of  a   family
             (see Marckx, cited above, pp. 14-15,    31,  and Abdulaziz,
             Cabales  and  Balkandali,  cited  above,  p.   32,   62),   a
             requirement which does not  seem  to  have  been  met  in  the
             instant case  as  the  applicants  did  not  live  with  their
             respective adopted daughters or  have  sufficiently  close de
             facto ties with them, either before  or  after  the  adoption
             orders were made. However, this does not mean, in the  Court's
             opinion, that all intended family life falls entirely  outside
             the ambit of Article 8. In  this  connection,  the  Court  has
             previously  held  that  Article  8  may  also  extend  to  the
             potential relationship between a child born out of wedlock and
             his or her natural  father  (see Nylund  v.  Finland (dec.),
             no. 27110/95, ECHR 1999-VI), or apply to the relationship that
             arises from a lawful and genuine marriage, even if family life
             has not yet been fully established (see Abdulaziz, Cabales and
             Balkandali, cited above, p. 32,  62).'


64. The above extract paved the way for Dyson LJ, as he then  was,  to  say
    the following  at  [38],  upon  which  Ms  Kilroy  places  considerable
    reliance:


             'the potential for development of family life is  relevant  in
             determining whether family life already exists...'


65. Ms Kilroy also relies on R (Ahmadi) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1721, per Moses LJ, at  [17],  and  Boyle  v
    United Kingdom 19 EHRR 179 at [40] to [46],  concerning  the  potential
    for family life to develop.  She also relies on a  series  of  judicial
    review cases in this tribunal to make good the same point, plus further
    authorities listed at [53] of her skeleton argument.


66. Family life having been established, submits Ms  Kilroy,  the  repeated
    TCR refusals amounted to an unlawful interference  in  the  applicant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights.  As the Secretary  of  State  is  in  breach  of
    Dublin III, the interference is not 'in accordance with the law'.   The
    refusals have forced the applicant to remain in dire  and  unacceptable
    conditions in Greece, prolonging his separation from his  family.   The
    delay caused by the Secretary of State's unlawful refusals  exacerbated
    her  breaches  of  Article  8  ECHR,  and  the  multiple  instances  of
    procedural  unfairness  and  procedural  irregularities  breached   the
    procedural limb of Article 8 ECHR.  The Secretary of  State's  practice
    of requiring a further TCR was unlawful, and  contrary  to  established
    authority: R (oao of MS) (a child  by  his  litigation  friend  MAS)  v
    Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  (Dublin  III;  duty  to
    investigate) [2019] UKUT 00009 (IAC); R (oao IAD) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department  JR/1333/2020;  R  (oao  MA  (a  child  by  his
    litigation friend ASM)) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    JR/1265/2020, and the Outer House of the Court  of  Session's  reasoned
    order on interim relief in Nasser Al Fadhli.


67. Ms Kilroy submits that, even though further TCRs were neither necessary
    nor appropriate following the initial request, the Secretary  of  State
    failed to provide the tribunal and the Greek authorities with  accurate
    information  concerning   her   position,   further   compounding   the
    unlawfulness of her conduct.


68. For example, in parallel to maintaining before the  tribunal  that  she
    was willing to reconsider the applicant's case, subject to receiving  a
    fresh TCR (see paragraph 2 of the Acknowledgement of  Service  dated  8
    July 2020), the Secretary of  State's  officials  contacted  the  Greek
    authorities  to  inform  them  that  it  would  be  necessary  for  the
    applicant's lawyers to convey further evidence to the Greek authorities
    in order for a further TCR to be considered.  See the  email  of  Julia
    Farman, Head of the European Intake in the UK  Dublin  Unit,  dated  10
    July 2020, at page 252 of the trial bundle.


69. In the DGD dated 13 November 2020, the Secretary of State accepted that
    her first two decisions were  unlawful  (see  paragraphs  21  and  25),
    having underlined her position that she was willing to  reconsider  the
    request, subject to a further TCR from Greece.   By  contrast,  on  the
    same day as filing her DGD, Ms Farman emailed an official  in  the  GDU
    stating that further evidence would be required in order for the UK  to
    consider a further TCR: see page 244 of the trial bundle.


70. At no stage, submits Ms Kilroy, did Ms Farman reveal to  the  GDU  that
    the Secretary of State now accepts that the first two refusal decisions
    were unlawful.  Instead, the impression given to the  GDU  was  that  a
    further TCR request would only be considered in a  different  light  if
    new evidence were provided in support.  Ms Farman has  not  provided  a
    witness statement explaining her decisions in the process, nor has  she
    sought to respond to the concerns raised by Ms Kilroy  in  relation  to
    her handling of the matter.


71. In relation to FWF in the Court of  Appeal,  Ms  Kilroy's  post-hearing
    submissions contend that the authority is distinguishable.   Its  focus
    was default acceptance cases where transfer had taken place within  the
    overall time limits prescribed by Dublin III.  It was in  that  limited
    context that the court held that Article 8 added little to  the  rights
    guaranteed by the Dublin III regime, for  the  process  it  established
    went considerably further than Article 8 ECHR would require within  the
    same timeframe.  The purported TCR refusal in FWF was held to  have  no
    legal effect.  That was in stark contrast to the unlawful  refusals  in
    the  present  matter  which  had  'full  legal  effect',  resulting  in
    responsibility for the applicant unlawfully failing to pass to  the  UK
    upon the conclusion  of  the  two  month  Article  22(1)  period.   The
    unlawfulness in these proceedings is fully operative, and  not  in  any
    sense incidental.  The applicant does not seek to supplement his rights
    under Dublin III in a  situation  where  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    complied with the regulation.  Rather he relies on Article  8  ECHR  in
    circumstances where the Secretary of State  has  manifestly  failed  to
    comply  with  Dublin  III,  with  the  effect  that  the   'exceptional
    circumstances' test underlined in FWF does not apply.


72. Ms Kilroy invites me to declare that the Article 8 Dublin III  criteria
    are met, and to order the Secretary of State to liaise with  the  Greek
    authorities to arrange the  applicant's  prompt  transfer  to  the  UK,
    consistent with the approach of Lord Boyd in Nasser Al  Fadhli,  or  to
    take a fresh decision  within  an  appropriately  tight  timeframe.   I
    should also declare that the Secretary of State  breached  her  EU  law
    obligations.


73. I turn now to Mr Lewis' submissions.  The Secretary of State's  primary
    position has always been that this challenge  is  academic.   Mr  Lewis
    emphasised that it is now accepted that the applicant is related to  SU
    and LB.  The only  outstanding  matters  to  be  resolved  ahead  of  a
    transfer tacking place were responses to the undertaking forms, and the
    local authorities' assessments (SU and LB  living  in  different  local
    authority areas), which will inform the assessment of  the  applicant's
    best interests.  The Secretary of State had also  sought  clarity  from
    the GDU as to whether the proposed transfer was in relation  to  SU  or
    LB, as legal certainty in that respect was essential, and the  original
    requests have been unclear.  The Secretary of  State  accepted  that  a
    final decision on the transfer should be taken within two working  days
    of receipt of the local authority assessment.


74. Mr Lewis submits that I need not  engage  with  the  substance  of  the
    applicant's submissions, and there is no good  reason  to  exercise  my
    discretion to consider argument on an academic matter.  There  is  not,
    for example, a discrete point of statutory construction of significance
    to a large number of similar or anticipated cases as a reason to engage
    with an otherwise academic claim.  No such considerations arise in  the
    present matter, he submits, and I should decline to examine  the  claim
    any further.  While Mr Lewis accepted that the legal effect of  further
    reconsideration refusals, such as the third and fourth decisions of the
    Secretary of State in these proceedings, was a point  which  ordinarily
    would have the potential to impact other cases, the United Kingdom  was
    no longer part of the Dublin III regime.  With the exception of certain
    transitional cases, the point was of no broader significance.


75. In the event I was not with Mr Lewis on the  academic  nature  of  this
    challenge, he advanced the following submissions in response.


76. First, it could not be said that the Secretary of State was obliged  to
    address the potential significance of LB as well as SU.   On  a  proper
    construction of the TCR, it related only to SU, not LB.   LB's  details
    featured on the form simply 'as a matter of interest'.   There  was  no
    indication that LB consented to the transfer.


77. Secondly, there was no basis under Dublin III for the GDU to have  made
    multiple  reconsideration  requests.   Recital  (5)   to   Dublin   III
    emphasises the importance of the rapid determination  of  which  Member
    State is responsible for examining an asylum claim.  The  Secretary  of
    State was right to rely on Article 5(2) of the Implementing Regulation,
    in the light of X and X, to conclude that the refusal had  been  final.
    To the extent that the Greek authorities sought  or  were  required  to
    make further take charge  requests,  the  discretionary  process  under
    Article 17(2) of Dublin III provided the necessary  vehicle.   Adopting
    that approach provides legal certainty.  While the Secretary  of  State
    has been prepared in these proceedings to entertain the  purported  re-
    submission of the original TCR by the GDU, she did so exceptionally, as
    emphasised at [4] of her skeleton argument.


78. Thirdly, the issue of whether it was appropriate for the  Secretary  of
    State to 'solicit' further TCR requests had recently been  the  subject
    of  full  argument  before  Upper   Tribunal   Judge   O'Callaghan   in
    JR/1696/2020, in relation to which judgment was awaited.  It would  not
    be consistent with the overriding objective for these proceedings to re-
    examine the same question.


79. Put simply, the Secretary of State's position on the 'soliciting' issue
    was that, where a prior unlawful  refusal  was  conceded  or  otherwise
    accepted, a  further  TCR  was  necessary,  in  order  to  provide  the
    Secretary of State with the necessary legal certainty that the transfer
    was still sought.  In some cases, the requesting Member  State  may  no
    longer wish to pursue transfer, for example  where  there  were  extant
    criminal proceedings concerning the transferee.  The Secretary of State
    was entitled to require  an  additional  formal  request,  rather  than
    simply clarification from the caseworker at an informal level.


80. In post-hearing submissions  on  FWF,  Mr  Lewis  maintained  that  the
    application was academic.  In FWF, the Court of  Appeal  held  that  an
    actionable breach of Dublin III only occurred where  the  eleven  month
    'longstop' period for a transfer to  the  requested  member  state  was
    breached.  Even on that standard, where there  had  been  a  breach  of
    Dublin III, that would not amount ipso facto to a breach of  Article  8
    ECHR.  Dublin III goes further than Article 8  ECHR,  setting  its  own
    'procedural  code'  for  enabling  some  applicants  for   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection to be reunited with certain family  members  in
    another Member State.  For there to be a  breach  of  Article  8  ECHR,
    there had  to  either  be  a  negative  interference  with  the  rights
    protected by ECHR, or a breach of a  positive  obligation  to  admit  a
    person for the purposes of  family  reunion.   Unless  there  are  very
    exceptional circumstances, which are plainly not present here,  submits
    Mr Lewis, a person cannot rely on  Article  8  ECHR  to  supplement  or
    augment the rights conferred by Dublin III.  This applicant is  on  the
    cusp of adulthood, and nothing about his  case  is  'very  exceptional'
    when viewed in the context of the cohort  of  unaccompanied  minors  in
    continental Europe seeking family reunion pursuant to Dublin III.


81. In relation to Article 8 ECHR, and in light of the  Court  of  Appeal's
    judgment in FWF, Mr Lewis submitted that, to the extent that there is a
    positive Article 8 obligation to facilitate the applicant's transfer to
    this country, the Secretary of State is meeting that obligation by  the
    steps she is now taking to finalise the Dublin  III  transfer  process.
    There can be no question of the Secretary of State breaching the United
    Kingdom's negative Article 8 obligations towards the applicant, SU  and
    LB, as 'family life' plainly does not exist between them.  SU has  only
    met the applicant  twice.   The  first  time  was  in  2008,  when  the
    applicant was five years old, and then it was not until 2016 that  they
    met again.  There is no evidence as to what the applicant  and  SU  did
    together in these two brief meetings.  Their only contact has  been  by
    telephone.  LB is the applicant's 28 year old  sister.   She  left  the
    family home in Bangladesh to marry in 2012, which was the last time she
    saw him.  The suggestion that Article 8 'family  life'  exists  between
    the applicant, a young man on the cusp of adulthood, SU and LB  is,  Mr
    Lewis submits, 'hopeless'.  There has simply been no breach of  Article
    8 on the facts of this case.


DISCUSSION


18 February and 17 March decisions


82. This application for judicial review is  founded  upon  the  procedural
    implications of two initial decisions by the Secretary of  State  which
    she now accepts to have been  unlawful: see paragraphs 24 and 28 of  Mr
    Lewis' skeleton argument dated 18 January 2021.


83. Specifically, the Secretary of State accepts that she made a mistake of
    fact in her 18 January decision, in part  because  she  relied  on  the
    absence of the applicant's 'original' birth certificate and declined to
    accept an inferior translation into English.  In fact, as the Secretary
    of  State  now  accepts,  the  authorities  in  Bangladesh  issue  such
    documents in Bengali and English.  The  English  version  provided  had
    been the original version, and the reasons given by  the  Secretary  of
    State for refusing to accept the document do not withstand scrutiny.


84. In relation to the 17 March decision, the Secretary  of  State  accepts
    that she could and should have used the first  reconsideration  request
    as an opportunity to cure the defects in her earlier decision  yet  did
    not.  She wrongly stated that 'no further evidence' had  been  provided
    with the reconsideration request, whereas additional,  Bangla  versions
    of the birth and family certificates had been provided to her.


85. As outlined above, Ms Kilroy  advanced  a  multi-faceted  challenge  to
    these decisions, on a number of detailed bases.   I  accept  Mr  Lewis'
    submissions that, at this stage, and for the  purpose  of  the  present
    binary assessment of the lawfulness of the two initial decisions, it is
    not necessary for me to engage in further analysis of those criticisms.
     The Secretary of State accepts that the two decisions  were  unlawful,
    and the decisions are not defended.


86. As Ms Kilroy accepts at [7] of her post-hearing submissions on FWF, the
    first two refusals had legal effect.  This is  not  a  case  where  the
    unlawful refusals were void and had no legal effect (in  contrast,  for
    example, to the Secretary of State's purported refusals outside the two
    month limit in FWF,  which  had  no  legal  effect:  see  [133]).   The
    decisions of 18 February and 17 March were unlawful  and  provided  the
    unlawful  foundation  for   the   Secretary   of   State's   subsequent
    reconsideration refusals, as set out below.   While  ordinarily  I  may
    have had some reservations about quashing  a  decision  which  has  had
    legal effect in another member state in the context of a member  state-
    to-member state regime for the allocation  of  responsibility  for  the
    examination of claims for international protection, I consider that  it
    is appropriate to do so in this case.  The Greek authorities  are  live
    to these proceedings and are actively awaiting  my  decision.   In  the
    circumstances, quashing the decisions would be appropriate.


27 April and 1 June decisions


87. The first two unlawful decisions laid the foundations for the Secretary
    of State's subsequent unlawful processing of the TCR, in  the  form  of
    the 27 April and 1 June decisions.  Mr Lewis contends that, in light of
    the 'resubmitted' TCR on 31 December 2020, and the Secretary of State's
    acceptance of the family link, it is  academic  for  me  to  engage  in
    further and detailed consideration of  the  merits  of  the  third  and
    fourth decisions of the Secretary of State.


88. I am not persuaded that consideration of the third and fourth decisions
    of the Secretary of State is wholly academic.   Pursuant  to  FWF,  so-
    called 'incidental' breaches of Dublin III are of peripheral  relevance
    to the overall question of whether there has been a 'breach' of  Dublin
    III where transfer takes place within the overall  11  month  longstop:
    see [133].  By the same token, it must follow  that,  where  (as  here)
    transfer has not taken place within the 11 month longstop, the question
    of whether there has been a breach of Dublin III remains a live  issue,
    and must be determined, as it  may  be  relevant  to  the  question  of
    damages for breach of EU law (subject to submissions on the question of
    EU exit).


89. Taken in isolation, the 27 April and 1 June decisions were based  on  a
    literal application of Article 5(2) of the Implementing Regulation  and
    X and X v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en  Justitie  (Cases  C-47/17
    and C-48/18).  At [86], the Court of Justice held that Article 5(2)  of
    the Implementing Regulation:


             '...must be interpreted as meaning that the expiry of the two-
             week time limit for  a  reply  laid  down  by  that  provision
             definitively brings to an end  the  additional  re-examination
             procedure, whether the requested Member State has, or has not,
             replied within that period to the re-examination request  made
             by the requesting Member State.'


90. To that end, submits Mr Lewis, the decisions of 27  April  and  1  June
    were in  response  to  'impermissible  reconsideration  requests',  and
    should be treated as final.


91. Ms Kilroy contends that X and X is, upon a purposive interpretation  in
    light of the best interests of the child, not the binding authority for
    which the Secretary of State contends.  I agree.  In my judgment, while
    the Secretary  of  State's  reliance  on  X  and  X  was  superficially
    consistent with the  approach  of  the  Court  of  Justice,  Mr  Lewis'
    submission is flawed.


92. X and X did not concern unaccompanied minors, and its teleological  and
    purposive interpretation of the Dublin III regulation was not conducted
    with the best interests of a child applicant  in  mind,  pursuant,  for
    example, to Article 6(1), which gives expression to the  principles  at
    the heart of Recital (13).  There is nothing in  the  court's  judgment
    which suggests that a reconsideration refusal under Article 5(2) of the
    Implementing   Regulation   is   irrevocable   where   the   underlying
    reconsideration refusal concerns the best interests of an unaccompanied
    minor.


93. Moreover, the Dublin regime admits of the possibility of  TCR  requests
    involving  unaccompanied  minors  taking  longer  to  process  by   the
    requested member state than the mandatory  time  limits  prescribed  by
    Article 22(1) of Dublin III.


94. Article 12(2) of the Implementing Regulation provides:


             'The fact that the duration of procedures for placing a  minor
             may lead to a failure  to  observe  the  time  limits  set  in
             Article 18(1) and (6) and Article 19(4) of Regulation (EC)  No
             343/2003 shall not necessarily be an  obstacle  to  continuing
             the procedure for determining the Member State responsible  or
             carrying out a transfer.'


    Pursuant to the correlation table  at  Annex  II  to  Dublin  III,  the
    references to Article 18(1) and  (6)  are  to  read  as  references  to
    Articles 22(1)  and  (6),  and  29(2)  of  Dublin  III.   Neither  this
    provision, nor the concept of the best interests  of  the  child,  were
    addressed in X and X.


95. In R (oao HN and MN (by their litigation friend  SH))  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department JR/4719/2018, Mr Justice Lane, President,
    and Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia  considered  the  import  of  Article
    12(2) of the Implementing  Regulation  in  the  context  of  a  default
    acceptance case (see [54]).  Having found the UK to be the  responsible
    member state by default, at [57], the tribunal identified the potential
    impact of Article 29(2) of  Dublin  III,  in  light  of  the  fact  the
    applicants had not been transferred by Greece within the mandatory  six
    month time limit.  Pursuant to Article 29(2), the consequences  of  the
    Greek failure to transfer the applicants to the UK  within  six  months
    meant that responsibility for the  examination  of  the  asylum  claims
    defaulted to Greece.  The tribunal considered  the  judgment  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Frances in R (oao FA & Others) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department, another default acceptance case.  At  [66],  Judge
    Frances held:


             'Article 12(2) of the  [Implementing  Regulation]  applies  in
             extreme cases where there are 'best interest reasons' for  not
             complying with the time limit.'


96.  In  HN  and  MN,  the  tribunal  concluded  that  the  allocation   of
    responsibility for an unaccompanied minor by default was not capable of
    overriding  the  child's  best  interests.   Article   12(2)   of   the
    Implementing Regulation operated in parallel with the deemed acceptance
    of the TCR.   If transfer were not in the child's best  interests,  the
    regulation did not require it to proceed.  At [77], the tribunal held:


             'There is therefore scope for the disapplication of  the  time
             limits, if warranted.'


      And at [78]:


                 'Article 12(2) [of the Implementing Regulation] is not  in
             our judgment, concerned with a 'reversal of the obligation' to
             take charge, or the 'the withdrawal of responsibility', but is
             concerned with reaching a  decision  that  promotes  the  best
             interests of the child as a primary consideration and  ensures
             full respect for the principle of family unity.'


97. Those were considerations which, by definition, the  Court  of  Justice
    did not have cause to consider in X and X, but which are central to the
    issue of whether the strict application of the time  limits  enunciated
    by the Court of Justice reads across to cases  involving  unaccompanied
    minors.


98. The potential import of Article 12(2) of the Implementing Regulation in
    the present matter is that, had the Secretary of  State  withdrawn  her
    earlier  unlawful  refusals,  the  provision  would  potentially   have
    permitted an extension  to  the  Article  22(1)  two  month  limit  for
    responding to a TCR on the grounds of the applicant's best interests.


99. Drawing this analysis together, the Secretary of  State's  approach  in
    the 27 April and 1 June decisions was to rely on her  earlier  unlawful
    refusals to accept the family link between the applicant and SU and LB,
    and  in  doing  so,  compound  her  earlier  unlawfulness,  purportedly
    justified by reliance on a judgment of the Court of Justice  which  had
    nothing to do with unaccompanied minors.  The decisions of 27 April and
    1 June provided opportunities for the Secretary of State to cure  those
    defects.  She did not avail herself of those opportunities.


100. I therefore quash the decisions of 27 April and 1 June.


101. Had the Secretary of State used the 27 April or  1  June  decisions  as
    vehicles to withdraw her earlier, unlawful refusals, there are at least
    two constructions of the Dublin regime which would have followed,  each
    with the same result.  The withdrawal of the earlier unlawful  refusals
    would have resulted in the UK being the  responsible  member  state  by
    default, pursuant to Article 22(7).  Alternatively, pursuant to Article
    12(2) of the Implementing Regulation, the Article 22(1) two month  time
    limit for responding to the TCR could have been extended to enable  the
    Secretary of State's  proper  consideration  of  the  applicant's  best
    interests, following the withdrawal of her earlier  unlawful  refusals.
    On either formulation, whether the UK  became  the  responsible  member
    state  depends  on  the  applicant's  best  interests,  and  on  either
    formulation, the result would be the same; the UK  is  the  responsible
    member state, provided  transfer  would  be  in  the  applicant's  best
    interests.  It is not necessary to reach a final view on which  of  the
    two procedural alternatives would lead to this result.


102. The 27 April and 1 June decisions therefore provided the  Secretary  of
    State with the opportunity to withdraw the  earlier,  unlawful  refusal
    decisions, with the effect that the UK would have been the  responsible
    member state, provided transfer was in the applicant's best  interests.
    By the time of the  final  reconsideration  refusal,  on  1  June,  the
    applicant's transfer  would  still  have  been  within  the  six  month
    transfer window permitted by Article 29(1) of the regulation.  Provided
    the best interests requirement were met, the applicant's transfer could
    have been effected within the overall Dublin III time  limit,  with  no
    overall breach of the regulation.


103. By the date of the hearing on 25 January 2021, the Secretary  of  State
    was yet to  commission  formal  assessments  of  the  applicant's  best
    interests by the relevant local authorities.  The order I made  at  the
    end of the hearing required her to do so forthwith.   Such  assessments
    should have been commissioned well within the initial two month  period
    for responding to the TCR.


104. At this stage, in the absence of the local authorities' assessments  of
    the applicant's best interests, I  am  not  in  a  position  to  assess
    whether the Secretary of State has  breached  her  overall  obligations
    towards the applicant under the Dublin III regulation.  It is  only  if
    transfer is in the applicant's  best  interests  that  the  UK  is  the
    responsible member state by default.  Having made an order  to  require
    the Secretary of State to commission  local  authority  assessments  to
    that end, it would be inappropriate  for  me  to  seek  to  usurp  that
    process by pre-empting it, and  unilaterally  declaring  that  transfer
    would be in the applicant's best interests.  I  have  doubts  about  Ms
    Kilroy's submission, outlined in paragraph 60, above, that there is  no
    requirement to demonstrate the ability of the proposed family member in
    this country to care for a Dublin III unaccompanied minor.  It is  true
    that there is no express requirement, as there  is  with  Article  8(2)
    concerning a 'relative'.  However, the placement  of  an  unaccompanied
    child with a family member or sibling who was not able to care for  the
    child would be anathema to the primacy  of  the  best  interests  of  a
    child.  The ability of the family member or sibling to take care of the
    child is certainly a relevant factor that must be considered.


105. While I note that Lord Boyd was  content  to  conclude  in  Nasser  Al-
    Fadhli that transfer would be in the petitioner's best interests,  that
    was plainly a case-specific decision, on the  basis  of  the  materials
    before the Outer  House.   See  paragraph  2:  'having  regard  to  the
    material before the court in terms of the petitioner's best interests.'
     I am not privy to the materials that were before Lord Boyd, but  I  do
    know that in these proceedings no formal  local  authority  assessments
    had been conducted by the time of the hearing on 25 January.


106. It is sufficient to state that,  if  it  is  in  the  applicant's  best
    interests that he be united with either his uncle or his sister, the UK
    will be the responsible member state, and transfer will  have  breached
    the eleven month long stop.


The respondent's practice of soliciting further TCRs


107. There was no application to amend the grounds for  judicial  review  in
    light of Judge Norton-Taylor's observations  when  granting  permission
    concerning what is said to be the respondent's practice of 'soliciting'
    fresh TCRs.  The grounds for  judicial  review  target  only  the  four
    decisions set out above.   See Section 3 on form T480 sealed on 15 June
    2020.  While there is a generic reference to the Secretary  of  State's
    'ongoing' decisions being  the  target  of  the  judicial  review,  the
    'ongoing' conduct of the Secretary of State was plainly a reference  to
    the alleged, thereby 'ongoing', failure to respond  positively  to  the
    TCR  and  the  reconsideration  requests.    Quite   apart   from   the
    difficulties inherent to considering post-decision material in judicial
    review proceedings which I consider below, the generic reference to the
    'ongoing' conduct of the Secretary of State is imprecise and vague, and
    certainly cannot provide cover for the applicant to  target  any  post-
    decision conduct of the Secretary of State at will.   The  two  grounds
    for judicial review remain as those set above, with no specific  ground
    targeting any specific post-decision steps taken by  the  Secretary  of
    State in relation to soliciting a 'fresh' TCR request.  I note that  Ms
    Kilroy's skeleton argument raises the issue at [3] to [6], but that  is
    as part of a general discourse of the sort referred to at paragraph 25,
    above, distinct from  the  submissions  advanced  in  relation  to  the
    grounds upon which the applicant enjoys permission which start at  [36]
    and following.


108. In Secretary of State for the Home Department v R (oao  Spaihu)  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 2604 at [63], the Court of Appeal held:


             'It will usually be better for all parties if judicial  review
             proceedings are not treated as "rolling" or "evolving", and it
             is generally simpler and more cost-effective for the reviewing
             court to avoid scrutinising post-decision material. But  there
             will  also  be  a  need  to  maintain  a  certain   procedural
             flexibility so as to do justice as between the parties.'


109. It follows that this application for judicial review is  not  expressly
    concerned with the question of whether the Secretary  of  State  has  a
    practice of soliciting new TCRs, and if  so  whether  the  practice  is
    unlawful.  The Secretary of State's subsequent engagement with the  GDU
    which led to the correspondence received on 31 December 2020 is a post-
    decision matter. In the absence  of  express  grounds  concerning  this
    issue, and having heard only peripheral argument on, in the exercise of
    my discretion pursuant  to  the  overriding  objective,  I  decline  to
    consider it.





ARTICLE 8 ECHR AND THE CHARTER


110. I will approach the Article 8 ECHR submissions as follows:


        a. By reference to first principles, what are a contracting party's
           Article 8 ECHR obligations?


        b. What is the relationship between Article 8 ECHR, the Dublin  III
           regime and the Charter?


        c. What, therefore, are the UK's Article 8 obligations towards  the
           applicant?


   a) Article 8: first principles


111. I reject Ms Kilroy's submission that the  potential  responsibility  of
    the UK for examining the applicant's asylum claim necessarily  provides
    a 'strong indication' of the engagement of his Article  8  ECHR  family
    life rights in relation to  his  uncle  and  sister  (see  Ms  Kilroy's
    skeleton argument at [52]).  While there are areas of  overlap  between
    the Dublin III regime and the rights guaranteed by Article 8 ECHR,  the
    two regimes are not identical.  The Dublin III regime goes considerably
    further than Article 8 ECHR in  some  respects.   In  others,  the  two
    regimes 'may sometimes tug in different directions', and in  especially
    compelling cases, the requirements of Article 8 may militate in  favour
    of bypassing the Dublin III procedures  (see  R.  (oao  ZT  (Syria))  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  810  at
    [65]).


112. In order to address the Article 8 submissions, I shall return to  first
    principles.


113. As Baroness Hale explained in R (oao Bibi) v  Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2015] UKSC 68 at [25] to [29], and in  R  (oao  MM
    (Lebanon)) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC  10
    at  [38]  and  [40]  to  [44],  the  Strasbourg  Court  has  for   long
    distinguished between the negative and positive obligations imposed  by
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  Contracting  parties  to  the  Convention  have
    negative obligations not to interfere with the private and family lives
    of  settled  migrants,  other  than  as  may  be  justified  under  the
    derogation contained in Article 8(2).  By contrast, in cases concerning
    the removal, or  admission,  of  migrants  with  no  such  rights,  the
    essential question is whether the host state is subject to  a  positive
    obligation to  facilitate  their  entry  or  continued  residence.   In
    positive obligation cases, the question is whether the host country has
    an obligation towards the migrant, rather than whether it  can  justify
    the interference under Article 8(2).   But  the  principles  concerning
    negative and positive obligations are similar.  As the Strasbourg Court
    held in Gl v Switzerland (1996) 22 EHRR 93:


             'In both contexts regard must be had to the fair balance  that
             has to be  struck  between  the  competing  interests  of  the
             individual and of the  community  as  a  whole;  and  in  both
             contexts the state enjoys a certain margin of appreciation...'
             (paragraph 106)










   b) The relationship between Article 8 ECHR, Dublin III and the Charter


114. In FWF the Court  of  Appeal  conducted  an  extensive  review  of  the
    authorities on the  interaction  between  the  Dublin  III  regime  and
    Article 8 ECHR.  While Ms Kilroy sought to confine FWF to  the  default
    acceptance context, I do not consider that attempted distinction to  be
    of merit, for the following reasons.


115.  First,  I  have  quashed  the  refusal  and  initial   reconsideration
    decisions dated 18 February and 17 March respectively.  As set  out  in
    paragraph 101,  above,  the  result  is  that  either  the  UK  is  the
    responsible member state by default, or that the time for accepting the
    TCR may be extended, provided it is in the applicant's best  interests.
    Each formulation would lead to the  same  result,  provided  that  were
    consistent with the applicant's best interests.  It is not necessary to
    determine the precise inner workings of the Dublin  III  regime,  given
    the end result would be identical.  Ms Kilroy's  submissions  that  FWF
    concerned a so-called 'default acceptance' scenario does not place  the
    case in significantly different territory from the present matter.


116. Secondly, the Court of Appeal's analysis  of  the  interaction  between
    Article 8 ECHR and Dublin III was not confined to 'default  acceptance'
    Dublin  III  cases.   It  concerned  a  broad  range  of   Dublin   III
    authorities, including proceedings where  the  applicants  specifically
    sought to bypass Dublin III on Article 8 grounds, having chosen not  to
    claim asylum in the host member state.  See, for example, ZT (Syria), R
    (oao Citizens UK) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 1812, R (oao AM) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    [2018] EWCA (Civ) 1815.


117. At [134] to [136] of FWF, Laing LJ contrasted the aims and  purpose  of
    the Dublin III regime  and  the  Strasbourg  authorities  concerning  a
    state's positive obligation to admit the  family  member  of  a  person
    settled in  a  contracting  state.   She  noted  that  some  Strasbourg
    authorities,  for  example  Tanda-Muzinga  v  France  (Application   No
    2260/10, 10 July 2014), recognised that family reunion may,  compatibly
    with Article 8 ECHR, take some time.  At [136], she stated:


             'There is no Strasbourg case, however, which has recognised  a
             positive obligation to admit them within the relatively  short
             time limits prescribed by Dublin III. Moreover, no  Strasbourg
             case has derived an obligation  from  article  8  to  admit  a
             person to a contracting state in order to enable that state to
             consider his claim for international protection.'


    Ms Kilroy's FWF-based submissions  did  not  highlight  any  Strasbourg
    authorities which cast a shadow of doubt  over  the  above  summary  by
    Laing LJ of that court's jurisprudence.


118. It follows that nothing in  the  Court  of  Appeal's  analysis  in  FWF
    concerning the interaction between Article 8 ECHR and  the  Dublin  III
    regime was confined to the facts of the proceedings  in  FWF.   To  the
    extent that the principles enunciated by FWF concerned the facts of the
    proceedings before the Court of Appeal, for example  where  there  were
    only 'incidental' breaches of Dublin III, that is of  course  relevant,
    and will be considered as set out below.


119.  I  turn  therefore  to  the  court's  substantive  analysis   of   the
    relationship between the two regimes.


120. At [137] of FWF, Laing LJ held:


             'It is therefore  obvious  that  the  obligations  imposed  by
             Dublin III are not a mirror image of the  obligations  imposed
             by article 8. The references in the recitals to article 8  and
             to article 7 CFR [the Charter of Fundamental Rights] show, not
             that Dublin III  mirrors  article  8,  but,  rather,  that  in
             framing Dublin III, the legislator has had the  importance  of
             family links well in mind, no doubt  because  it  was  thought
             that if an application for international protection  succeeds,
             it will help the successful applicant to  settle  in  his  new
             country if any member of his wider family is lawfully  present
             there.  Recital  (32)  recognises  the  significance  of   the
             Strasbourg caselaw, but does not oblige member  states  to  go
             further than that caselaw indicates...'


121. Laing LJ then addressed the question to be addressed by a court  seized
    of a possible breach of Article 8 ECHR or the Dublin III regime,  which
    she had identified, at [134], in these terms:


             'The second issue is whether the court should ask, not whether
             a public authority has interfered with the rights protected by
             article 8,  or  whether  a  public  authority  has  failed  to
             discharge a positive obligation  imposed  by  article  8,  but
             whether article 8 is engaged in the overall operation  of  the
             Dublin scheme, and then to ask whether the Secretary of  State
             has acted unlawfully  in  the  discharge  of  the  obligations
             imposed by that scheme.'


122. The answer to that question, held the court at [138], was that:


             'The Strasbourg cases do not  decide  that  if  a  contracting
             state establishes an administrative  scheme  (such  as  Dublin
             III) which is designed, in part, to recognise  or  to  respect
             the rights protected by article 8, any incidental unlawfulness
             in the operation of such a scheme is a breach  of  article  8.
             Such an approach is similar to  the  approach  which  a  court
             takes  when  considering  an  allegation   of   discrimination
             contrary to article 14. That approach is to ask, if a state is
             acting 'within the ambit' of a Convention  right,  whether  an
             applicant has been treated differently on the grounds  of  his
             status. Article 14  does  not  require  an  interference  with
             Convention rights. There is no warrant for such an approach to
             article 8. A breach of article 8 depends, in  the  case  of  a
             negative obligation, on an interference with rights  protected
             by article 8, and, in the case of a positive  obligation  owed
             to that person, a breach of that positive obligation.'


123. I accept that the Dublin III unlawfulness  in  the  present  matter  is
    more  than  incidental.   If  transfer  is  in  the  applicant's   best
    interests, it will not be able to take place until some time after  the
    eleven month longstop has passed.


124. While below I give reasons for finding that the applicant's  Article  8
    ECHR private and family life rights are not breached by  the  decisions
    of the Secretary of State, the question of the applicant's private life
    under Article 7 of the  Charter  is  a  different  matter.   While  the
    Charter draws much of its inspiration from the ECHR, and the  provision
    made by each overlaps to a considerable  extent,  the  scope  of  their
    engagement can be different, as the Charter can provide more  extensive
    protection than the ECHR.  Article 52(3) of the Charter provides:


             'In so far as this Charter contains rights which correspond to
             rights guaranteed by the  Convention  for  the  Protection  of
             Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the meaning  and  scope
             of those rights shall be the same as those laid  down  by  the
             said Convention. This provision shall not  prevent  Union  law
             providing more extensive protection.' (emphasis added).


125. The Charter is engaged when the Secretary of  State  is  acting  within
    the scope of EU law, or, more accurately, 'implementing' EU law (see R.
    (oao NS) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (C-411/10) [2013]
    QB 102, operative paragraph 1).  The Charter can be engaged even  where
    corresponding rights in the ECHR would not be.  See, for example, ZZ  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (C-300/11) [2013]  QB  1136,
    concerning the engagement and import of Article 47 of  the  Charter  in
    circumstances where Article 6 of the ECHR would have no role  to  play,
    namely in immigration proceedings.  That is  an  example  of  the  more
    extensive provision which can be made under  the  Charter.   Similarly,
    while the ECHR has territorial constraints which  limit  its  effective
    scope of application in relation to individual contracting parties (see
    Article 1 of the Convention: 'the High Contracting Parties shall secure
    to  everyone  within  their  jurisdiction  the  rights   and   freedoms
    defined...'), the Charter is engaged on the 'implementing' EU law basis
    set out above.  In practical terms applied to the present matter,  that
    means that there may be circumstances when an  individual's  Article  8
    ECHR private life rights are not engaged towards the  UK,  even  though
    the equivalent rights in the Charter do  not  operate  under  the  same
    territorial constraints.


126. It is difficult to  see  how  the  Charter  could  not  be  engaged  in
    relation to the applicant's Article 7 private life.  The  circumstances
    of his life in Greece (which is, of  course,  outside  the  territorial
    scope of the UK's ECHR obligations, with the effect that  he  does  not
    enjoy Article 8 private life vis a vis the UK's ECHR  obligations)  are
    closely intertwined with the processing of his  application  under  the
    Dublin III regime.  The UK's responses to the GDU's requests amount  to
    the UK 'implementing' EU  law  for  these  purposes.   The  applicant's
    Article 7 Charter private life rights are therefore engaged.


127. By contrast, the applicant's private life Article 8  ECHR  rights  are,
    given his location in Greece, within the jurisdiction of  the  Hellenic
    Republic, and not the UK, and are not justiciable in these proceedings.


128. The  applicant's  Article  7  Charter  'family  life'  rights  are  not
    engaged.  He does not enjoy 'family life' with his uncle or sister,  as
    set out below.  While the UK's obligations under the  Charter  are  not
    subject to the same territorial constraints as  its  obligations  under
    the ECHR, nothing in the  Charter  requires  a  broader  view  of  what
    amounts to the substance of family life  than  is  required  under  the
    ECHR.


129. It follows that the Secretary of State's unlawful responses to the  TCR
    and reconsideration requests breached the Dublin  III  regulation,  and
    the applicant's Article 7 private life rights under  the  Charter.   In
    practice, the engagement of the Charter on  a  private  life  basis  is
    unlikely to add significantly, if at all, to the overall  magnitude  of
    the Secretary of State's breaches of EU law.  The private life role  of
    the Charter in this context is simply one facet  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's overall breach of the Dublin III regulation.


130. I address the  question  of  relief,  and  associated  next  steps,  at
    paragraph 171, below.


   c) What, therefore, are the UK's Article 8 ECHR obligations  towards  the
      applicant?


131. The essential question for me  to  address  under  Article  8  ECHR  is
    whether Article 8 imposes a positive obligation on the UK to admit  the
    applicant for the purposes  of  unification  with  his  family  members
    already resident in the territory.


132. I make two preliminary observations.  First, an overall breach  of  the
    Dublin III regime will not automatically be a breach of Article 8 ECHR,
    given the distinctions between the two regimes.  I have been  taken  to
    no sub-species of Strasbourg authority concerning  the  impact  on  the
    positive and negative obligations of a contracting party by a  parallel
    administrative regime for family unification, even  where  there  is  a
    breach of that regime.  See [138] of  FWF,  quoted  at  paragraph  122,
    above.


133. Nor have I been taken to any authority which demonstrates that the  'in
    accordance with the  law'  criterion  of  Article  8(2)  applies  to  a
    positive  obligation  case.   While  the   proportionality   assessment
    inherent to Article 8(2) has been described domestically as  a  'useful
    tool' for assessing whether a fair balance has been struck between  the
    individual and public interests at play in  such  a  decision  (see  MM
    (Lebanon) at [44]), nothing I have been taken to demonstrates that  the
    other  criteria  in  Article  8(2)  map  across  to  the  fair  balance
    assessment.  In practical terms, therefore, a breach of the Dublin  III
    regulation in a putative positive obligation case does not result in an
    additional breach of Article 8 ECHR on 'not in accordance with the law'
    grounds under Article 8(2).


134. Secondly, while the  applicant's  best  interests  as  a  child  are  a
    primary consideration, they cannot, in principle, affect an analysis of
    whether 'family life' exists between him  and  his  uncle  and  sister.
    Family life either exists, or it does not.  Of course,  the  assessment
    that follows must be conducted in a manner benevolent to the applicant,
    reflective generally of the primacy of his  best  interests.   However,
    while it would no doubt be in the applicant's best interests for family
    life to be found to exist, the question of whether it does exist is  an
    objective question, which must be assessed according to the evidence.


Does the applicant enjoy 'family life' with SU or LB?


135. It is  necessary  first  to  establish  whether  the  applicant  enjoys
    'family life' for the purposes of Article 8  ECHR  with  his  uncle  or
    sister.  If 'family life' does not exist, there can be no question of a
    positive obligation  to  facilitate  the  admission  of  the  applicant
    exists, still less whether such an obligation has been breached.


136. I take the following facts from the uncontested witness  statements  of
    SU and LB.


Family life: factual matrix


137.  SU  was  born  in  1962  in  Bangladesh.   His  elder  sister  is  the
    applicant's mother.  SU left Bangladesh in 1989 for Italy.  He  married
    his wife, whom he met in Bangladesh, in 1999, and  she  joined  him  in
    Italy.  He acquired Italian citizenship in 2010 and now lives  in  this
    country, having acquired the right to permanent residence on 9  October
    2017.


138.  SU  first  met  the  applicant  in  2008  during  a  return  visit  to
    Bangladesh.  The applicant would have  been  five  or  six  years  old.
    Their second, and only  subsequent,  meeting  was  in  2016,  when  the
    applicant would have been 13 or 14 years old.  SU does not suggest that
    he ever spoke directly to the applicant when he was in Bangladesh; SU's
    contact was with the applicant's mother, his sister.  They would  speak
    three to four times weekly, and SU would enquire after  the  applicant.
    Now that the applicant is in Greece, he maintains 'close contact'  with
    him and calls 'more often' (statement at [10]).   The  purpose  of  the
    calls is to check on the applicant and find how he  is  doing.   SU  is
    aware of the  basic  and  unsatisfactory  living  arrangements  of  the
    applicant in Greece.   SU  liaised  with  the  applicant's  brother  in
    Bangladesh to obtain some  of  the  family  documents  that  have  been
    provided to the GDU as part of the asylum process.  He  has  sought  to
    cooperate with the Home Office as  part  of  the  Dublin  process,  but
    claims he didn't receive some of the correspondence that the  Secretary
    of State maintains was  sent  to  him.   He  made  some  calls  to  the
    Secretary of State's European Intake Unit when the  applicant's  Dublin
    application was refused.  He has had contact with a charity called Safe
    Passage to help with the applicant's transfer here.  He is very worried
    about his nephew.


139. LB's statement begins by outlining the family situation.  She was  born
    in 1991 in Bangladesh.  She lived with the appellant and their  brother
    and two sisters until leaving the country  in  2012  with  her  Italian
    husband.  In 2016 she moved with her husband to the UK, with  whom  she
    has three children.   She would speak  to  her  brother  in  Bangladesh
    every week to two weeks after leaving.  Now she speaks with him  almost
    daily.  She is worried about him and so is in  more  frequent  contact.
    His living conditions are concerning.  She  was  very  upset  when  his
    application was refused.  In May 2020, she used the  internet  to  find
    the charity Safe Passage which helped the applicant find a solicitor.


Family life: legal framework


140. In relation to Ms Kilroy's submissions concerning the  General  comment
    No. 14, I accept that the Strasbourg Court and the authorities draw  on
    the UN Convention on the Rights  of  the  Child  when  determining  the
    engagement and scope of  Article  8  family  life  in  cases  involving
    children.  That the General comment No. 14 emphasises the  preservation
    of  family,  the  maintenance  of  relations  and  the  prevention   of
    disruption is an uncontroversial proposition, and  such  considerations
    are  woven  throughout  many  domestic  and  international  authorities
    concerning the best interests of children.


141. However, I consider the General comment to be of limited assistance  in
    relation to the issue of determining whether family life exists in  the
    first place between this applicant  and  his  uncle  and  sister.   The
    General comment, and the generally accepted emphasis on the  importance
    of maintaining family relations and  preventing  family  disruption  in
    cases  involving  children,  assist  with  identifying  what  the  best
    interests of a child should  be  and  how  those  interests  should  be
    incorporated into decision making, particularly in the context (in  the
    extracts relied on by  Ms  Kilroy)  of  family  reunification.   In  my
    judgment, the General comment's primary relevance  in  the  context  of
    these proceedings would be in  relation  to  striking  a  fair  balance
    between the rights of the individual  child  (and  his  or  her  family
    members) and the public  interests  of  the  state  militating  in  the
    opposite direction,  once  family  life  is  established,  rather  than
    determining whether family life for the  purposes  of  Article  8  ECHR
    exists in the first place.


142. To the extent that the General comment endorses  the  proposition  that
    the best interests of children may encompass many shapes and forms,  it
    confirms established jurisprudence in this jurisdiction.  I accept that
    cohabitation is not necessarily the hallmark of family  life  and  that
    family life may exist even where those  who  are  a  party  to  it  are
    separated  by  international  boundaries.    Internationally   accepted
    standards for the best interests of children also assist in  confirming
    it would be in the applicant's best interests for  family  life  to  be
    created with his uncle and sister, in  the  event  it  does  not  exist
    already.


143. The leading domestic authority on the existence of  'family  life'  for
    the purposes of Article 8 ECHR is Kugathas v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  At [14], Lord Justice Sedley  drew
    on the decision of the European Commission for  Human  Rights  in  S  v
    United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196, accepting that it sets out the 'proper
    approach.'  Addressing the facts before it in  those  proceedings,  the
    Commission held, at page 198:


             'Generally, the protection of  family  life  under  Article  8
             involves cohabiting dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
             dependent,  minor  children.  Whether  it  extends  to   other
             relationships depends on the circumstances of  the  particular
             case. Relationships between adults, a mother and her 33 year
             old son in the present case, would not necessarily acquire the
             protection of Article 8 of the Convention without evidence  of
             further elements of dependency, involving more than the normal
             emotional ties.' (emphasis added)


144. As to what was meant by 'dependency', Sedley LJ held at [17]:


             '...if dependency is read down as meaning  'support',  in  the
             personal sense,  and  if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg
             jurisprudence, 'real' or 'committed'  or  'effective'  to  the
             word 'support', then it represents in my view the  irreducible
             minimum of what family life implies.'


145. Although in submissions Ms Kilroy contended that Kugathas was  not  the
    leading authority on this issue, that it had never been  reported,  and
    that it was not cited in Pawandeep Singh, it is clear that the Court of
    Appeal has consistently ascribed to it the significance  for  which  Mr
    Lewis contends.    See, for example, AU v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2020] EWCA Civ 338 at [32] ('Subsequent case  law  has
    built upon but not detracted from Kugathas...');  R  (oao  Britcits)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 368 at [61],
    [74], and [86]; Entry Clearance Officer,  Sierra  Leone  v  Edna  Kopoi
    [2017] EWCA Civ 1511 ('The leading domestic authority on the  ambit  of
    'family life' for the purposes of Article 8 is the well-known  decision
    of this court in Kugathas...' [17], [19], per  Sales  LJ,  as  he  then
    was).   Kugathas  is  plainly  the  leading  authority.   There   must,
    therefore, be something more than normal emotional ties.  There must be
    dependency characterised by real, committed or effective support.


146. I do not consider that Dyson LJ was attempting  to  adopt  a  different
    approach or establish a general principle of 'anticipatory' family life
    in Pawandeep Singh at [38] (see paragraph 62, above).  Concerning  Pini
    v Romania, which formed a central plank of the reasoning of  Dyson  LJ,
    Ms Kilroy initially sought to emphasise the fact the  adoptive  parents
    had not even met the children as being supportive  of  the  applicant's
    case as to the existence of family life with SU and LB.  However, as  I
    pointed out during argument, there had been physical  meetings  between
    the persons concerned; one set of  adoptive  parents  had  met  'their'
    child five times, the other set, three times: see [26].  The court  was
    not endorsing the proposition that family life can exist where physical
    contact had never taken place.  In fairness to Ms Kilroy, she  accepted
    as much when I drew the facts  of  Pini  to  her  attention.   But  the
    factual matrix of Pini provides essential context for  its  influential
    role in Pawandeep Singh.


147.  The  facts  of  Pawandeep  Singh  were  unique;  the  entry  clearance
    applicant was a child who had been adopted in India, according  to  the
    laws and practices of the Sikh faith, by a British couple  residing  in
    this country.  The adoption was recognised under the law of India.  The
    arrangement was unique because the child remained in the  home  of  his
    birth parents in India, along with his siblings, but was brought up  to
    regard his adoptive parents as his real parents,  and  to  address  his
    birth parents as 'aunt' and 'uncle'.  The adoptive parents  visited  at
    least twice annually.  They took all major decisions for him, including
    concerning his  schooling,  providing  funding  and  maintenance.   The
    required irreducible minimum of family life with his  adoptive  parents
    plainly already existed, yet, if he were  granted  entry  clearance  to
    reside with them in this country, that kernel of family life would have
    expanded and developed exponentially, especially when compared  to  the
    long-distance arrangements which the family were forced to tolerate  in
    the meantime.  The extract from Dyson LJ's judgment at [38] relied upon
    by Ms Kilroy must be read in that context, and in the  context  of  the
    remaining  reasoning  in  the  same  paragraph,  which  included   this
    important caveat:


              'I acknowledge, however, that unless some  degree  of  family
             life is already established, the claim  to  family  life  will
             fail and will not be saved by the fact that at  some  time  in
             the future it could flower into a full-blown family  life,  or
             that the applicants have a genuine wish to bring this  about.'
             (emphasis original)


    For those reasons, the adjudicator had been entitled  to  find  on  the
    facts that family life did exist, the court held.


148. I consider that Dyson LJ's emphasis on the need  for  'some  degree  of
    family life' already to be established must mean some degree of  family
    life for the purposes of Article 8 ECHR.  'Family life' in this context
    cannot mean mere emotional ties.  Were that not  so,  it  would  render
    nugatory any requirement for there to be  more  than  normal  emotional
    ties in an entry clearance  (or  any  other  Article  8)  context.   By
    definition, barring some intervening or disruptive act such  as  family
    breakdown, all 'usual emotional  ties'  would  have  the  potential  to
    develop into 'full-blown family life', given the opportunity to do  so.
    Dyson  LJ  could  not  have  meant  that  merely  demonstrating  normal
    emotional ties would suffice for engaging Article  8  ECHR,  given  the
    potential for future development  of  family  life.    He  was  plainly
    referring to a quality of relationship which  had  already  passed  the
    minimum threshold to amount  to  'family  life'  for  the  purposes  of
    Article 8 ECHR.  In Pawandeep Singh, as in Pini's case, formal adoption
    arrangements were in place, pursuant to  the  legal  framework  of  the
    jurisdiction in which  the  putative  adopted  children  resided.   The
    parents and children had met, albeit to differing degrees.  There  were
    plainly more than mere emotional ties between the parents and children.


149. Ms Kilroy's reliance upon R (oao Ahmadi) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home  Department  does  not  assist  her  submission   either.    Those
    proceedings concerned family life between two Afghan brothers  in  this
    country.  The Secretary of State proposed to remove one of the brothers
    to Germany under the Dublin II regime, having certified a human  rights
    claim he made in an attempt to resist removal  as  'clearly  unfounded'
    under section 92(2) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  Ms Kilroy relies on [17], where Moses LJ observed that:


             'The question [of whether the human rights claim was 'bound to
             fail'] must be considered in the light of the potential of the
             brothers' family  life  together,  not  just  that  which  has
             existed for a  short  time  in  the  past.  It  must  also  be
             remembered  that  by  the  time  of  any  appeal   before   an
             immigration judge, the relationship, if  it  was  a  genuinely
             supportive relationship, will have developed,  and  a  greater
             opportunity will have emerged for those qualified medically to
             speak about the effect of that relationship.'


150. In Ahmadi, Moses LJ was concerned not with the engagement of Article  8
    on a family life basis, but rather the proportionality of removal, once
    Article 8 was engaged.  So much is clear from  the  discussion  of  the
    fifth question posed by Lord Bingham of Cornhill in Razgar [2004]  UKHL
    27 at [15] of Moses LJ's judgment.  By definition, Razgar question (5),
    concerning the proportionality of an  interference  with  rights  under
    Article 8(2) ECHR, only arises once Article 8 is engaged.  If Mr Ahmadi
    were able to enjoy an in-country appeal,  the  adjudicator  would  have
    assessed the human rights claim at the date of the hearing, which would
    have been some time away.  By then, the family  life  which  -  as  was
    common ground -  already  existed  would  necessarily  have  augmented.
    There were health considerations and additional levels  of  dependency.
    The first instance judge simply failed to have  regard  to  the  likely
    facts as they would obtain  before  the  adjudicator  at  the  eventual
    appeal,  and,  as  such,  failed  to  have   regard   to   a   material
    consideration.


151. If any further clarity be required, it  is  provided  by  Moses  LJ  at
    [18], addressing this precise issue:


             'That is not to say that, where there has been no pre-existing
             family life and there exists only  a  future  intention,  that
             will be sufficient to engage Article 8.'


152. Boyle v United Kingdom, also relied upon by Ms Kilroy, does not  assist
    the applicant, other than to endorse the proposition that  family  life
    is  capable  of  existing  between  an  uncle  and  nephew,  which   is
    uncontroversial.  The applicant uncle established that Article  8  ECHR
    family life existed with his nephew, with whom he was very close.   The
    context was care proceedings, the uncle having been denied contact with
    the nephew upon the latter being taken into care as a result  of  abuse
    from his mother, the uncle's sister.  The uncle and nephew lived  close
    to each other, and the nephew made weekend stays at the  uncle's  home.
    The uncle had been a father figure to the nephew from birth.  The  care
    process cut the uncle out of the  nephew's  life  altogether,  with  no
    provision for his involvement in  the  process  to  determine  contact.
    Family life existed, but the absence of a proper process to respect the
    uncle's Article 8(1) rights meant that the interference  could  not  be
    regarded as 'necessary' under Article 8(2): see [58].


153. While Boyle establishes that an uncle  and  nephew  may  enjoy  Article
    8(1) family life, I do not understand that  simple  proposition  to  be
    controversial.   The  issue  in  these  proceedings  is  whether   this
    applicant enjoys family life either with his uncle, or with LB.   Boyle
    is instructive in one respect, as it assists with  the  calibration  of
    the strength and depth of relationship required  between  non-immediate
    family members in order to establish 'family  life'  for  Article  8(1)
    purposes.  The relationship was very close, as outlined above.





Family life with SU: discussion


154. I find that the applicant and SU do  not  enjoy  family  life  for  the
    purposes of Article 8 ECHR.  They have met only twice,  once  when  the
    applicant was very young, and the last time  in  2016.   There  are  no
    details of what  took  place  during  those  meetings.   Prior  to  the
    applicant's arrival in Greece, the high watermark of  his  relationship
    with the applicant was to  enquire  after  him  when  speaking  to  his
    mother.  He does not claim to have spoken directly with the  applicant,
    or written, or had any other form of long-distance  relationship  which
    goes beyond the normal emotional ties of uncle and nephew prior to  his
    arrival in Greece.  While there  may  have  been  an  increase  in  the
    contact with  the  applicant  following  his  arrival  there,  what  is
    striking from the  evidence  presented  in  these  proceedings  is  its
    general paucity.  There are no copies of text message or telephone logs
    of the sort that would readily be  available,  and  which  are  usually
    relied upon in cases where the parties seek to establish  long-distance
    family life.  SU's evidence  is  that  he  speaks  regularly  with  the
    applicant by telephone.  Such evidence would be easy to provide.


155. There is no evidence of any financial support, or any  visits  to  meet
    with the applicant.  While  international  travel  has  been  difficult
    since late March 2020, the applicant arrived in Greece in May 2019 (see
    [20] of Emma Terenius' witness statement dated 12 June 2020).  There is
    no suggestion of any visits by the uncle (or sister) in the  ten  month
    period before the pandemic struck, which is significant.  Were  it  the
    case that 'family life' existed between the applicant and SU,  I  would
    have expected  SU's  statement  to  have  at  least  engaged  with  the
    possibility of travelling to meet him, even  if  there  were  practical
    problems which later intervened, or which prevented travel in the first
    place.  SU wrote that  he  could  not  afford  lawyers  to  assist  the
    applicant in his asylum and Dublin claim.  He does not say there was no
    possibility of travelling to meet him.


156. SU has indicated a willingness to accommodate the applicant  in  future
    and supports his Dublin transfer request.  That is a degree of support.
     However, the mere fact of his willingness to support the applicant  in
    the future, assessed in the context of the general paucity of  evidence
    as  to  the  current  status  of  family  life  between  the  two,   is
    insufficient.  Many human rights claims  where  the  central  issue  is
    whether 'family life' exists in the entry clearance context involve the
    prospect of the  parties  cohabiting  upon  arrival  in  this  country;
    something more than mere willingness  to  accommodate  is  required  to
    demonstrate the engagement of Article 8 on a family life basis prior to
    their arrival.


157. I accept that SU, and LB (see below), have provided some assistance  to
    the applicant with his Dublin  III  application.   As  detailed  by  Ms
    Terenius at [7] of her statement, SU assisted the applicant  to  liaise
    with SA, the applicant's cousin in  Bangladesh,  to  obtain  his  birth
    certificate and other documentation.   I  accept  that  those  isolated
    tasks do involve the provision of a degree of support, but when  viewed
    in the context of the overall paucity of evidence, that is insufficient
    to reach the minimum threshold for the existence of family life.


158. The fact that family life would inevitably develop  in  the  future  is
    not sufficient to merit a finding that it already exists,  as  set  out
    above.  The case-specific examples relied upon by Ms Kilroy  concerning
    other decisions of this tribunal finding that family  life  does  exist
    are just  that:  case-specific  examples.   They  do  not  establish  a
    proposition.   They  are   merely   examples   of   already-established
    principles applying to the facts of individual cases.


Family life with LB: discussion


159. I reject Ms Kilroy's submission (see [53]  of  her  skeleton  argument)
    that family life should be 'presumed' to exist in this sibling context.
     The assessment of family life is inherently case-specific,  and  there
    is no presumption that it exists in any context: see Arden LJ  at  [24]
    of Kugathas:


             'There is no presumption that a person has a family life, even
             with the members of a person's immediate family. The court has
             to scrutinise the relevant factors.'


160. Similarly, Ms Kilroy's reliance on R (oao FA  &  Ors)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the  Home  Department  JR/5523/2018  does  not  take  matters
    further.  It was common ground on the facts of those cases that Article
    8 was engaged on a family life basis:  see  [79].   The  fact  that  in
    other, factually distinct, proceedings the parties agreed that  Article
    8 was engaged does not lead to the conclusion that it must  be  engaged
    in the present matter.  A case specific assessment is required.


161. LB left the family home when the applicant was nine  years  old.   They
    have not seen each other since.  He is  now  nearly  18.   LB  paid  no
    return visits to Bangladesh prior to his departure and does not  appear
    to have sought to visit the applicant in Greece, nor  contemplated  the
    possibility of travelling to meet  the  applicant  in  the  ten  months
    before the  pandemic  struck.   There  are  no  details  of  telephone,
    messaging or social media contact of the sort which  would  readily  be
    expected when family life exists between an  adult  and  minor  sibling
    living in different countries.


162. I accept that LB appears to have  been  instrumental  in  securing  the
    services of Safe Passage on behalf of the applicant:  see  [6]  of  her
    statement.  This accords with SU's statement at [17]  where  he  writes
    that it was LB who contacted Safe Passage, thereby taking  the  initial
    steps to catalyse the applicant obtaining legal  representation.   That
    led  to  him  instructing  Wilson   solicitors,   and   bringing   this
    application.  I take that into account.


163. I find that LB has provided the applicant with  a  degree  of  support,
    but the support is limited, and I do not consider it to demonstrate the
    required 'dependency' on the  part  of  the  applicant.   There  is  no
    evidence of financial or other physical  provision,  such  as  sending,
    posting or arranging delivery of items of support, such as clothing  or
    other basic items.   While I accept that LB has emotional  concern  for
    her brother and is worried for him, such concern does not evidence more
    than normal emotional ties.  If family life existed, there would  be  a
    wealth of evidence of more contact and  greater  support,  even  taking
    into account the  difficulties  of  making  such  provision  while  the
    applicant remains in Greece.  LB does  not  mention  barriers  to  such
    support, other than financial barriers in seeking legal  representation
    for the applicant. She does not mention that she experienced  financial
    or other barriers in seeking to provide the applicant with other  forms
    of support.


164. Plainly, there is the potential for 'family life'  to  develop  in  due
    course in relation to both SU and LB, in the event that the applicant's
    transfer to the UK under Dublin  III  is  in  his  best  interests  and
    therefore takes place.  However, I find that  'family  life'  does  not
    exist between the  applicant  and  SU  and  LB  at  the  present  time.
    Whatever the potential may be in the future,  'family  life'  does  not
    exist at the moment.


165. In relation to the applicant's private life under Article  8  ECHR,  he
    is outside the territorial jurisdiction of the UK's  ECHR  obligations,
    as he is in Greece.


166. It follows,  therefore,  that  the  respondent's  failure  properly  to
    consider the TCR request made by the GDU did not entail a breach of the
    UK's obligations under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.


SUMMARY OF DECISION


167. This application for judicial review is granted in relation  to  Ground
    1, to the extent that the Secretary of State's processing  of  the  TCR
    and refusal  to  accept  responsibility  for  the  examination  of  the
    applicant's asylum claim was a breach of the Dublin III regulation.


168. The application is dismissed in relation to Ground 2.  In  the  absence
    of an assessment of the applicant's best interests, it is not  possible
    for me to conclude that the UK is responsible for  the  examination  of
    the applicant's asylum claim.


169. To the extent both  grounds  contend  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    processing of the TCR breached the applicant's rights under  Article  8
    ECHR, this application is dismissed.


170. In the  exercise  of  my  discretion,  I  decline  to  conduct  a  full
    assessment of the applicant's best interests, for the reasons given  at
    paragraph 104, above.


OTHER RELIEF


171. Both parties are directed to make written submissions on  the  question
    of whether any further relief is required, as follows:


        a. Within 14 days  of  being  sent  this  judgment  in  draft,  the
           applicant may make written submissions on those issues;


        b. Within 28 days  of  being  sent  this  judgment  in  draft,  the
           respondent may make written submissions on those issues.


172. Written submissions from each party must be no longer than  ten  pages.
    If relevant, the submissions should address paragraph 4 of  Schedule  1
    to the EU (Withdrawal) Act 2018, which provides:


             'There is no right in domestic law on or after  IP  completion
             day to damages in accordance with the rule in Francovich.'


173. If further written submissions, or an oral hearing is required, I  will
    give further directions accordingly.


POSTSCRIPT


174. This judgment was circulated in draft to the parties on 2  March  2021.
    On 3 March, by a letter from the applicant's solicitors I was  informed
    that the respondent had accepted the  TCR  on  9  February.   I  sought
    submissions from the parties as to (i) why I had not been  informed  of
    the development, and (ii) the impact of the TCR having been accepted on
    the applicant's application for judicial review.


175. As to (i) there appears to have been an oversight on the part  of  both
    parties.  The Secretary of State, having accepted the TCR, should  have
    informed  me  immediately.   The  failure  to  do  so  is  said  to  be
    attributable to an oversight by the case lawyer in the Government Legal
    Department.  The applicant was on notice from the GDU that the  request
    had been accepted on 12 February 2021,  but  decided  to  seek  further
    confirmation from the Secretary of State before informing the tribunal.
     Strikingly, despite having copied other  inter-parties  correspondence
    to the tribunal, those representing the applicant decided not to do  so
    on that occasion.  If ever there was a time to copy  correspondence  to
    the tribunal, or alert it to potentially significant  developments,  it
    was then.


176. As to (ii), the  applicant  proposed  amendments  to  the  judgment  to
    reflect the fact the TCR had been accepted.  The  respondent  submitted
    that the  'administrative  oversight'  had  no  bearing  on  the  draft
    judgment, suggesting that the factual development could be regarded  as
    a postscript.  I agree with the respondent.  The judgment  reflects  my
    decision and reasons on the application for judicial review as  it  was
    presented to me.  There will always  be  post-hearing  developments  in
    judicial review cases,  especially  in  this  jurisdiction,  where  the
    Secretary of State engages  with  an  applicant  through  a  series  of
    decisions and actions over a course of time.  Just as 'rolling  review'
    is generally to be avoided, so  too  should  judgments  seek  to  avoid
    trying to adapt to a continually changing factual matrix.   Insofar  as
    the date of the TCR being accepted has any bearing  on  further  relief
    sought by the applicant, that is an  issue  which  may  be  dealt  with
    pursuant to the directions set out  in  paragraph  171  and  following,
    above.


Stephen H Smith


Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


5 March 2021












|IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL                 |CASE NO: JR/1592/2020      |
|                                                                  |
|BETWEEN:-                                                         |
|               | The Queen (on the application of |Applicant      |
|               |ShM)                              |               |
|               |                                  |               |
|               |                                  |               |
|               |- and -                           |               |
|               |                                  |               |
|               |Secretary of State for the Home   |Respondent     |
|               |Department                        |               |
|               |                                  |               |
|               |                                |                |
|               |INTERIM ORDER                   |                |

UPON hearing from the Applicant's counsel, Ms Charlotte  Kilroy  QC  and  Ms
Michelle Knorr, and the Respondent's counsel, Mr Gwion Lewis  at  a  hearing
on 25 January 2021;

AND UPON the Respondent accepting that her substantive  decisions  dated  18
February 2020 and 17 March 2020 refusing the request made on 7 January  2020
by the Greek authorities for her to take responsibility for the  Applicant's
asylum claim under Article 8 EU Regulation 604/2013 were unlawful  and  fall
to be reconsidered;

AND UPON the Respondent committing to all reasonable  endeavours  to  secure
family assessments from the  relevant  local  authorities  on  an  expedited
basis;

IT IS ORDERED that:
   1) The Respondent shall make a request to the relevant local authorities
      for SU and LB by 4.30 pm on 27 January 2020 to conduct urgent
      assessments and must inform the Applicant of the outcome of those
      assessments, through his solicitor, within 1 working day of receipt.
   2) The Respondent shall communicate a decision on the Article 8 TCR to
      the Greek authorities within 2 working days of receiving any positive
      local authority assessment for either SU or LB (it not being necessary
      to await a positive local authority assessment in relation to both SU
      and LB), and shall provide a copy of that decision to the Applicant's
      solicitor.
   3) At the time of communicating the decision on the TCR to the Greek
      authorities, and in the event that the TCR is accepted, the SSHD shall
      request that the Greek authorities expedite the Applicant's transfer
      insofar as they are able to do so. The Respondent must provide a copy
      of the request to the Applicant's solicitor together with the decision
      on the TCR.
   4) Liberty to apply.
   5) The Respondent do pay the Applicant's reasonable costs of the
      application sealed 11 January 2021, to be assessed if not agreed.

Stephen H Smith
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith,
26 January 2021
