
IAC-FH-CK-VI

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                            JR/1339/2020 (V)

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                             London EC4A IWR

                                                             9 November 2020


                                  THE QUEEN
                 (ON THE APPLICATION OF JOAN SAMUELS GREEN)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   BEFORE

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L SMITH
               SITTING AT FIELD HOUSE, VIA SKYPE FOR BUSINESS


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Symes, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer Solicitors, appeared on
behalf of the Applicant.

Mr J Jolliffe, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                           - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  APPROVED
                           - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE SMITH: This is an application  for  judicial  review  challenging  the
    Respondent's decision dated 27  January  2020  refusing  the  Applicant
    entry clearance to settle as the spouse of  a  British  national.  That
    decision followed a decision made as long ago  as  1 October  2008  to
    exclude the Applicant from the UK.

 2. The Applicant's application for judicial review was  issued  on  4  May
    2020. Permission to apply for judicial review was refused on the papers
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Keki? on 19 June 2020 but granted following  an
    oral hearing on 5 August 2020 by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith largely  on
    the basis that the refusal of entry clearance was  procedurally  unfair
    because the Applicant was unaware of the exclusion  decision  on  which
    the refusal was based and had no opportunity to challenge it.

 3. The decision under challenge was also a refusal of a human rights claim
    and therefore generated a right of appeal. At the time of the making of
    the  decision,  the  Respondent  had  not  addressed  the   Applicant's
    representations made about exclusion as she could not have  made  those
    before she knew of the exclusion.  The  Respondent  has  since  made  a
    decision refusing to  revoke  the  exclusion  order  in  reply  to  the
    Applicant's representations. Although the Respondent  agreed  that  she
    would do this in a response to the pre-action protocol letter, she  did
    not in fact do so until September  2020.  The  Respondent  argues  that
    there is a complete alternative remedy such that  the  application  for
    judicial review should be refused.

 4. I can deal with the facts of the case very shortly. The Applicant is  a
    national of Jamaica. She came to the UK as a visitor in  December  1999
    with leave to June 2000. She was granted an extended period of leave to
    March 2001. Whilst in the UK she met her partner, now her husband.  She
    overstayed and, in 2007,  was  encountered  working  unlawfully.  As  I
    understand  it,  she  had  obtained  her  employment  using  a  genuine
    passport, but it contained falsified details of her  leave  to  remain.
    The Applicant was charged  and  convicted  of  a  criminal  offence  in
    relation to her use of false documents. She was sentenced to  a  period
    of six months in prison and recommended for deportation.

 5. The Applicant voluntarily left the  UK  thereafter  in  May  2008.  She
    married her partner in Jamaica in 2008. He returned to the UK and  they
    have maintained their relationship since via visits and remote  regular
    contact. The  couple  were  unable  to  make  an  application  for  the
    Applicant to join her husband until 2019 as he could  not,  till  then,
    meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").

 6. Although entry clearance  was  also  refused  on  the  basis  that  the
    Applicant could not satisfy the financial requirements  of  the  Rules,
    due to a failure to provide the correct documents,  I  understand  that
    the Applicant is now in  a  position  to  satisfy  an  Entry  Clearance
    Officer  as  regards  the  financial  requirements  with  the   correct
    documents and therefore, if the exclusion order did not exist, would be
    in a position to make a further application rather than relying on  the
    appeal which was generated by the decision under challenge.

 7. Through no fault of the Applicant's solicitors,  the  revised  judicial
    review hearing bundle did not reach me before the hearing and therefore
    I have not seen either the original exclusion  decision  or  the  later
    refusal to revoke the  exclusion  order.  The  Applicant  has  made  an
    application to amend the grounds to challenge  the  later  decision.  I
    obviously could not deal  with  that  application  without  seeing  the
    decision which the Applicant seeks to challenge.

 8. Both representatives agreed however that I would not reach  that  point
    if I decide that the appeal against the entry clearance decision  is  a
    complete alternative remedy, which is the Respondent's  position.  That
    is based, as I say, on the refusal of a human rights  claim  which  has
    generated a full Article 8 appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  That
    has been lodged and remains pending. It was  agreed  therefore  that  I
    would hear submissions on the alternative  remedy  issue  first  before
    moving on, if necessary, to consider the application to amend.

 9. Having heard very  helpful  submissions  from  both  Mr  Symes  and  Mr
    Jolliffe, who have both put their cases extremely  succinctly,  I  have
    concluded that the appeal is an alternative remedy and  that  I  should
    therefore refuse the Applicant for judicial review  on  that  basis.  I
    turn to set out my reasons.

10. The Respondent relies on the case of R (oao Zoolife International Ltd v
    Secretary of State for Environment, Food & Rural  Affairs  [2007]  EWHC
    2995. That is not entirely on point as it concerns academic  challenges
    rather than ones where there is an alternative  remedy.  It  is  though
    trite law, and Mr Symes does not dispute, that  judicial  review  is  a
    remedy of last resort and should not be exercised until any alternative
    remedy is exhausted. I accept of course that there are some cases where
    parallel judicial review and appeal proceedings are  necessary  because
    the appeal is unable to determine the essential issues but that is  not
    this case.

11. Mr Symes relied on the case of Ahsan v The Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department (2017) EWCA Civ 2009 in support of his proposition that
    there is no full alternative remedy. He points to [116] of the judgment
    which he says contains conditions which are of general application  and
    which are required to be  satisfied  to  show  that  an  appeal  is  an
    alternative remedy:

      1) The first condition is that on appeal the First-tier Tribunal  must
         be able to determine the central issue. In  the  Ahsan  cases  that
         issue was whether there had been dishonesty in the  taking  of  the
         English language test. Mr Symes says that the  First-tier  Tribunal
         cannot decide the central issue in this case which is  whether  the
         Applicant should continue to  be  excluded  because  the  exclusion
         order is not an appealable decision.

      2) Second, the Applicant must not be in a worse position in the appeal
         than she would be in  judicial  review  if  the  central  issue  is
         determined in her favour. In this case, it is said that she is in a
         worse position because, if the Tribunal were to  conclude  via  the
         judicial review that the exclusion decision is  unlawful  then  all
         objections to entry clearance fall away  and  the  Applicant  could
         simply make another  application  rather  than  continue  with  her
         appeal. It  is  said  that  an  appeal  is  more  costly  and  more
         protracted particularly in the current climate of the pandemic.

      3) Third, there must be a refusal of a human rights  claim  so  as  to
         generate an appeal.

12. The third condition is of course satisfied. I agree  with  Mr  Jolliffe
    that, insofar as what is said  in  Ahsan  amounts  to  a  statement  of
    principle applicable to all cases, those principles  are  satisfied  in
    any event.

13. The First-tier Tribunal can decide the central issue.  As  Mr  Jolliffe
    points out, in Ahsan there was a disputed issue of fact which had to be
    determined. Here there is no dispute as to the  facts  which  are  that
    there was a criminal conviction, a recommendation for  deportation  and
    an exclusion order remains in place. True  it  is  that  the  exclusion
    order is itself not appealable. However, as is evident from the case of
    Campbell (exclusion; Zambrano) [2013] UKUT  147  (IAC)  (on  which  the
    Applicant placed reliance), the Tribunal can still  consider(indeed  is
    bound to consider) the effect of the exclusion order  when  considering
    the public interest. That  would  include  whether  the  exclusion  can
    properly be maintained after this passage  of  time.  The  Tribunal  in
    Campbell made just such a decision (see [48] and [49] of the decision).

14. As I also observed in the course of the hearing, this situation  is  no
    different to there being a deportation decision in place at the time of
    an appeal. It cannot sensible be suggested that a Tribunal dealing with
    a deportation case cannot decide that deportation  is  disproportionate
    notwithstanding the existence of a deportation order. Indeed,  in  this
    case I understand that the reason for the initial exclusion order, even
    though I have not seen it, was based on the court's recommendation  for
    deportation  and  that  the  Applicant  departed  the  UK  before   the
    deportation order was served.

15. Nor can it be said that the Applicant  is  in  this  case  in  a  worse
    position in the appeal than in her judicial review. As I pointed out to
    Mr Symes, and he agreed, I could only consider the  lawfulness  of  the
    exclusion decision in terms of whether it  accords  with  guidance  and
    whether it is "Wednesbury unreasonable".  I  could  not  determine  the
    proportionality issue because that is a matter of which the  First-tier
    Tribunal is seized in the appeal. The Applicant will be able  to  carry
    out a more intensive review of the lawfulness of the exclusion decision
    when  the  First-tier  Tribunal  looks  at  the  public  interest   and
    proportionality in the context of the merits  of  the  entry  clearance
    refusal.

16. Furthermore, now that  the  Respondent  has  made  a  further  decision
    refusing to revoke the exclusion order, the  Applicant  would  have  to
    apply to amend her grounds to challenge that - as she has  done  -  and
    would need the Tribunal's permission to proceed.  That  would  put  her
    back to square one and if anything  would  lead  to  further  cost  and
    delay. The Applicant points to the case  of  Caroopen & Myrie  v  The
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  1307  in
    support of a submission that I would have  to  look  at  the  exclusion
    decision when considering the lawfulness of the entry clearance refusal
    whether or not permission to amend was given. Caroopen is not on  point
    precisely because there is, in this  case,  an  alternative  remedy  in
    relation to the first decision which is currently being exercised. That
    was not the position in Caroopen.

17. I did wonder at one point if  there  was  a  distinction  to  be  drawn
    between the outcome for the Applicant in the appeal  and  the  judicial
    review. That would be relevant to  whether  the  second  of  the  Ahsan
    conditions is satisfied. If the suitability finding falls away and  the
    Applicant meets the financial requirement  she  would  be  entitled  to
    enter under the Rules in the five-year category to  settlement.  As  Mr
    Jolliffe pointed out, though, as  in  a  deportation  case,  where  the
    Tribunal can decide that deportation is  disproportionate  which  would
    lead to the removal of the deportation decision, so  the  Tribunal  can
    decide in this case that exclusion is disproportionate which would also
    lead to the same result. So I cannot see that the Applicant is  in  any
    worse position and is probably in a much better position in her  appeal
    as the Tribunal will be able to consider the case  on  its  merits  and
    substitute its own view which is something I cannot do.

18. For all of those  reasons,  even  if  Ahsan  is  intended  to  set  out
    conditions which apply to all cases when considering  the  availability
    of alternative remedies, those conditions are satisfied in  this  case.
    It follows that the Applicant's appeal is an alternative remedy and for
    that reason I refuse the application for judicial review.

Application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

19. Mr Symes makes an application for permission to  appeal  but  does  not
    particularise his grounds. In essence,  he  repeats  his  case  as  put
    before me. I refuse permission to appeal for the same reasons as I have
    refused the application for judicial review. There is no arguable error
    in my decision.

Costs

20. I am going to order that the Respondent  pay  50%  of  the  Applicant's
    costs to the  end  of  September  2020.  The  challenge  to  the  entry
    clearance refusal was on  two  grounds.  The  first  was  a  procedural
    unfairness challenge in relation to the earlier exclusion decision  and
    the Respondent's failure to communicate that  in  accordance  with  her
    policy, prior to the making of the entry clearance decision,  in  order
    that the Applicant could challenge it. That was the main basis for  the
    grant  of  permission.  Whilst  that  ground  of  challenge  fell  away
    following the making of the refusal to  revoke  decision  in  September
    2020, it was extant both at the time of the  claim  and  the  grant  of
    permission. Although  the  Respondent  had  indicated  that  she  would
    consider the Applicant's representations in response to the PAP  letter
    in April 2020, she did not do so until after the grant  of  permission.
    The Applicant's case in this regard was found to be  arguable  and  she
    has achieved what  she  sought  by  that  ground  by  the  decision  in
    September 2020. She is entitled to recover her  costs  of  that  ground
    until a reasonable time after the making of that decision.

21. However, in relation to the challenge to the January  decision  itself,
    the Respondent's position has remained the same throughout, namely that
    there is  an  alternative  remedy.  Her  position  in  that  regard  is
    vindicated by my judgment. She is therefore  entitled  to  recover  her
    costs of that ground of challenge. I therefore order that the Applicant
    pay 50% of the Respondent's costs for the entirety of the proceedings.

22. It may be that there is little point in seeking  to  have  those  costs
    assessed or agreed if the net result would be  that  the  costs  cancel
    each other out. However, I do not have schedules of costs which  enable
    me to see if that would be the result. It is for the parties to  decide
    whether to enforce the order I have made  or  leave  the  case  in  the
    position of each side bearing its own costs. I will make an  order  for
    detailed assessment by a Costs Judge in the event of  non-agreement  in
    case of need.

                                    [pic]





                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                            JR/1339/2020 (V)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                       The Queen on the application of
                             Joan Samuels Green
              Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all documents lodged and having heard from Mr M  Symes  of
Counsel instructed by Barnes, Harrild  Dyer  solicitors  on  behalf  of  the
Applicant and Mr J Jolliffe of Counsel, instructed by the  Government  Legal
Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,
London via Skype for Business on Monday 9 November 2020

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused
For the reasons contained in my decision given orally  at  the  end  of  the
hearing on 9 November, an approved transcript of which is attached hereto

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal
I refuse permission to appeal.  There is no arguable  error  of  law  in  my
decision.


Costs
The Respondent shall pay 50% of the Applicant's costs to 30 September  2020.
 The Applicant shall pay 50% of the Respondent's costs of  this  application
for the entirety of  the  proceedings.   My  reasons  are  set  out  in  the
approved transcript.


     Signed:  L K Smith


                       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


        Dated:     9 November 2020


[pic]

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 12/11/2020
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
----------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).
