
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/1947/2020  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |(on the application of AB)                   |              |
|              |(by his Litigation Friend Francesco Jeff)    |              |
|              |(ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)               |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Kent County Council                          |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

HAVING considered all documents lodged and having heard Mr P. Rule of
counsel, instructed by Instalaw, for the applicant and Ms C. Rowlands of
counsel, instructed by Invicta Law, for the respondent at a hybrid hearing
on 31 August and 1 September 2021; and having considered the written
submissions from each party concerning costs, received on 21 September
2021; and having heard oral costs submissions from Mr Rule and Ms Rowlands
upon handing down the judgment on 24 September 2021

IT IS DECLARED THAT:

   1. The applicant was born on 1 January 1999, for the reasons given in the
      judgment handed down on 24 September 2021.


Costs


   2. The applicant shall pay the respondent's reasonable costs of this
      claim from 24 January 2020; such costs not to be enforced without the
      leave of the Tribunal. The applicant having the benefit of cost
      protection under section 26 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and
      Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, the amount that he is to pay should
      be determined on an application by the respondent under regulation 16
      of the Civil Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013.


   3. The order of Mrs Justice Thornton DBE dated 23 January 2020 that the
      respondent shall pay 90% of the applicant's costs prior to the date of
      that order is set off against the applicant's liability to the
      respondent under paragraph (2) of this order, above.



   4. There is to be a detailed assessment of the applicant's publicly
      funded costs.



Reasons



   5. The respondent has succeeded in establishing that the applicant was
      not a child and that he had reached the age of majority before
      arriving in this country. The applicant pursued this claim despite
      having been an adult at all material times.  Costs follow the event
      and there is no reason why the respondent should not, in principle,
      benefit from a costs award in its favour, subject to the usual costs
      protection enjoyed by publicly funded applicants.  There is no basis
      to make no order as to costs on account of the respondent's conduct;
      while the so-called "short form" assessment was found to be unlawful,
      it was not quashed, and Thornton J accepted that it provided relevant
      material for the local authority to build upon (see [58]).  Both the
      High Court (see [55]) and this Tribunal (see [81]) rejected Mr Rule's
      criticism of Mr Stringer's personal conduct.  There is nothing in the
      overall conduct of the respondent council that merits a departure from
      the usual approach.


   6. The respondent has applied for its earlier payment of costs (see [4]
      of Thornton J's order) to be set off against that of the applicant
      pursuant to this order.  The applicant advanced a range of submissions
      seeking to resist set-off.  Mr Rule submitted that set-off would be an
      unlawful violation of the costs protection enjoyed by the applicant,
      who cannot afford to pay the costs order.  He also submits that set-
      off would undermine a "concluded order" of the High Court, in
      circumstances when Thornton J was invited to reserve the question of
      costs until the overall outcome of the case, but declined to do so.
      She treated the question of costs in the Administrative Court as
      separate and concluded.  Nor was payment deferred.  The proceedings
      before the Administrative Court are concluded, he submits.  Not only
      are the proceedings now at an entirely different stage, but it would
      be inappropriate and improper for this Tribunal to "interfere" with
      the order.  The authorities concerning set-off and legally aided
      litigants do not assist the respondent, for they merely provide that
      set-off may operate as a 'shield' to future liability for damages,
      rather than requiring a legally aided litigant to make a payment of
      costs. In Hicks v Russell Jones & Walker [2001] C.P. Rep 25 at [11] to
      [13], the Court of Appeal made clear that dealing with costs in an
      earlier separate part of the proceedings "is fatal" to any attempt at
      set-off in a legally aided case (see [17] of Mr Rule's costs
      submissions received on 21 September 2021).



   7. I accept the respondent's submissions that the costs order made by the
      Administrative Court at an earlier stage in these proceedings should
      be set off against the applicant's liability for costs at this stage,
      for the following reasons.



   8. First, I reject the submission that the proceedings are now separate
      to those before the Administrative Court.  The proceedings are the
      same proceedings.  As set out at paragraph 6 of my substantive
      judgment, these proceedings are a continuation of those heard by
      Thornton J.  The Statement of Facts and Grounds relied upon by the
      applicant before the Administrative Court was the only Statement of
      Facts and Grounds in the proceedings: see paragraph 7 of my judgment.
      In her order of 23 January 2020, Thornton J granted permission for the
      applicant to challenge the ensuing Merton-assessment through a fact-
      finding hearing in this Tribunal (paragraph 6) and "transferred" the
      matter to this Tribunal (paragraph 7) for the (same) matter to
      "proceed".  So much is recognised by Mr Rule at paragraphs 9 and 10 of
      his skeleton argument dated 11 August 2021.  The proceedings before
      this Tribunal are a continuation of those commenced in the High Court.



   9. Secondly, where an application for judicial review is transferred to
      the Upper Tribunal under section 31A of the Senior Courts Act 1981,
      pursuant to section 19(3)(c) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement
      Act 2007, "any steps taken, permission given, leave given or orders
      made by the High Court in relation to the application are to be
      treated as taken, given or made by the Tribunal".  It follows that the
      order of Thornton J dated 23 January 2020 is to be treated as though
      it were made by the Upper Tribunal in these proceedings.  These are
      the same proceedings, with the same procedural history, and the orders
      made in the High Court have been deemed by section 19(3)(c) of the
      2007 Act to be orders of this Tribunal, made within the confines of
      the same proceedings.



  10. Had Thornton J wanted to avoid the implications of section 19(3)(c) of
      the 2007 Act, she would not have transferred the matter to this
      Tribunal.  By doing so, she placed at this Tribunal's disposal the
      full panoply of powers, rights and privileges of the High Court as
      conferred by the 2007 Act.  To the extent Mr Rule's submissions,
      either to Thornton J (see [10] of his costs submissions before the
      Administrative Court dated 22 January 2020) or before this Tribunal
      are inconsistent with the above statutory framework, they are
      misconceived.


  11. It is nothing to the point, as submitted by Mr Rule, that the nature
      of this stage of the proceedings is of a different character to that
      of the proceedings before the High Court.  The fact-finding hearing
      took place within the confines of the same overall proceedings.



  12. Thirdly, I reject the submission that ordering set-off would violate
      the applicant's costs protection that he enjoys under the Legal Aid,
      Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.  As held in Hicks v
      Russell Jones & Walker at [11]:



           "It is clearly established that a set-off of costs, where costs
           orders have been made both ways in a case involving legal aid,
           does not amount to a payment of costs by a legally aided
           litigant: see the decision of this court in Lockley v National
           Blood Transfusion Service [1992] 1 WLR 492".



  13. Hicks v Russell Jones & Walker is not authority for the proposition
      that "the prior final dealing with costs in an earlier separate part
      of the proceedings is fatal to any attempt at set-of in a legal-aid
      case" (Mr Rule's costs submissions, paragraph 17).  The Court of
      Appeal simply applied the general rule in CPR47.1 that the costs of
      any proceedings or any part of the proceedings are not to be assessed
      by the detailed procedure until the conclusion of the proceedings, and
      declined to order an assessment at the conclusion of appellate
      proceedings concerning a preliminary issue as to strike out in
      relation to which the defendants had not succeeded, ahead of the
      substantive trial resuming before the trial judge.  The point of
      principle in Hicks v Russell Jones & Walker is that a set-off of costs
      does not offend the costs protection enjoyed by a legally aided
      litigant.  The case-specific decision of the Court of Appeal on the
      facts of those proceedings is of second order importance.


  14. In R (oao Burkett) v Hammersmith and Fulham LBC [2004] EWCA Civ 1342;
      [2005] C.P. Rep 11 at [50], the Court of Appeal held:


           "...a set-off does not place the person against whom it is
           asserted under any obligation to pay, but merely reduces the
           amount that he can recover..."


  15. I accept that the payment has already been made by the respondent to
      the applicant.  However, I do not consider that that is a barrier to
      ordering set-off to take place.  An accounting exercise is required,
      whereby a sum already paid to the applicant's legal team may have to
      be returned.  That the applicant's legal team has already received the
      funds is not a barrier to the power to make an order of this sort
      existing; I have been taken to no authority to that effect.


  16. Mr Rule's reliance upon Maloba v Waltham Forest LBC (Law Society
      intervening) [2007] EWCA Civ 1234 is misplaced.  In Maloba, a local
      authority appealed against a homelessness appeal allowed by the County
      Court under section 204 of the Housing Act 1996, and against the order
      of costs made by the judge against the council.  The council submitted
      that there should be a "general practice" in allowed appeals under the
      1996 Act that any order for costs made against the council should be
      subject to a stay until after the redetermination of the homeless
      application and any subsequent appeal from it (see [66]).  The court
      rejected the submission that such a general practice should be adopted
      (see [71]).  Having outlined the leading authorities on set-off, the
      Court of Appeal held that the procedural context in those proceedings
      was different.  The council in Maloba had not won on any issue and did
      not have a costs order in its favour.  That, of course, is in contrast
      to the instant proceedings, where the respondent council does have a
      costs order in its favour, and has 'succeeded' in establishing that
      the applicant was not a child as he claimed to be (albeit that the
      terminology of 'success' must be approached with a degree of caution
      in age assessment proceedings, as the Tribunal's fact-finding function
      is non-adversarial).  Properly understood, Maloba did not concern a
      set-off situation, but a challenge to a case-specific decision by a
      judge not to stay the effect of his order, and the Court of Appeal's
      rejection of the broad submission that costs orders in all allowed
      homelessness appeals should always be stayed.  Maloba is of no
      assistance.


  17. In my judgment, therefore, the availability of set-off is not a matter
      which should be determined by whether a paying party at one stage of
      the proceedings had already made a payment or not.  That is a
      restriction that does not feature in any of the authorities to which I
      have been taken.


  18. I therefore reject Mr Rule's submissions that the power to set the
      respondent's earlier costs liability off against the applicant's
      liability does not exist.



  19. The question then arises as to whether it is appropriate to exercise
      the power to set off the respondent's costs liability to the applicant
      against his liability to the respondent.  In my judgment, it is
      unquestionably appropriate.  The applicant was a 20 year old man when
      he arrived in this country, yet has maintained throughout the course
      of these lengthy legal proceedings that he was a child.  In doing so,
      he caused the respondent council not only to incur its own costs, but
      also rendered them liable for his costs incurred when falsely
      purporting to be below the age of majority.  While there is no
      question that I should revisit the substance of Thornton J's judgment,
      in my judgment it would be unjust for the respondent's costs liability
      to the applicant not to be set off against the applicant's costs
      liability to the respondent.  As held in Burkett at [50], the
      applicant would be under no obligation to make any payment himself;
      the amount he is entitled to recover pursuant to the order of Thornton
      J is simply set-off against his own costs liability to the respondent.
       That Thornton J's order may already have been paid by the respondent
      to the applicant is not a reason to decline to order set-off; these
      are the same proceedings, and, by definition, Thornton J's order
      concerned only a preliminary stage of the lengthy proceedings which
      continue in this Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

  20. I decline to extend time for an application for permission to appeal
      to be made to the Court of Appeal.  The parties have had the draft
      judgment in this matter since 8 September 2021.  It was handed down at
      a hearing on 24 September 2021, at a hearing adjourned from 21
      September 2021 in light of both counsel serving extensive written
      costs submissions only minutes before that hearing, necessitating an
      adjournment.  There has been ample time to formulate a written
      application for permission to appeal and I see no good reason to
      extend time.


  21. Turning to the applicant's application for permission to appeal made
      orally at the hand down hearing, I decline permission to appeal for
      the reasons given at the hearing.  The proposed grounds of appeal
      unarguably amounted to a series of disagreements of fact and weight
      and did not arguably disclose an arguable error of law, or some other
      reason why the Court of Appeal should be seized of this matter.


      Signed:     Stephen H Smith


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


      Dated:           24 September 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested party / the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
27 September 2020

Solicitors:
Ref No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal on a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is given. If
no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider at the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B) of the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to appeal can apply for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by filing an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office of the Court of Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission to appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


                                    [pic]
                                                       Case No: JR/1947/2020
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                           21 September 2021
                                   Before:

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                         (on the application of AB)
                  (by his Litigation Friend Francesco Jeff)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                             KENT COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                 Mr P. Rule
                 (instructed by Instalaw) for the applicant

                               Ms C. Rowlands
               (instructed by Invicta Law) for the respondent

                 Hearing date: 31 August - 1 September 2021

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               J U D G M E N T

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith:

 1. AB is a citizen of Afghanistan. He claims to be 17  years  old,  having
    been born in 2004,  nominally in January of that year (that  being  the
    month ascribed to him).  That  claim  is  disputed  by  the  respondent
    council which considers the applicant to have been  born  in  at  least
    2001, if not 1999.  It is the  role  of  this  tribunal  in  these  age
    assessment proceedings to determine the applicant's  probable  age  and
    date of birth.


Procedural background


 2. AB  came  to  the  attention  of  Kent  County  Council  following  his
    clandestine arrival in this country by lorry on 26 July  2019.  He  was
    assessed by two officers of the council to be aged  between  20  to  25
    years old, with no date of birth ascribed. Mr Alex Stringer was one  of
    those assessing social workers on that occasion.  He appeared before me
    as a witness in these proceedings.  The assessment on that occasion was
    abbreviated and was not conducted in  a  so-called  "Merton  compliant"
    manner, the term now given  to  the  form  of  assessment  outlined  by
    Stanley Burnton J in R (oao B) v London Borough of Merton  [2003]  EWHC
    1698 (Admin); [2003] 4 All ER 280.


 3. AB subsequently issued proceedings to  challenge  the  above  so-called
    "short form" assessment of his age.  On  20  August  2019,  Mr  Justice
    Nicklin granted AB permission to apply for judicial review and  ordered
    the respondent to take AB into care attending the determination of  his
    claim.


 4. AB's challenge to the short form assessment was heard at a  substantive
    judicial review hearing on 9 - 10 December 2019 by Mrs Justice Thornton
    DBE.  Judgment in favour of the applicant was handed down on 23 January
    2021; it is reported at [2020] EWHC 109 (Admin) and [2020] 4  All  E.R.
    235.  The court found that the short assessment featured  a  number  of
    flaws, which I outline below, and ordered the Council to conduct a full
    Merton-compliant age assessment.  The short  form  assessment  was  not
    quashed.  Thornton J accepted the submission advanced by  Ms  Rowlands,
    who also appeared before me, that, despite its flaws,  the  abbreviated
    assessment "provides relevant material for the local authority to build
    upon" (see [58]).  I return to the judgment of Thornton J below.


 5. A Merton-compliant assessment was conducted by two  independent  social
    workers on 27 and 28 February 2020. That assessment concluded that  the
    applicant was 19 years old, with a date of birth of 1 January 2001.


 6. These proceedings are a continuation of those heard by Thornton  J.  At
    [5] of her order giving effect to her judgment, she granted  permission
    for a fact-finding  hearing  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  "to  the  extent
    necessary" and made further provision for the matter to be  transferred
    to this tribunal, following the  Merton  assessment.  It  is  in  those
    circumstances that this claim for judicial review resumed before me.


 7. There has been no application to amend the grounds for judicial  review
    from those which  were  originally  advanced  before  Thornton  J.  The
    Statement of Facts and Grounds is, therefore, out of date insofar as it
    relates to the short-form assessment which has already been found to be
    unlawful (although not quashed). Instead,  the  parties  have  prepared
    agreed statements of facts and issues; the  primary  issue  for  me  to
    determine is the applicant's probable age and date  of  birth.  To  the
    extent necessary to reach findings on that issue, I  will  analyse  the
    credibility of the applicant's account of the same, the  weight  to  be
    placed upon the Merton age assessment, and any third party evidence.


 8. On 25 August 2021, I granted a late application  by  the  applicant  to
    rely on the report of a Mr Ahmed, which I set out below.


 9. The fact-finding hearing took place before me  at  Field  House  on  31
    August and 1 September 2021. The proceedings took place in hybrid form;
    all parties save for Mr Stringer attended the proceedings in person. Mr
    Stringer gave evidence and observed the remaining proceedings remotely.


10. The applicant gave evidence and  participated  in  the  proceedings  in
    Dari. At the outset, I established that the applicant  and  interpreter
    could understand one another and  communicate  through  each  other.  I
    understand that the applicant's  private  interpreter  was  present  in
    court  throughout  the  proceedings.  Mr   Rule   confirmed   that   no
    interpretation difficulties had arisen, although, as set out below,  at
    various points it  was  necessary  for  Ms  Rowlands  to  simplify  the
    language of questions put to the applicant during cross-examination.


11. I treated the applicant as a vulnerable participant within the  meaning
    of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010.  I  ensured  the
    proceedings featured regular breaks and took account of the applicant's
    vulnerability in my assessment of his evidence.


12. I heard evidence from the applicant, HR,  and  Mr  Stringer.   Mr  Rule
    relied on his skeleton argument dated 11 August 2021  and  Ms  Rowlands
    relied on her skeleton argument dated 18 August 2021.


Factual background


13. AB is from Baghlan  in  northern  Afghanistan.  His  case  is  that  he
    attended a government school in Afghanistan, starting in year one  when
    he was around seven years old.  He cannot remember what  calendar  year
    that was. He  has  little  memory  of  what  he  learnt  at  school  in
    Afghanistan.


14. AB claims  to  have  left  Afghanistan  in  around  2016  when  he  was
    approximately 11 years old and in year four at school.  He travelled to
    the UK through Iran, Turkey, Greece, Serbia, Hungary, Austria, Germany,
    and France.  He reached Austria in 2016.  There, he claimed asylum  and
    told the authorities that his date of birth was 1  January  1999.   His
    claim was refused  and  in  2019  he  appears  to  have  faced  removal
    proceedings.  At that point he  left  Austria  for  this  country.   He
    claims to have been  under  the  control  or  guidance  of  his  cousin
    throughout his time in Austria  and  subsequently,  including  when  he
    informed the authorities in Austria that he was born on 1 January 1999.
     His case is that his cousin either made him give that date of birth to
    the authorities, or provided it on his behalf,  but  that  he  was,  in
    fact, much younger at the time.  He claims his  cousin  gave  an  older
    date of birth to avoid them from being separated.


15. In his first witness statement, AB explained that he  always  knew  his
    age in Afghanistan, because his mother and father told him.  They  said
    it was important that he knew his age. He thinks that it  said  he  was
    born in 2004, maybe in the fourth month, but he cannot be sure. He  had
    a Taskera but lost it in Iran. While he had always known his age  while
    in Afghanistan, it was not until shortly before he  left  Austria  that
    his father told him, by telephone, that he had been born in  2004.  His
    age was recorded in the Qu'ran, his father said. While in  Austria,  AB
    would speak to his parents frequently. He has  since  lost  touch  with
    them.


16. AB was first encountered by Home Office  immigration  officers  in  the
    early hours  of  26  July  2019,  having  arrived  clandestinely.   The
    officers who initially  engaged  with  the  applicant  appear  to  have
    accepted his claim to have been a child.   He  was  initially  accepted
    into the Home Office's Kent Intake Unit ("the KIU") as a newly  arrived
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.  His details  were  passed  to  the
    respondent on that basis.


17. Mr Alex Stringer, who works for the respondent as a Service Manager for
    Unaccompanied Asylum Seeking Children ("UASC"), reviewed AB's  details,
    including a photograph of him, electronically.  He formed  the  initial
    view that he was significantly over the age of 15.  Later that  day  Mr
    Stringer met AB at a UASC  facility  in  Dover  known  as  the  Atrium,
    staffed by the Refugee Council.   Mr  Stringer  arranged  for  a  Farsi
    telephone interpreter through the KIU.  The applicant's first  language
    is Dari, although he understands some Farsi.  Mr  Stringer  interviewed
    the applicant with  a  colleague  from  Kent  County  Council,  Melissa
    Carter, following which  the  Chief  Immigration  Officer  ("CIO"),  Ms
    Nicholls, and  the  KIU  safeguarding  lead,  Ms  Mead,  met  with  the
    applicant without Mr Stringer or his colleagues present.  The  CIO  and
    KIU safeguarding officer concluded that the applicant was significantly
    over the age of 18.  Mr Stringer and  his  colleague  formed  the  same
    view.


18. During his time at the Atrium, the applicant  had  been  cared  for  by
    Roland Carter of the Refugee Council.  Mr Carter, who was not called as
    a witness by either party, has extensive  experience  of  dealing  with
    UASC, in particular with Afghan boys.  He was with AB from his  arrival
    at the atrium at around 8AM until he left at 5.30PM. Mr  Carter  writes
    in his statement dated 2 August 2019 that he had no reason to  question
    AB's age based on his behaviour outside of an interview setting and his
    physical appearance.  The applicant was slight in stature and extremely
    thin.  He was too small properly to fit even the smallest clothes  that
    were provided by the Atrium.  Mr Carter informed  Mr  Stringer  of  his
    views.


19. At around 4.45PM that day,  having  secured  the  agreement  of  senior
    colleagues in the Council and that of Ms Nicholls and Ms  Mead  of  the
    Home Office, Mr Stringer and Ms Melissa Carter met with  AB  to  inform
    him that they had assessed him to be an adult, and  that  he  would  be
    returned to the KIU to be supported as an adult.


The short-form age assessment


20. It was during Mr Stringer's second meeting with AB on 26 July 2019 that
    the conclusions of the short form age assessment were presented to him.
     The assessment has not been quashed, and Thornton J held that  it  may
    provide relevant material which could be built upon, so I will  outline
    its contents.  The assessment the process  adopted  by  the  respondent
    that day to ascertain AB's age, and his involvement in the process.  It
    records that AB was asked questions about his physical presentation and
    demeanour and notes that Mr Stringer had shared  his  own  observations
    concerning AB's physical presentation and demeanour with him. It states
    that  Ms  Nicholls  was  "fully  satisfied"  that  the  applicant   was
    "significantly over 18 years of age", and Ms Mead is recorded as having
    said, "I do not believe that he is 15 years as claimed and would  place
    him at around 20 - 21 years."


21. The assessment continues to note that AB had  established  facial  hair
    growth across his jawline and around his mouth, and  acne  scarring  on
    his cheeks that presented as being well established and having occurred
    some time ago. There were faint lines around his eyes  and  his  Adam's
    apple was visible. AB was recorded as being  calm  and  assertive  when
    discussing his age and  circumstances,  and  even  presented  as  being
    irritated by  the  questioning.  His  eye  contact  was  sustained.  Mr
    Stringer's  observations  to  that  effect  corresponded   to   similar
    observations recorded by Ms Nicholls and Ms Mead, who also described AB
    as "confident" because he  was  able  to  challenge  them  openly  when
    questioned about his age. In their view, that was not  consistent  with
    the behaviour and demeanour to be expected of a 15 year old child.


22. The short form assessment continues to state that, although puberty can
    occur at different times for young people:


         "it is consider [sic] to usually occur in a particular  order  with
         the head, hands and feet growing first before the legs and arms  in
         the trunk of the body. This sequence of growth... [AB]  appears  to
         have experienced physical development in all  these  parts  of  his
         body and  also  appears  to  be  accustomed  to  his  current  body
         shape/size, which indicates to me that he is a young person who has
         already progressed some time ago through puberty and  his  physical
         development to adult hood."


23. The assessment concluded that AB's physical  appearance  and  demeanour
    was consistent with someone aged between 20 and 25 years,  rather  than
    15 years. He presented "very clearly as an adult well over the  age  of
    18 years old". For that  reason,  considered  the  assessment,  a  full
    Merton assessment was not required.


24. In early August 2019, the applicant was referred  by  Migrant  Help,  a
    charity supporting asylum seekers and refugees, to Derby City  Council.
    It  is  not  clear  how  that  happened,  in  light  of   the   earlier
    determination that he was not a child; I have not  been  provided  with
    any evidence. On 2 August 2019, two social workers  from  that  council
    met with AB, and decided that he presented neither as an adult nor as a
    child. Given the doubt, it would be necessary to conduct a full Merton-
    compliant age assessment, the Derby social workers concluded.  However,
    Derby City Council subsequently became  aware  that  Kent  Council  had
    already conducted  an  age  assessment  in  respect  of  AB,  and  thus
    terminated the foster care placement that had  been  provided  for  him
    without conducting the Merton assessment, on 13 August 2019.


The judgment of Thornton J


25. It is not necessary in this judgment to recite the  full  criticism  of
    Kent County Council's short form assessment which features in  Thornton
    J's judgment. For present purposes, a brief summary will be sufficient.
    At  [48],  the  court  noted  the  contrasting  opinion  of  Mr  Carter
    concerning AB's age,  formed  in  light  of  his  extensive  experience
    working with Afghan minors.  The respondent's short form analysis  made
    no reference to the "cultural specifics  of  Afghan  boys".   That  was
    despite the acknowledgement in Merton at [24] that the margin for error
    in age assessment increases when the young person in question is of  an
    ethnicity,  culture,  education,  and  background  that   foreign   and
    unfamiliar to  the  decision-maker.  In  relation  to  the  short  form
    assessment's conclusion that AB was "accustomed  to  his  current  body
    shape/size", Thornton J drew on the judgment of Collins J in A and WK v
    London Borough of Croydon and others [2009] EWHC 939 (Admin) at [56]:


         "...What is meant  by  the  observation  that  he  appeared  to  be
         comfortable in his body? It is difficult to follow what  this  does
         mean and how  a  discomfort  with  a  changing  body  can  manifest
         itself."


26. As to the observation that AB presented "irritated by the questioning",
    it was not clear how that advanced the  decision-making  further.  Both
    adults and children  were  capable  of  being  irritated.  Whereas  the
    assessing social workers regarded AB's irritation  as  a  sign  of  his
    maturity, Mr Carter  regarded  his  irritation  as  being  evidence  of
    precisely the opposite.  AB  had  immediately  fallen  asleep  when  he
    arrived at the Atrium and had been woken up at various points in  order
    to be interviewed throughout the day.   In  Mr  Carter's  opinion,  his
    behaviour was consistent with that of a child.


27. Although the respondent's notes of the interview with AB record that he
    was questioned about how he knew what his age was, his credibility  was
    not mentioned in the decision letter. That contrasted with the guidance
    in the original Merton case given by Stanley Bunton J that:


         "Given the impossibility of any decision-makers being able to  make
         an objectively verifiable determination of the age of an  applicant
         who may be in the age range of, say, 16-20, it is necessary to take
         history from him or her with a view to determining  whether  it  is
         true. That will enable the decision-maker in such a case to  decide
         that the applicant is a child." See [28].


28. Having asked the applicant questions which went to his credibility,  it
    was incumbent upon the assessing social workers to reach a view on that
    issue in the decision letter, and to  have  addressed  the  margin  for
    error in doing so, yet they did not: [56].


29. The age range ascribed to the applicant by the short  form  assessment,
    namely 20 to 25, was too close to the "cut off point" of 18  years  for
    the Council not to give AB the benefit of the doubt.  The  respondent's
    short-form  assessment  was  based  on  AB's  physical  appearance  and
    demeanour "failed to adequately acknowledge the  potential  margin  for
    error and give AB the corresponding benefit of the doubt" [57].


The Merton assessment


30. Pursuant to the judgment of Thornton J, two independent social  workers
    assessed the applicant's age on 27 and 28 February 2020. The assessment
    was conducted in Dari in the presence of an appropriate adult from  the
    Refugee Council. The ensuing Merton assessment outlines  the  questions
    which were put to the applicant concerning his  personal  details,  his
    account of how he knows his age, the languages he speaks, his religion,
    his health, family members, reasons for leaving Afghanistan, education,
    employment, leisure,  physical  and  development  and  appearance.  The
    assessment considered the short  form  assessment  undertaken  by  Kent
    County Council on 26 July 2019, and some of the materials generated  by
    the applicant's asylum claim, including his  "statement  of  evidence".
    The meeting on 28 February 2020 is described as a  "follow-up  meeting"
    in the age assessment and focuses on the applicant's account of his age
    while living in Austria, and his circumstances  in  Afghanistan  before
    his departure.


31. The assessment outlines a number of background facts concerning Baghlan
    province in Afghanistan, Afghan  identity  documents  and  primary  and
    secondary education in  Afghanistan.  The  operative  analysis  of  the
    applicant's age begins at page 54. It commences with a  description  of
    the applicant's demeanour during the age  assessment  meetings.  He  is
    described as having  demonstrated  "disinterest  through  playing  with
    small pieces of paper... and dismantling a paper cup..." One feature of
    the first day's interviews with the applicant was  that  he  wanted  to
    finish early for lunch, namely at 12 p.m., rather than 12.30 p.m.  That
    was cited as evidence of his disinterest in the process. He is said  to
    have provided limited eye  contact  and  focused  instead  on  his  own
    actions. He spoke with  a  quiet,  mumbled  voice,  and  at  times  the
    interpreter had to ask him to speak up. However, notes the  assessment,
    "when he  detested  certain  response  [sic]  from  the  assessor,  his
    demeanour and tone of voice  significantly  changed  to  the  point  of
    challenging the assessor."


32. The  assessment  describes  the  applicant's  physical  appearance  and
    clothing. It describes the applicant's visible body  and  facial  hair,
    including what is described as a "faint shaving shadow" above  his  top
    lip, and notes that he has a prominent Adam's apple.


33. The applicant's evident irritation by the  questioning  concerning  his
    age, and his confidence and assertiveness in response, were regarded by
    the assessing social workers as demonstrating the applicant's  "mature"
    responses. While those behaviours could  have  been  explained  by  the
    applicant being tired and anxious due to his experiences prior  to  his
    arrival in the UK, in the opinion of the assessing social workers  they
    were "signs of disinterest" and demonstrated that the applicant  sought
    to minimise the importance of the age assessment. The applicant is said
    to have provided limited information concerning his age or the timeline
    of age-related events, which the assessors considered to be an  attempt
    to deflect the applicant's true age. The  applicant  was  described  as
    selective to the point of being uncooperative when the assessors sought
    detailed information, making it difficult to ascertain what  was  "fact
    or fiction".


34. In relation to the applicant's physical appearance, although there were
    age lines and acne scarring, that may have  been  attributable  to  his
    birth and early life in a warmer climate than Europe.


35. There were some contradictions in the applicant's  account  of  how  he
    knew his age, the assessment considered. Whereas he claimed on 26  July
    2019 that his mother had informed him of his age  2  years  previously,
    during the assessment in February 2020, he claimed  that  he  had  been
    informed  by  his  father  only  eight  months  previously.  That   was
    "questionable", considering the applicant had been in Austria for three
    years prior to his arrival in this country.


THE LAW


36. The legal principles applicable to the determination of age assessments
    are now well established.


37. The Children Act 1989 imposes certain duties upon local authorities  in
    relation to children within their area who are  "in  need".   See,  for
    example, section 17, which  imposes  a  general  duty  on  every  local
    authority to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children  in  within
    their area who are in need by providing a range and level  of  services
    appropriate to those children's needs.  Section 20 obliges every  local
    authority to provide accommodation for any child in need  within  their
    area who appears to require accommodation as a result of there being no
    person who has parental responsibility for  the  child  (amongst  other
    factors).  A paradigm example of the  practical  application  of  these
    duties arises in the case of  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  children.
    They have no one else to look after them, nowhere to go, and no way  to
    support themselves.  The Children Act 1989 obliges local authorities to
    act in such cases.


38. Difficulties arise when it is not clear whether a person is a child  or
    not.  By section 105(1) of the 1989 Act, "'a child' means...  a  person
    under the age of eighteen".  The common law has evolved such  that  the
    task of determining factual disputes between  those  who  claim  to  be
    children and local authorities is to be resolved by an application  for
    judicial review on a precedent fact basis.  Applications are brought in
    the Administrative Court and, by convention,  are  transferred  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.


39. In R (A) v London Borough of Croydon [2009]  UKSC  8  [2009]  1  W.L.R.
    2557, Lady Hale held that the issue of whether a person is a  child  or
    not is a question of fact, for the court to decide upon an  application
    for judicial review.  Having considered the value judgements to be made
    by local authorities when addressing the question as to whether a child
    is "in need" or not, she said, at [27]:


         "But the question whether a person is a "child" is a different kind
         of question. There is  a  right  or  a  wrong  answer.  It  may  be
         difficult to determine what that answer is. The decision-makers may
         have to do their  best  on  the  basis  of  less  than  perfect  or
         conclusive evidence. But that is true of  many  questions  of  fact
         which regularly come before the courts. That does not prevent  them
         from being questions for the courts rather than for other kinds  of
         decision-makers."


40. In his concurring opinion, Lord Hope said, at [51]:


            "It seems to me that the question whether or not a person  is  a
         child for the purposes of section 20 of the 1989 Act is a  question
         of fact which must ultimately be decided by the court. There is  no
         denying the difficulties that the social worker is likely  to  face
         in  carrying  out  an  assessment  of  the  question   whether   an
         unaccompanied asylum seeker is or is  not  under  the  age  of  18.
         Reliable documentary evidence is  almost  always  lacking  in  such
         cases. So the process has to be one of  assessment.  This  involves
         the application of judgment on a variety  of  factors,  as  Stanley
         Burnton J recognised in R  (B)  v  Merton  London  Borough  Council
         [2003] 4 All ER 280, para 37. But the question is not  whether  the
         person can properly be described as  a  child...  The  question  is
         whether the person is, or is not, under  the  age  of  18.  However
         difficult it may be to resolve the issue, it  admits  of  only  one
         answer. As it is a question of fact,  ultimately  this  must  be  a
         matter for the court."


41. There is no burden of proof in age assessment cases: see R (CJ  by  his
    litigation friend SW) v Cardiff City Council [2011] EWCA  Civ  1590  at
    [21]  ("...once  the  court  is  invited  to  make  a   decision   upon
    jurisdictional fact it can  do  no  more  than  apply  the  balance  of
    probability to the issue without resorting to the concept of  discharge
    of a burden of proof...").  As this Tribunal held in R (AM) v  Solihull
    Metropolitan Borough Council (AAJR) [2012] UKUT 00118 (IAC) at [12]:


         "There is no hurdle which the claimant  must  overcome.  The  court
         will decide whether, on a balance of probability, the claimant  was
         or was not at the material time a child. The  court  will  not  ask
         whether the  local  authority  has  established  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities that the claimant was  an  adult;  nor  will it ask
         whether the claimant has established on a balance of  probabilities
         that he is a child."


42. There can be difficulties in assessing the age of a putative child.  In
    R (B) v London Borough of Merton, Stanley Burnton J held at [28]:


         "Given the impossibility of any decision maker being able  to  make
         an objectively verifiable determination of the age of an  applicant
         who may be in the age range of, say, 16 to 20, it is  necessary  to
         take a history from him or her with a view to  determining  whether
         it is true. A history that is accepted as true  and  is  consistent
         with an age below 18 will enable the decision maker in such a  case
         to decide that the applicant is a child.  Conversely,  however,  an
         untrue history, while relevant, is not necessarily indicative of  a
         lie as to the age of the applicant. Lies may be  told  for  reasons
         unconnected with the applicant's case as to his age, for example to
         avoid his return to his country of  origin.  Furthermore,  physical
         appearance and behaviour cannot be isolated from  the  question  of
         the veracity  of  the  applicant:  appearance,  behaviour  and  the
         credibility of his account are all matters  that  reflect  on  each
         other."


43. At [37], he said:


            "...except in clear cases, the decision maker  cannot  determine
         age solely on the basis of the  appearance  of  the  applicant.  In
         general, the  decision  maker  must  seek  to  elicit  the  general
         background of the applicant, including his family circumstances and
         history, his educational background, and his activities during  the
         previous few years. Ethnic and cultural  information  may  also  be
         important. If there is reason to doubt the applicant's statement as
         to his age, the decision maker will have to make an  assessment  of
         his credibility, and he will have to ask questions designed to test
         his credibility."


44. This was developed in R (AM) v Solihull MBC [2012] UKUT 118.  At  [15],
    the Vice President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) said:


         "...almost all evidence of physical characteristics is likely to be
         of very limited value. That is because, as pointed out  by  Kenneth
         Parker J in R (R) v Croydon [2011] EWHC 1473 (Admin)  there  is  no
         clear relationship between chronological age and physical  maturity
         in respect of most measurable aspects of such maturity."


45. At [16] he added:


         "...individuals who raise questions of the assessment of their  age
         typically have  a  history,  or  claimed  history,  beginning  with
         childhood and  early  youth  in  a  country  of  relative  poverty,
         continuing with a long and arduous journey that is claimed to  have
         taken place during their mid-teens, and concluding  with  a  period
         living in a country  of  relative  affluence  such  as  the  United
         Kingdom. So far as we are aware, no, or  no  sufficient,  work  has
         been done to identify what affect such  a  history  might  have  on
         their physical maturity at various dates. In  particular  (although
         we accept that we are relying more on instinct than anything  else)
         physical maturity may be attained  more  slowly  in  conditions  of
         poverty and malnutrition and that on arrival such a person may look
         less physically mature than his chronological  age  might  suggest.
         After his arrival it may be that physical changes take  place  more
         quickly than they would otherwise do, but it may (or  may  not)  be
         that a person with such a history is less  physically  mature  than
         anybody might expect for his age."


46. The Vice President addressed  the  relevance  of  mental  maturity  and
    demeanour at [19]:


         "So far as mental development is concerned, it  is  very  difficult
         indeed to see how any proper assessment can be made from a position
         of ignorance as to the individual's age. Most assessments of mental
         development  are,  in  essence,  an  assessment  of   whether   the
         individual is at average,  or  below  or  above  average,  for  his
         chronological age."


47. He continued:


         "So far as demeanour is concerned, it seems to us that there may be
         value to be obtained from observations of demeanour and interaction
         with others made over a long period  of  time  by  those  who  have
         opportunity to observe an individual going about his ordinary life.
         But we find it difficult to see that  any  useful  observations  of
         demeanour or social interaction or maturity  can  be  made  in  the
         course of a short interview between an  individual  and  a  strange
         adult. There may of course be  cultural  difficulties  in  such  an
         interview but there are the ordinary social difficulties as well."


48. The views of social workers gleaned from formal  interactions  with  an
    applicant are unlikely to mitigate those difficulties:


         "20. The asserted  expertise  of  a  social  worker  conducting  an
         interview is not in our judgement sufficient  to  counteract  those
         difficulties. A person such as a teacher or even a  family  member,
         who can point to consistent attitudes, and a number  of  supporting
         instances over a considerable period of time, is  likely  to  carry
         weight that observations made in the artificial surroundings of  an
         interview cannot carry."


49. There  must  be  no  "predisposition,  divorced  from  information  and
    evidence available to the local authority, to assume that an  applicant
    is an adult, or conversely that he is a child..."  Physical  appearance
    and demeanour are only likely to be relevant in an "obvious"  case,  in
    the absence of compelling evidence to  the  contrary.   See  Merton  at
    [38].


50. In an age assessment judicial review application, the role of the Upper
    Tribunal is to arrive at  an  assessment  of  the  applicant's  age  by
    reference to all material  and  evidence  in  the  case,  applying  the
    balance of probabilities standard of proof. In contrast to conventional
    judicial review proceedings, the  focus  of  my  consideration  is  not
    whether the respondent reached a decision which was unlawful on  public
    law grounds, but rather  to  find,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  what  the
    applicant's probable age is.  Neither party is subject to the burden of
    proof.


DISCUSSION


The benefit of the doubt


51. Mr Rule submitted that I should give the applicant the benefit  of  the
    doubt, in reliance upon A v London Borough of Croydon  and  WK  v  Kent
    County Council [2009] EWHC 939 (Admin)  at  [40],  per  Collins  J,  as
    endorsed by Simon Picken, QC, as he then was, sitting as a Deputy Judge
    of the High Court in VS v Home Office [2014] EWHC 2483 (QB) at [78(7)].
     While as set out below I adopt a  sympathetic  approach  towards  AB's
    evidence, Mr Rule's reliance on the judgment of Collins J is misplaced.
     The authorities concerning the benefit of the doubt principle  in  the
    context of a disputed age claim  address  the  role  of  the  assessing
    social workers during the Merton assessment, rather than a tribunal  or
    court in an age assessment judicial review.   At  [40]  of  A  and  WK,
    Collins J summarised evidence before the court on  that  occasion  from
    the assessing local authority that, in its conduct of  Merton-compliant
    age assessments, it extends the benefit of the doubt to the  individual
    concerned. Similarly, at [78] of VS the deputy  judge  was  summarising
    the principles applicable to the conduct of Merton age assessments by a
    local  authority,  in  the  context  of  a  damages  claim  for   false
    imprisonment which in part turned on assurances given by  the  relevant
    local authority to the Home Office concerning the age of  the  detained
    individual.


52. As noted by Thornton J at [38] of her judgment, in R (oao  AS  (by  his
    litigation  friend  Francesco  Jeff))  v  Kent  County   Council   (age
    assessment; dental evidence)  [2017]  UKUT  446  (IAC),  this  tribunal
    considered the extent to which  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  principle
    extends to age assessment judicial review  applications:  see  [17]  to
    [21].  In the interests of brevity, I quote only [20] and [21]:


         "20.          We  consider,  on  reviewing  the  case   law,   that
         application of the benefit of the doubt is  nothing  more  than  an
         acknowledgement that age assessment cannot be concluded  with  100%
         accuracy, absent definitive documentary evidence,  and  is  in  the
         case of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children  who  may  also  have
         been traumatised, unlikely to be supported by other  evidence.   On
         that basis, its proper application is that where, having considered
         the evidence, the decision maker concludes there  is  doubt  as  to
         whether  an  individual  is  over  18  or  not,   then   in   those
         circumstances,  the  decision-maker  should   conclude   that   the
         applicant is under 18.


         21.         Thus, the benefit of the doubt  is not of use  where  a
         specific date or age has to be  determined  except  insofar  as  it
         requires a sympathetic assessment of the evidence as indicated in R
         (CJ) v Cardiff CC [2011] EWCA Civ 1590."


      I  have  approached  the  evidence  of  AB  on  a  sympathetic  basis,
    additionally calibrating my assessment of its credibility by  reference
    to his vulnerabilities.  In any event, as will be seen, this is  not  a
    case where I had doubt concerning whether AB was over or under the  age
    of 18, such that the applicant does not enjoy the benefit of the  doubt
    in the sense it was summarised at [20] of AS.


Merton assessment: weight


53. It is also necessary to address the role of the Merton age  assessment.
    Ms Rowlands submits that it is a  document  that  carries  "substantial
    weight", and that  I  should  only  depart  from  the  opinion  of  the
    experienced age assessors for good reason. Putting to one side for  the
    moment Ms Rowlands' contradictory submission that I should  not  accept
    the Merton assessment's conclusion that the applicant was born in 2001,
    and should instead find he was born in 1999, in my judgment the  Merton
    assessment provides no such starting point.  While these  are  judicial
    review proceedings, the issue with which  I  am  concerned  is  one  of
    precedent fact; I am  to  reach  my  own  findings,  having  heard  the
    evidence, as to the probable age of the applicant. The age  assessment,
    of course, is part of the evidence, but it enjoys  no  special  status.
    The authorities relied upon by Ms Rowlands in her skeleton argument  in
    support of this proposition do not assist  her;  at  paragraph  41,  Ms
    Rowlands cites the Solihull case at [10].  That paragraph concerns  the
    continuing  validity  of  unchallenged  age  assessments,  which  is  a
    different matter. The preceding paragraph, [9],  rejects  a  submission
    that an age assessment, once challenged, attracts no  weight.  That,  I
    can readily accept; an age assessment is  evidence  of  the  considered
    view of two (usually two) experienced social  workers,  but  attracting
    some weight is a different matter from attracting  substantial  weight.
    The Merton assessment forms part of the evidence in  the  case,  to  be
    considered in the round; no more, no less.


Findings of fact


54. In the analysis that follows, I do not set  out  the  entirety  of  the
    evidence I have heard and considered, nor the submissions made. Rather,
    I will summarise the salient aspects of the evidence and submissions to
    the extent necessary  to  reach  and  give  reasons  for  my  findings.
    Naturally, I considered the entirety of the evidence, in the round,  to
    the balance of probabilities standard before reaching my decision.


55. There are some matters which I exclude from my analysis.  For  example,
    Ms Rowlands submitted that the shape of AB's face, in contrast  to  the
    rounder form of that of the witness HR, who has recently turned 18,  is
    a factor demonstrating that he has attained the age of majority.  As  I
    made clear at the time, I have  little  hesitation  in  rejecting  this
    speculative submission which was not grounded in evidence.   Nor  do  I
    draw an adverse  inference  against  the  applicant  that  he  has  not
    provided evidence of his height over the course of the two years of his
    residence in the UK; there is no scope  for  adverse  inferences  in  a
    process where neither party bears the burden of proof.


56. By way of a further preliminary observation, it is necessary to  recall
    that those in the position of this applicant, regardless of their  age,
    are likely to be victims  of  a  degree  of  trauma  arising  from  the
    perilous journey conducted over  a  course  of  many  months,  and  the
    uncertainty arising from  the  dispute  concerning  their  age.  Having
    treated the applicant as vulnerable at the hearing, I  have  calibrated
    my analysis of the credibility of his evidence by reference to the well-
    established difficulties  vulnerable  witnesses  often  encounter  when
    subjected  to  the  stress  and  pressure  of  cross-examination,   and
    generally in relation to recounting their histories.


Medical evidence


57. I commence by addressing the  extent  to  which  the  medical  evidence
    provides a concrete basis to conclude that  the  applicant  experiences
    specific  mental  health  conditions  which   would   require   further
    allowances to be made when assessing his evidence, over and above those
    outlined above.


58. There are three items of medical evidence in these proceedings.  First,
    there is the formal record of an assessment conducted under the  Mental
    Health Act 1983 ("the 1983 Act")  in  July  2020.  The  assessment  was
    conducted following a referral by the police following the  applicant's
    removal to a place of  safety  under  section  136  of  the  1983  Act,
    following an attempt the applicant made to set fire to his room in  the
    Millbank Centre on 27 July 2020. AB was found in his room with a  noose
    around his neck, in an apparent attempt to hang himself.  It  does  not
    appear that any criminal charges were brought, and  no  further  action
    appears to have been taken. I have not been provided  with  any  police
    records. The relevance of the incident for present purposes  is  simply
    that it led to the applicant being assessed  by  two  "approved  mental
    health practitioners" for the  purposes  of  the  1983  Act,  Mr  Simon
    Nicholls, and Dr Uwadoka, along with a Dr Boggaram from the  Child  and
    Adolescent Mental Health Service ("CAMHS"), and another CAMHS official.


59. In summary, the applicant attempted to set fire to  his  room  and  was
    found by staff with a noose around his neck attempting to hang himself.
    Those conducting the 1983 Act assessment accessed  the  applicant's  GP
    records, spoke with his social worker, Lily Holmes, and also spoke with
    the manager of the Millbank Centre. Ms Holmes is  recorded  as  opining
    that the applicant considered the Millbank Centre to be the  source  of
    his problems, adding that he thought that, if he were to move, he would
    feel less depressed. Ms Holmes, by contrast,  felt  that  even  if  the
    applicant were moved, his problems would not be resolved, although  her
    view was that he did not  experience  a  formal  mental  disorder.  The
    centre manager considered the applicant to be at risk  of  suicide  and
    noted that many of his friends had moved  on.  The  conclusion  of  the
    assessment was in the following terms:


         "There was a consensus opinion between the assessing team that  [A]
         had no mental disorder  and  was  using  manipulation  to  get  his
         perceived needs met. There were no issues of lacking  capacity.  He
         is making unwise decisions regarding his fire-setting  and  suicide
         attempts. We told him our opinion and  he  said  'so  long  as  I'm
         healthy' [.] I explained he could be arrested  if  he  set  a  fire
         again and it was  clear  he  understood  the  consequences  of  his
         actions. The police also spoke with him and reiterated the risks of
         fire-setting and  the  rest  with  possible  criminal  charges  and
         deportation. They also felt  he  understood.  In  response  to  the
         police [A] said 'if I am arrested another day, I'd rather that' but
         would not explain any more detail.


         In coming to  this  decision,  I  took  into  account  the  guiding
         principles of the [1983 Act]..."


60. The second item of medical evidence is a letter from a Shalini Mehta, a
    children's  psychological  therapist  with  the  Refugee  Council.  The
    applicant was referred to the therapeutic service  within  the  Refugee
    Council on 30 September 2020, in connection with  his  high  levels  of
    anxiety, self-harming and the suicide attempt. In a letter dated 8 June
    2021, Ms Mehta states that Ms Holmes, the  applicant's  social  worker,
    had reported that the age assessment process had had a major impact  on
    the applicant's everyday life and mental health. Ms Mehta states in her
    letter that she is unable to provide a formal clinical diagnosis of the
    applicant's  mental  health  but  recorded  that  in  her  opinion   he
    experienced symptoms consistent  with  post-traumatic  stress  disorder
    which included flashbacks, sleeping problems, stress, irritability, and
    anger management issues. She conducted 12  therapy  sessions  with  the
    applicant over the Zoom video conferencing platform. On the second page
    of her letter, Ms Mehta writes that during the  therapy  sessions,  she
    never had any  reason  to  doubt  the  applicant's  age,  and  that  he
    presented as younger than his "stated/assessed" age.


61. The third item of medical evidence is the report of Mr Nomir  Ahmed,  a
    chartered counselling psychologist. According to Part 2 of his  report,
    Mr Ahmed was  instructed  to  diagnose  any  mental  health  conditions
    experienced by the applicant, and to comment upon  how  that  diagnosis
    would affect the applicant's presentation  and  behaviours,  and  other
    matters  including  the  applicant's  ability  to  recall  and   retain
    information, and in particular dates, times and events, and his ability
    to answer questions. The report also addressed additional  support  the
    applicant may require during the age assessment process.


62. The Ahmed report does not set out the materials that were  provided  to
    the author by those instructing him. It is not clear whether  Mr  Ahmed
    had the benefit of the applicant's assessment under the 1983  Act,  for
    example, nor the  extent  of  the  other  materials  generated  by  the
    applicant's engagement with  Kent  County  Council  or  other  relevant
    professionals. The report makes no reference to the applicant's current
    living arrangements.  The late  reliance  by  the  applicant  upon  the
    report meant that it was not  possible  for  Mr  Ahmed  to  attend  the
    tribunal to give evidence. There is some force to the  submission  made
    by Ms Rowlands that it was not possible to explore with Mr Ahmed  under
    cross examination the impact of the uncertainty arising  from  the  age
    dispute on the applicant's mental health, which is significant  as  his
    psychological therapist, Ms Mehta, suggested that it was precisely  the
    age assessment process that was causing the symptoms displayed  by  the
    applicant (although I stress that that was a non-clinical opinion).


63. The conclusions of the Ahmed report are at odds with the conclusions of
    the approved mental health assessors who examined the applicant in July
    2020. Whereas in the 1983 Act assessment there was  consensus  among  a
    number of approved practitioners that the applicant did  not  have  any
    mental health conditions,  and  was  using  manipulation  to  meet  his
    perceived needs, Mr Ahmed  concluded  that  the  applicant  experiences
    severe  depression  (see  paragraph  8.7),  moderately  severe  anxiety
    (paragraph 8.8), and meets the criteria for  a  probable  diagnosis  of
    PTSD (paragraph 8.10).  That led to an overall conclusion by  Mr  Ahmed
    that the applicant meets the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD, as  well
    as a major depressive episode.  The impact of that diagnosis, writes Mr
    Ahmed at paragraph  9.9,  is  that  the  applicant  experiences  memory
    dysfunction relating to his inability to recall  important  aspects  of
    the trauma. That, opines Mr Ahmed, may explain why  the  applicant  has
    found it difficult to provide  clear  and  consistent  answers  in  the
    course of the legal proceedings to which he is a  party.   Further,  at
    paragraph 9. 8, Mr Ahmed concludes that the applicant is  not  feigning
    his symptoms.


64. It is necessary for me to resolve the conflict  between  the  1983  Act
    assessment, on the one hand, and those of Ms Mehta and Mr Ahmed, on the
    other, and the impact  of  that  conflict  on  the  evidence  in  these
    proceedings and my assessment of it.


65. First, as accepted by Ms Mehta, she was unable to  provide  a  clinical
    diagnosis.  She is not qualified to do so.  It is of some significance,
    however,  that  in  her  non-clinical  opinion,  she   identifies   the
    uncertainty  caused  by  the  age  assessment  process   as   being   a
    contributing factor to the applicant's conditions.  As set  out  above,
    the uncertainty  and  stress  arising  from  being  involved  in  legal
    proceedings of this nature, with the  ensuing  consequences,  have  the
    potential to place individuals under great pressure.


66. Ms Mehta's opinion as to the applicant's age was formed over the course
    of 12 Zoom therapy sessions, and so  her  interactions  with  him  have
    necessarily been limited.  Further, she does not explain the  operative
    reasoning underlying her opinion that he is a child in any  depth;  her
    analysis appears to accept that it may be said  that  there  are  bases
    upon which to conclude that the applicant presents as an adult, and she
    seeks  to  refute  those  suggestions  (such  as  by  attributing   his
    "perceived understanding and assumed maturity in certain areas" to  his
    "early challenging life", and also the impact of "cultural  pressures",
    such as his perceived  sense  of  responsibility  towards  his  younger
    siblings), without providing reasons for her conclusion that  he  is  a
    child.  Her focus on why he is not an adult.


67. Secondly, somewhat surprisingly, the documents provided to Mr Ahmed  as
    part of his instructions were not listed in his report. Either Mr Ahmed
    was provided with the 1983 Act assessment, and failed expressly to take
    it into account, or he was  not  provided  with  it.  Either  way,  the
    report's omission from  the  matters  Mr  Ahmed  considered  is  highly
    significant, and his report attracts less  weight  as  a  result.   For
    example, whereas Mr Ahmed considered the applicant was not feigning his
    symptoms, the 1983 Act assessment specifically  records  the  consensus
    among the assessors that  the  applicant  was  being  manipulative  and
    seeking to meet his perceived needs through his  behaviour.   While  Mr
    Ahmed would  not  be  bound  by  the  1983  Act  assessment,  he  would
    nevertheless have to reconcile its opposing conclusion with his own.


68. I therefore prefer the 1983 Act assessment.  It  reflects  the  medical
    consensus among a  number  of  approved  mental  health  practitioners,
    reached following consideration of  the  applicant's  GP  records,  and
    discussion with his social worker and the Millbank Centre manager.


69. Of course, as set out above, I accept  that  the  applicant  will  have
    experienced a degree of trauma from his journey to the United  Kingdom,
    and the uncertainty of these proceedings will undoubtedly  be  a  large
    cloud hanging over him. Allied to that, he has made a claim for  asylum
    which, although the substance of that claim outside the scope of  these
    proceedings, there can be  little  dispute  that  many  asylum  seekers
    experience anxiety and depression arising  from  the  circumstances  of
    their claim, and the corresponding uncertainty  they  experience  while
    waiting for their claims to be  resolved.   In  addition,  the  current
    situation in Afghanistan is likely to cause any citizen of that country
    distress  when  recalling   events   during   their   childhood.    And
    notwithstanding the reasonable adjustments I sought to make during  the
    hearing itself, there were still points at which  the  process  clearly
    caused the applicant confusion. Ms Rowlands, in particular, had  to  be
    reminded to ask shorter questions, and to simplify the terminology that
    she used (for example in relation to whether he  had  appealed  against
    the refusal of his asylum claim in Austria). It was clear at times that
    the applicant  was  struggling  to  follow,  and  my  intervention  was
    required to ensure his full participation and understanding.


70. I therefore  make  allowances  in  my  assessment  of  the  applicant's
    evidence to account for those factors, albeit  not  to  the  extent  Mr
    Ahmed's report suggests that I should, for the reasons given above.   I
    also approach  his  evidence  in  a  sympathetic  manner,  as  Mr  Rule
    submitted I should.


Demeanour and physical appearance


71. I will deal first  with  the  evidence  and  the  submissions  which  I
    consider to be of a neutral  character,  relating  to  the  applicant's
    demeanour and appearance.


72. Mr Rule placed great emphasis on what he claimed  to  be  the  immature
    behavioural traits of the applicant. In a detailed written schedule, Mr
    Rule highlighted extracts from the applicant's social care notes  which
    he submitted demonstrated the behaviour of a child, rather than that of
    a young adult. These included having a messy and smelly room,  punching
    a wall of the Millbank Centre, sleeping in late, smoking in  his  room,
    claiming to miss his social worker, Ms Holmes, needing strict  guidance
    as to  how  to  spend  his  clothing  allowance,  avoiding  key  worker
    sessions, going out for lengthy periods, without explaining where he is
    going, breaching so-called "lockdown"  guidance  which  suggested  that
    daily exercise should be limited to one hour, failing to observe social-
    distancing guidance, being fussy with his eating, allowing  his  friend
    HR to do all the cooking and being content with assuming  the  role  of
    cleaning and washing up afterwards, declining to engage in Pancake  Day
    celebrations, not wanting to set up a laptop, declining to  go  to  Red
    Cross lessons, relating well to other young people, needing  assistance
    with how  to  wash  and  dry  clothes,  being  nervous  in  a  language
    assessment and similar traits.


73. By contrast, Ms Rowlands submitted that  many  of  the  above  examples
    demonstrate that the applicant was, in fact, older than a child. In her
    submission, the applicant was behaving as one would expect an adult  to
    conduct themselves when subject to  rules,  accommodation  and  support
    targeted at those aged under 18.  In  his  initial  interview  with  Mr
    Stringer on 26 July 2016, the applicant suggested  that  he  should  be
    accommodated with a family, or on his own.  There was an  assertiveness
    to the applicant's behaviour, submitted  Ms  Rowlands,  which  revealed
    that he was in excess of his claimed age.


74. In my judgment, it is clear that the applicant had some prior knowledge
    of the sort of provision  that  is  made  for  UASC  in  the  UK.   The
    applicant has presented at times as a determined individual, with clear
    ideas of what he expected.  However, that  is  hardly  surprising;  the
    applicant's journey was facilitated by an  agent,  and  in  his  second
    witness statement, he reveals that he received  a  degree  of  coaching
    from the agent as to what to say upon his arrival.  HR's  evidence  was
    that  his  own  agent  had  provided  him  with  false   identification
    documents,  such  was  the  assistance  available  to   those   seeking
    clandestine entry to the UK.  That this applicant was coached would not
    distinguish him from the vast majority of other UASC who arrive in this
    country, and nor does the fact he sought accommodation of a  particular
    nature clearly render him an adult.


75. Ms Rowlands relied on the fact that social workers at  the  applicant's
    current accommodation have observed him delivering leaflets for a local
    takeaway, and unpacking boxes in a shop, as though working  there.  The
    applicant revealed to one of his social workers that he has  undertaken
    some work because he wants more money.  Again, that  takes  matters  no
    further.  Those in the 15 to 17 years age bracket often work in manual,
    low-skilled jobs, just as those over the age of majority do.  Nor do  I
    accept that it necessarily follows that the applicant's defiance of the
    prohibition against working to which asylum seekers are subject renders
    him an adult.  I have been taken to no  evidence  that  minors  do  not
    flout that prohibition, and my experience sitting  in  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber does not suggest otherwise.


76. In my judgment, therefore, the above behavioural traits do not tell one
    way or the other. While I accept that some of the applicant's behaviour
    may reveal a  lack  of  maturity,  I  reject  the  submission  that  it
    demonstrates the applicant's age in one way or another. It  is  readily
    possible to envisage young people both under and over  the  age  of  18
    acting in the manner outlined above.  As Mr Rule realistically accepted
    during  his  submissions,  my  analysis  of  these  features   of   the
    applicant's behaviour is a question of weight. He did not  submit  that
    the only rational conclusion to be drawn in relation to them  was  that
    the applicant must still be a child; by the same token, neither did  Ms
    Rowlands submit  that  these  behavioural  traits  admit  only  of  the
    conclusion that the applicant is the age the council seeks to assign to
    him. The weight to ascribe to the applicant's behaviour  is  a  largely
    neutral factor, to be  considered  in  the  round  with  the  remaining
    evidence.


77. Of course, demeanour and behaviour can be a guide to assessing age:  so
    much is clear from  the  guidance  summarised  in  Mr  Rule's  skeleton
    argument, and in key authorities  in  the  jurisdiction,  such  as  the
    judgment of the Vice  President  in  the  Solihull  case.   But  it  is
    important to recall the limitations of demeanour-based evidence. As the
    Vice  President  noted,  observations  gleaned  from  limited,   formal
    interactions are unlikely to be of significant assistance.  An  opinion
    formed  on  the  basis  of  observations  and  interactions  with   the
    individual concerned over a "considerable period" (Solihull,  at  [20])
    is likely to carry weight that  observations  made  in  the  artificial
    surroundings of an interview cannot carry.  That is a reality that even
    the asserted expertise of a social worker  cannot  overcome,  held  the
    Vice President.


78. The above observations are consistent with the conclusions of the  full
    age assessment insofar  as  demeanour  and  physical  presentation  are
    concerned.  The assessment observed that the applicant's  assertiveness
    was beyond that which would be expected of a 15 year old.


79. In relation to the applicant's physical presentation,  the  conclusions
    of the Merton assessment are similarly neutral.  He  had  been  shaving
    for two to three years, he claimed, and his presentation was consistent
    with that narrative.  Similarly, the apparent age of the  skin  on  his
    face, and acne scarring, was consistent with one born and brought up in
    a warmer climate, the assessment noted.


80. Against that background, I turn to the evidence of Mr Stringer.  He is,
    as Thornton J noted at [4]  of  her  judgment,  an  experienced  social
    worker.  He formed an early view that the applicant presented as  being
    significantly over the age of 18, despite the  fact  he  had  initially
    been accepted by the Home Office to be  a  child  and  being  processed
    accordingly.   His  interventions  led  to  the  short-form  assessment
    concluding that the applicant was not a child, and the initial decision
    to treat him as such being reversed.


81. Mr Rule was highly critical of Mr Stringer's conduct on 26  July  2019,
    largely because, based 'only' on a photograph of the  applicant,  which
    he viewed remotely, he initiated a process which ultimately led to  the
    applicant being treated as an adult by an assessment later found to  be
    unlawful by the High Court.  In my judgment, Mr Rule's criticisms of Mr
    Stringer's personal conduct on 26 July 2019 were unfounded and must  be
    distinguished from the deficiencies in the  short-from  age  assessment
    found by the High Court.  For example, it is nothing to the point  that
    Mr Stringer initially contacted a more senior official on 26 July  2019
    before taking steps to revisit the applicant's age.  For an official to
    contact a more senior official before taking such steps, as Mr Stringer
    did, is hardly reprehensible conduct.  It is  good  administration  and
    certainly does not reveal any form of ill-will, as Mr Rule appeared  to
    submit. Nor do the steps Mr Stringer later  took  that  day  to  secure
    consensus that the applicant was not a child  merit  criticism  of  his
    personal conduct.


82. Under cross-examination, Mr Stringer's  emphasis  on  the  safeguarding
    responsibilities inherent to his  role  was  compelling,  and  entirely
    consistent with the difficult decisions which face  those  in  his  and
    similar positions who are charged with assessing  whether  to  treat  a
    putative child as a  child,  or  as  an  adult.   The  consequences  of
    treating an adult as a child were highlighted by the Supreme Court in R
    (oao BF (Eritrea)) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2021]
    UKSC 38 at [54].  Lord Sales and Lord  Burnett  held  that  there  were
    "sound policy reasons why adults should be treated as such and  not  as
    children".   In  his  oral  evidence,  Mr  Stringer   highlighted   the
    safeguarding concerns that would additionally  arise  from  placing  an
    adult in accommodation with  children  under  the  care  of  the  local
    authority, many of whom are, by definition, amongst the most vulnerable
    children in society.


83. It appears that Mr Rule sought  to  advance  similar  criticism  of  Mr
    Stringer's personal conduct before the High Court, which  was  rejected
    by Thornton J at [55]:  "I  am  not  however  persuaded  by  Mr  Rule's
    criticisms of Mr Stringer's conduct or his submission that the location
    of the interview was inappropriate..." I, too,  reject  the  criticisms
    advanced before me.  I reject Mr Rule's submission that the  weight  Mr
    Stringer's evidence attracts is diminished on account of  his  personal
    conduct.


84. In cross-examination, while accepting the deficiencies  in  the  short-
    form age assessment he drafted, Mr Stringer maintained  his  view  that
    the applicant was, and had been at all material times,  an  adult.   In
    addition to having interviewed him on 26 July 2019, Mr Stringer has met
    or interacted with the applicant on a  number  of  occasions.   In  his
    second statement, dated 24 May 2020, he stated at [25] that he had  met
    the applicant on at least 12 further occasions, from passing  greetings
    lasting for around 2 minutes in and around the Millbank Centre,  to  45
    minute encounters.  In his third statement, dated 3 November  2020,  Mr
    Stringer outlined a further meeting he conducted  with  the  applicant,
    concerning information received from the Austrian  authorities  to  the
    effect that the applicant had declared a date of  birth  of  1  January
    1999 when he claimed asylum there. At paragraph 10 Mr Stringer wrote of
    the meeting:


         "Having met [the applicant]  on  multiple  occasions  in  different
         settings and circumstances  since  his  arrival  to  the  UK,  this
         meeting affirmed my original decision that [the  applicant]  is  an
         adult and not a child. I remain of the view that  he  is  an  adult
         aged between 20 and 25 years of age."


85. In my judgment, Mr Stringer's interactions with the applicant, and  the
    conclusions he has formed as to his age, attract  a  degree  of  weight
    greater than the minimal amount that would ordinarily  be  ascribed  to
    the views of assessing social workers  formed  only  on  the  basis  of
    formal interactions in the artificial surroundings of an age assessment
    interview.  Mr Stringer's unchallenged evidence was  that  he  had  met
    with the applicant on a number of other occasions, over a  considerable
    period of time.  His interactions with the applicant have  been  varied
    and over a period of time, and his evidence therefore attracts a degree
    of weight on that basis, albeit not determinative weight.


86. Contrary to Mr  Rule's  submission,  the  fact  that  Mr  Stringer  has
    maintained his views as to AB's age is not a ground for criticism;  the
    impact of the earlier proceedings on Mr Stringer was apparent from  his
    evidence, and it is clear that his  maintained  view  is  a  considered
    view, formed on the basis of his professional judgment.


87. I turn now to the evidence of Roland Carter.  In his statement dated  2
    August 2019, Mr Carter said:


         "Based on my first observations of [A] I had no reason to  question
         his age, he was very quiet, appeared to be very slight  in  stature
         and quite thin... He immediately went to sleep when he  arrived  in
         our office. When he woke  up  he  showered  and  changed  into  the
         clothes we provide for new arrivals. He requested smaller  trousers
         which I was not able to provide as he was smaller  than  a  size  S
         kids clothes. I turned on our Xbox for him to play and he was  very
         excited, miming to me that he enjoyed driving games. He spoke  very
         few English words  and  was  cautious  and  polite  around  me.  He
         followed me into the kitchen when I went to make him some food  and
         generally seemed more comfortable with me present and being left on
         his own in a new environment. I found all of this to be  consistent
         with behaviour I have previously observed in Afghan minors and  our
         Dover office."


88. In light of his experience, and the context of  his  interactions  with
    the applicant, Mr Carter's opinion that the applicant was a 15 year old
    boy on the day in question attracts weight.  His was an opinion  formed
    in less formal surroundings, where the applicant is likely to have been
    more at ease than he was during the repeated interviews to which he was
    subject that day.


89. However, the weight Mr Carter's evidence attracts is  tempered  by  the
    following factors.  First, Mr Carter did not know at the time that  the
    applicant had spent three years living in Austria,  claiming  to  be  a
    child upon his arrival there, but on the basis of a date of birth  that
    would place him as an adult by the time he left in 2019.  I accept that
    the applicant has given reasons for initially concealing  the  Austrian
    leg of his journey,  and  the  1999  date  of  birth  he  gave  to  the
    authorities there (factors to which I will  return),  but  for  present
    purposes it suffices simply to state that there was a significant  part
    of the applicant's history of which Mr Carter was unaware, and which on
    any view would have  been  a  relevant  factor  for  him  to  consider.
    Secondly, the opinion formed by Mr Carter was in  the  context  of  his
    interactions over the  course  of  only  a  single  day.   While  those
    interactions gave Mr Carter the opportunity to see the applicant  in  a
    far less formal environment than the interviews also conducted with the
    applicant that day, they are nevertheless  limited  because  they  were
    only over the course of a single day.  Thirdly,  there  is  no  updated
    evidence from Mr Carter.  While that would  be  understandable  in  the
    event that he had had no further contact with the applicant, he appears
    to have had a degree of contact since; I was informed at the conclusion
    of the hearing that Mr Carter had been one of a number  of  members  of
    the public present in court throughout the hearing.  Mr Carter was  not
    called by either party to give evidence.  I am, therefore, without  the
    considered and updated view of Mr Carter  (assuming  that  he  had  had
    further interactions with the applicant since 26 July 2019  other  than
    in the margins of the hearings before me).  That, of course,  does  not
    undermine the credibility of Mr Carter's written evidence, but it  does
    mean that his evidence amounts only to a snapshot of his opinion formed
    after a single day's contact in July 2019, following which  there  have
    been developments in the factual  matrix,  in  particular  the  details
    provided by the Austrian authorities, and the applicant's three  years'
    residence in that country, of which Mr Carter was unaware.


90. It follows that Mr Carter's evidence  attracts  weight  but,  when  his
    evidence  is  assessed  in  light  of  what  is  now  known  about  the
    applicant's chronology, it is of lesser assistance than  otherwise  may
    have been the case.


91. I also heard evidence from HR, a citizen of Afghanistan born  in  2003.
    He is the applicant's closest friend, having got to  know  him  at  the
    Millbank Centre.  He has always considered  the  applicant  to  be  his
    claimed  age,  mainly  due  to  the  applicant's  slight  stature   and
    appearance.  HR and the applicant have spent a considerable  period  of
    time in each other's company; when they both lived  in  Millbank,  they
    saw each other daily.   HR  claims  to  have  overheard  the  applicant
    speaking to his father in Afghanistan during a call  which  took  place
    after the  Merton  age  assessment  in  which  the  applicant's  father
    confirmed to him that he was 15 years old.  HR overheard  the  contents
    of the call because he was in the same room.  I return to this evidence
    below.


92. In my judgment, the evidence of AB's  physical  appearance  is  largely
    neutral.  His physical appearance is within the territory  where  there
    is a significant margin for error.  In his second witness statement, Mr
    Stringer outlines a series of measurements of  the  applicant's  height
    taken over a three month period.  The measurements  were  very  similar
    and did not appear to reveal any growth over  the  period,  leading  Mr
    Stringer to conclude that the  applicant  had  stopped  growing.   That
    aspect of Mr Stringer's evidence attracts little weight.   As  held  in
    Solihull at [18], for evidence of height to attract  weight,  it  would
    need to cover at least an 18 month period.  In any  event,  there  were
    clearly inaccuracies in the measurements taken by  Millbank  staff,  as
    they fluctuated: 156.1cm on 22 August 2019,  156.7cm  on  25  September
    2019, 156.4cm on 11 November 2019, and 156.1cm  on  24  November  2019.
    The height evidence attracts no weight.


AB's "history"


93.  The  analysis  in  the  preceding  paragraphs  underlines  the   need,
    identified by Stanley Burnton J at [28] of Merton, to  take  a  history
    from the individual concerned.  The applicant has given an  account  of
    how he knows his age on several occasions; when first interviewed by Mr
    Stringer,  later  that  day  to  Mr  Carter,  during  the  Merton   age
    assessment, in his witness statements prepared for  these  proceedings,
    and in his oral evidence before me.


94. There are certain aspects of the applicant's history which I  need  not
    address.  He was questioned in the Merton assessment, as well as in the
    proceedings before me, about whether his  claimed  date  of  birth  was
    calculated by reference to the solar Islamic  calendar,  the  Gregorian
    calendar, or the lunar calendar.  His understanding of the  differences
    between each was  limited,  and  nothing  turns  on  this.   Similarly,
    analysis of his age while at school in  Austria  do  not  take  matters
    further; it was put to the applicant in cross-examination that  he  was
    placed at an adult learning college by the Austrian authorities.  There
    is no background evidence before me concerning the school  in  question
    and the ages of its intake.


95. I find that the applicant has given inconsistent  accounts  of  how  he
    knows his age and of significant age-related events in his history, and
    that his evidence  concerning  his  age  lacks  credibility.   For  the
    reasons set out below, an examination of the applicant's history, taken
    in the round with the remaining evidence, reveals that he was not  born
    in 2004 as he claims, and that he is, in fact, an adult with a date  of
    birth of 1999.


96. When first interviewed by Mr Stringer on 26 July  2019,  the  applicant
    both claimed that his father had informed him  four  months  previously
    that he was 15 years old, and also that he had been told  his  age,  in
    Afghanistan, when he was 13, in the context of  being  vaccinated.   He
    later sought to clarify his position by saying that he had  been  asked
    four months previously, on his journey to the UK, what his precise  age
    was, and it was for that reason that he contacted his  father  to  find
    out.  This conversation was, of course, conducted without the applicant
    revealing to Mr Stringer that he  had  resided  in  Austria  for  three
    years, and could not have been travelling to the UK at the time of  the
    conversation, even allowing for a lengthy journey from Austria to  this
    country.   Having  spent  three  years  in  Austria  was,  of   course,
    inconsistent with the account the applicant gave of having been told by
    his mother, when he was aged 13  and  still  in  Afghanistan,  that  he
    needed to be vaccinated.  On the case he now advances, he  was  already
    in Austria when he was 13, having left Afghanistan when he was 11.   Of
    course, people lie for many reasons, and the  applicant  has  explained
    that his tired, scared, and vulnerable state at that point led  him  to
    conceal  the  Austrian  aspect  to  his  history.   The  interview  was
    conducted  in  Farsi,  rather  than  Dari,  which  is  the  applicant's
    preferred language.  I take these factors into account.


97. In the Merton age assessment, which was conducted in February 2020, the
    applicant said he had been told his by his age mother and father "eight
    months ago", when he was leaving Austria, two days  before  his  actual
    departure.  He was going to be deported, he said.  His father told  him
    that he had been born in 2004 and was 15 years old.  As for his age  in
    Austria, the applicant said that he did not know; he had been under the
    control of his cousin  at  the  time,  who  provided  his  age  to  the
    authorities.  When asked by the social workers for his age when he left
    Afghanistan, the applicant said he did not know.


98. The applicant did have a cousin in  Austria;  so  much  is  clear  from
    information subsequently provided by the Austrian  Federal  Office  for
    Immigration and Asylum's Dublin Unit,  in  a  response  provided  under
    Article 34 of Regulation 604/2013 (the Dublin III Regulation) dated  11
    September 2020.  The  Dublin  Unit's  response  also  states  that  the
    applicant's date of birth was recorded as 1 January 1999, and that  the
    applicant entered the country on 1 June 2016, claiming asylum the  same
    day. The applicant would have been a child at the time, on that date of
    birth.


99. I consider it to be unlikely that the Austrian authorities  would  have
    accepted the applicant to be a child on the basis of information solely
    provided by another family  member,  without  any  examination  of  the
    applicant or an attempt to verify the information with him  personally,
    given he would have been 17 on his then claimed  date  of  birth.   The
    Austrian authorities are bound by the processes of the Common  European
    Asylum System which places the best interests of the child at the heart
    of the examination of asylum claims made  by  children.   It  would  be
    striking if the Austrian authorities accepted the applicant to be a  17
    year old child by reference solely to information provided by  a  third
    party.  I accept,  however,  that  the  phenomenon  of  children  being
    coached to give misleading information to the authorities in  "transit"
    countries is real, and that it is plausible that the information  given
    to the Austrian authorities  by  the  applicant  could  have  been  the
    subject of coaching by another, including his cousin.   I  also  accept
    that it would have been possible for the applicant and  his  cousin  to
    pose as father and son, given, as  confirmed  by  the  Austrian  Dublin
    Unit, his cousin was born in 1982.  I will return to this point.


100. Throughout the age assessment interview, particularly  at  the  meeting
    on the second day, the applicant either struggled to  answer  questions
    about his knowledge of his date of birth and age or was evasive.   When
    pressed as to his date of birth, he claimed not to know it (see  Volume
    2/page 50).  When asked about contact with his family,  despite  having
    previously claimed to have been in regular contact with his parents, he
    claimed no longer to be able to contact them.  Their phone was off,  he
    said,  in  response  to  questions  on  the  topic.   Looking  at   the
    applicant's social care  notes,  losing  contact  with  his  family  in
    Afghanistan is not an issue which he reported to  his  key  and  social
    workers as troubling him,  as  one  would  expect  if  the  applicant's
    ability to contact his parents was impaired as he  claimed.   Ms  Mehta
    makes no reference to the applicant having raised this as an  issue  in
    the course of the therapy sessions she provided for the applicant.


101. I note that HR claims to have overheard the applicant speaking  to  his
    father on the telephone while they both still  lived  at  the  Millbank
    Centre concerning the applicant's age; in  cross-examination,  he  said
    that the conversation took place after  the  age  assessment.   In  re-
    examination, HR was less clear as  to  when  the  telephone  call  took
    place; he had not recorded the date of the conversation but was able to
    say it was after two age assessment results had been provided to  other
    residents at the centre.  In what amounted to a  leading  question,  Mr
    Rule said to HR that he "wanted to remove the guesswork" as to when the
    conversation took place, which may have planted some doubt in HR's mind
    about whether he was guessing or not; he certainly had not said that he
    was guessing.  While Mr Rule's re-examination attempted to  distinguish
    between the age dispute arising from applicant's short form  assessment
    and the full assessment, HR provided no further clarity.  He was unable
    to say when the other residents' age  assessments  took  place,  simply
    stating that he, HR, was feeling under pressure at the time.  Mr Rule's
    questions appeared to be intended to capture whether HR's reference  to
    the call taking place "after" the assessment simply  meant  during  the
    period in which the applicant's age was  disputed  by  the  respondent,
    rather than after the Merton assessment.  HR's further answers did  not
    shed further light on that issue; taken in the round, I  consider  that
    HR's evidence was that the applicant spoke  to  his  father  after  the
    Merton assessment.  He had ample opportunity during  re-examination  to
    clarify that he meant the call took place during the  currency  of  the
    applicant's general "age-disputed" status but did  not.   I  reject  Mr
    Rule's closing submission that HR's evidence was that the  conversation
    took place during the overall currency of the applicant's dispute  with
    the respondent concerning his age; the conversation  took  place  after
    the Merton assessment, during which AB had claimed to have  no  contact
    with his family in Afghanistan.  The applicant did  not  give  the  age
    assessors the full picture of his contact with his family and  has  not
    given me the full picture either.


102. The applicant provided a different account in  his  statement  prepared
    for these proceedings.  Rather than being  told  at  a  specific  point
    shortly before his departure from  Austria,  the  applicant  stated  at
    paragraph 5:


         "I have always known my age whilst I  was  growing  up  because  my
         mother and father told me. They would tell me that it is  important
         that I know my age. I do not think you know a reason to  know  your
         age, it is your age, and you should note."


103. In my judgment,  that  is  a  further  and  significant  inconsistency.
    Whereas the applicant had previously claimed to have been told his  age
    at distinct points in the past, for specific reasons, in his  statement
    he claims always to have known his age, having been told while  he  was
    growing up, on the premise that it was important to know his age.


104. Under cross-examination, the applicant's account was closer to that  he
    gave during  the  Merton  assessment,  although  his  recollection  was
    punctuated by claims not to  remember  key  details,  when  faced  with
    questions which highlighted the inconsistencies  in  his  account.   He
    said he could not remember what he had told Mr  Stringer  about  having
    been informed of his date of birth by his  father  four  months  before
    arriving in the UK in July 2019, which would have been in  March  2019.
    He could not remember whether he was told his age by his father  either
    when he was in  Austria  or  the  UK,  which  contrasts  with  (i)  his
    statement, in which he said he always knew his age growing up, and (ii)
    his accounts of having  been  told  his  age  by  his  mother  (to  get
    vaccinated aged 13, in Afghanistan) and his father (before his  arrival
    in the UK, in Austria) previously.


105. While recalling the applicant's  vulnerability  and  making  allowances
    for his ability fully to recollect his  history,  the  overall  picture
    that emerges from the applicant's oral evidence  is  of  an  individual
    presented with the consequences of having given different  accounts  of
    how he knew his age, on different occasions, to different  people.   He
    has not given the full picture of the contact he has with his  parents;
    HR's evidence, as I have found, was that AB spoke with his father after
    the Merton age assessment result, thereby undermining  the  applicant's
    claim to have lost contact with them  during  the  assessment  process.
    Nothing turns on HR having overheard the applicant's father confirm his
    age as being 15; HR was not party to the  conversation,  and  the  mere
    fact that the applicant's  father  is  thought  to  have  said  to  the
    applicant that he was 15 is not capable of curing the  defects  in  the
    applicant's account set out above.  The  significant  feature  of  HR's
    evidence  is  that  the  conversation  took  place  after  the   Merton
    assessment.  There was contact between the applicant and his family  in
    Afghanistan at a time when the applicant said he had lost contact  with
    them.  His claims, underlined in cross-examination,  to  be  unable  to
    secure a copy of his Taskera or other documents verifying his age, lack
    credibility.  HR's opinion as to AB's age was based almost entirely  on
    his physical appearance and slight stature, without taking into account
    his history, and attracts little weight.


106. The applicant has been in contact with his parents  at  key  stages  of
    the age assessment process.  In contrast to HR, who obtained a copy  of
    his own Taskera from his family in  Afghanistan,  and  other  documents
    such as educational certificates of attainment, this applicant has  not
    obtained documents that  may  have  assisted  his  case  (and  had  not
    obtained such documents at a time  before  the  Taliban  overthrew  the
    government in Afghanistan; I  accept  that  recent  events  would  make
    current contact difficult, but on AB's case he lost contact  with  them
    some time ago, a claim I do not accept).  AB has not obtained a copy of
    the record he claims his father kept of his age, which is said to  have
    been written in the Qu'ran.  While he is not subject  to  a  burden  of
    proof  to  establish  his  age,  the  lack  of  documentary   evidence,
    notwithstanding his contact with his family at the relevant  times,  is
    nevertheless a factor that goes to the weight his evidence attaches.


107. The Merton assessment  social  workers  concluded  that  the  applicant
    turned 18 in 2019 when he was to be "deported" from Austria (by which I
    take them to mean that he was subject to removal  proceedings  or  some
    other obligation to leave).  They did  not  have  the  benefit  of  the
    Austrian Dublin Unit's record of the applicant having given a  date  of
    birth in 1999 which states that his claim was "finally rejected in  the
    second instance" on 24 July 2019.  I reject  the  applicant's  evidence
    that his cousin had a  monopoly  in  all  dealings  with  the  Austrian
    authorities on his behalf, with no involvement from him.  The  date  of
    birth given rendered the applicant a child upon arrival in  2016,  with
    the effect that his claim to have made himself appear older  under  the
    direction of his cousin so as not  to  be  treated  as  a  child  lacks
    weight; he would have been treated as a child on the date of  birth  he
    provided.  The  applicant  was  not  required  to  leave  Austria  upon
    becoming an adult, as the Merton assessors speculated, but rather  when
    his asylum claim was finally determined, over two years after attaining
    the age of majority, following three years'  residence.   The  Austrian
    authorities' knowledge of the applicant's date  of  birth  was  in  the
    context of his relatively lengthy residence  there;  he  did  not,  for
    example, provide the date of birth as part of a fleeting  encounter  to
    secure immediate free passage to another country (as can often  be  the
    case in proceedings such as these), with no opportunity for the  asylum
    authorities to follow up or otherwise  act  upon  his  date  of  birth.
    Rather his claim for  international  protection  was  examined  by  the
    Austrian authorities, and only finally rejected following some form  of
    repeat consideration.


Conclusion


108. Drawing the above analysis together, having considered the entirety  of
    the evidence in the round to the balance of probabilities standard, and
    doing the best I can and adopting as sympathetic approach  towards  the
    applicant as possible, I consider  the  applicant's  probable  year  of
    birth to be 1999.  While many of the factors relied upon by each  party
    were neutral, AB's account of being told his age, and informed  of  his
    date of birth, lacks credibility on account of its inconsistencies.  So
    too does his claim to have lost contact with his family at the time  of
    his age assessment.  While  Mr  Carter's  evidence  and  experience  is
    superficially attractive, it is  subject  to  the  weaknesses  set  out
    above, and so carries less weight.  The other factors  relied  upon  by
    both parties are largely neutral and are of  little  assistance  to  my
    core analysis.  A  date  of  birth  in  1999  is  consistent  with  the
    information AB provided to the  Austrian  authorities,  and  consistent
    with their treatment of him.  I reject the applicant's evidence that he
    was under the control of his cousin at the time such that he provided a
    misleading date of birth.   The  date  of  birth  he  provided  to  the
    authorities in Austria was accurate.


109. I find that the applicant's date of birth is 1 January 1999.


SUMMARY OF DECISION


110. It is determined that the applicant's date of birth is 1  January  1999
    so that on arrival in the United Kingdom on 26 July  2019,  he  was  20
    years of age.

