


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: JR/1168/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Handed down 27 June 2017     |
|On 2, 3 and 4 May 2017                        |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                     SB
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                        The London Borough of Croydon
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the applicant:     Mr C. Buttler, Counsel, instructed by Coram CLC
For the respondent:    Mr R. Hadden, Counsel, instructed by LB of Croydon

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The applicant is a citizen of Afghanistan and the issue  before  the
       Tribunal is whether he was born in 1998 or 2000, a small  difference
       in time, perhaps, but a chasm in legal implication.


    2. The applicant has repeatedly said that he was born at about the  New
       Year which could not  realistically  have  meant  according  to  the
       Gregorian calendar on 1st January for an  individual  only  familiar
       with the Afghan calendar. This, however, explains why  some  of  the
       documentation refers to 1st  January.   The  New  Year  -  Nowroz  -
       according to  the  Afghan  calendar  -  takes  place  on  21  March.
       (Strictly speaking, it may be one day either  side  of  it  in  some
       traditions but, for the sake of convenience, I have treated it as 21
       March.)  Hence, the parties differ as to whether he was born  on  21
       March 1998 or 21 March 2000.  Unsurprisingly, the applicant contends
       the latter while the respondent contends  he  is  two  years  older.
       According to the parties, he is at present either 17 and a minor  or
       19 and an adult.

    3. At the hearing, the Tribunal was fully aware that the applicant was,
       or might be, a minor.  The hearing was conducted by all  parties  as
       if the applicant was vulnerable due to his age.   In  assessing  the
       applicant's claim and, in particular, the  applicant's  evidence,  I
       have made my assessment by taking into account his youth, his  level
       of understanding and his ability to cope with the situation in which
       he is placed.  This takes into account  that,  on  his  arrival  and
       during the interviews that followed, he  was  significantly  younger
       and, even on the respondent's assessment, a minor.   Whilst  in  the
       context of this application, his age and vulnerability  are  in  the
       forefront of the case, the Tribunal's concern does not cease  at  an
       arbitrary point at which a witness reaches his  majority.   Part  of
       the assessment of  any  witness,  is  to  assess  their  age,  their
       experience,  their  level  of  understanding,  their  strengths  and
       vulnerabilities.  Whilst these  considerations  are  unspoken,  they
       form part of my assessment.


    4. The applicant first entered the United Kingdom on 16  January  2014.
       He completed his first age assessment on 13  February  2014  at  the
       conclusion of which the respondent assessed the applicant to  be  16
       years old, attributing the nominal date of birth as 1 January  1998.
       The respondent thereafter accepted  21  March  as  the  more  likely
       nominal date of birth, given his claim to have been  born  at  about
       the time of the New Year, without thereby increasing his age  by  an
       additional year on 21  March  2014.   There  has  been  further  age
       assessments as time has  progressed  in  which  the  respondent  has
       maintained its stance that the  applicant  was  born  in  1998.  The
       latest was on 11 March 2016.  There is a single ground of  challenge
       to  the  respondent's  assessment:  the  applicant  contends,  as  a
       precedent fact, that the respondent  is  wrong  by  two  years;  the
       applicant was born in 2000. My  task  in  these  proceedings  is  to
       resolve his age as a matter of objective,  jurisdictional  fact.  In
       accordance with the decision of R  (on  the  application  of  CJ)  v
       Cardiff County Council [2011] EWCA Civ 1590, my function is to apply
       the rule of law. Neither party is required to  prove  the  precedent
       fact. Neither party bears the legal burden  of  proof.  Instead,  my
       function is an inquisitorial one, requiring me to decide on  balance
       of probability whether the applicant was born on 21 March in 1998 or
       2000.


    5. In the grounds of application, the relief sought by the applicant is
       a declaration that he was born on some  date  other  than  21  March
       1998. However, the applicant's case is that he was born on 21  March
       2000. No submissions have been made by either party that there is  a
       plausible  alternative  date  or  year  of  birth.   If  there  were
       compelling evidence leading to a  sustainable  conclusion  that,  on
       balance, the applicant was  born  on  a  date  other  than  the  two
       alternatives submitted by the parties, the Tribunal would  be  bound
       to reach such a conclusion.  However, for the reasons that follow, I
       can find no such evidence.  Further, were the evidence of both sides
       equally convincing, this might lead me to a judgment of Solomon that
       the applicant was born half-way between the two, namely on 21  March
       1999.  But that is not the case here.  Accordingly, there  are  only
       two  specific  and  alternative  dates  of  birth  which   need   my
       consideration.


The applicant's approach

    6. The case for the applicant is based to a significant degree  upon  a
       detailed critique of the respondent's reasoning. In essence,  it  is
       said that if the challenge is made  to  the  applicant's  own  self-
       assertion as to his age are  not  made  out,  there  is  nothing  to
       contradict him.  However,  for  the  reasons  that  I  will  shortly
       develop, I do not accept the applicant's evidence.   The  reasons  I
       will provide are quite separate  from  any  challenge  made  by  the
       respondent.  Where, however, the  factors  that  I  have  considered
       material have also been relied on by  the  respondent,  there  is  a
       consistency but I have not relied upon the respondent's reasoning as
       a means of reaching my own conclusions.

    7. The applicant's critique of the respondent's assessment cover  pages
       3 to 12 of the applicant's closing submissions. First, the applicant
       challenges the decision made by the respondent on 25 June 2015  both
       on procedural grounds but also on the basis  that  the  reasons  are
       cursory and did not justify the conclusion  reached.    It  is  then
       said that this approach tainted the respondent's decision  of  March
       2016.    My reasoning, however,  places  almost  no  weight  on  the
       respondent's decisions of 25 June 2015 or March 2016.

    8. The applicant also contends that no reliance  should  be  placed  on
       what the applicant said in interview.  I see no  reason  to  exclude
       what the applicant said in his interview.  Provided I  am  satisfied
       the answers have been accurately recorded, what was said  was  said.
       The answers remain a record of the  claim  the  applicant  was  then
       advancing.  Whether the  answers  are  factually  correct  will,  of
       course, be a matter of assessment.  As will be revealed, the answers
       provided by the applicant in interview are not in the  forefront  of
       my reasoning.

    9. I raised the relevance of the respondent's  decision  making  at  an
       early stage of the proceedings.  It  was  for  this  reason  that  I
       required the parties to address its relevance and impact,  given  it
       was not contested that my function was to make my own assessment  of
       the applicant's age.  I am not conducting a conventional public  law
       assessment of the lawfulness of the respondent's decision making. As
       I do not rely upon the respondent's process of  decision  making  in
       reaching my own conclusion, it serves no useful purpose  to  make  a
       finding on conventional public law grounds because, were  I  do  so,
       nothing of practical importance would be achieved.  Were I  to  find
       the respondent's reasoning was lawful, it would not avail me because
       I am required  to  make  up  my  own  mind.   Were  I  to  find  the
       respondent's decision making unlawful,  then  to  conclude  only  by
       setting aside the respondent's decision (requiring the respondent to
       make  a  fresh  and  lawful  decision)  would  be  to  abnegate   my
       responsibility of reaching a conclusion on the applicant's age.


   10. To limit my consideration to whether the  decision  was  lawful  (or
       indeed to place an over-reliance upon the  respondent's  reasons  at
       the expense of my own) would deprive the applicant of the very right
       that he is entitled to receive at the hands of the Tribunal, namely,
       an independent assessment of his age.

   11. I regard this approach settled by such cases as  R  (FZ)  v  Croydon
       [2011] EWCA Civ 59 and Kadri v Birmingham [2012] EWCA Civ 1432.

   12. Were these to be conventional judicial review proceedings  with  the
       objective  of  seeking  an  order  setting  aside  the  decision  on
       conventional public law grounds, the  applicant's  criticisms  might
       play a decisive part.  If the challenges that the applicant makes to
       the  respondent's  decision-making  process  were  such  that,   the
       Tribunal on review, could find  no  rational  basis  to  refuse  the
       applicant's contentions, the applicant would succeed by  default  if
       no more. However, I do not regard this is such a case.  Irrespective
       of the criticisms that are made by the applicant of the respondent's
       decisions, there remains evidence which I am required to assess  for
       myself and, to this extent, it is immaterial that  the  respondent's
       reasoning is defective provided I do not rely upon  its  defects  in
       reaching my own conclusion.

   13. Even if the respondent's reasoning is defective, there  remains  the
       record of facts within the relevant age  assessments;  the  recorded
       conversations, including what the applicant told  his  interviewers,
       and the factual account of events.

   14. At the end of the day,  however,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  local
       authority genuinely believes  that  the  applicant  is  of  the  age
       attributed by it to him. Furthermore, the relevant officials in  the
       local authority are not amateurs; their  professional  function  and
       duty is to make decisions according to the best of their ability and
       experience. Insofar as each individual is part of the team, I  would
       expect that to improve decision-making in that collective  decisions
       in which one individual exchanges his views with a  colleague  tends
       to  avoid  or  minimise  a  collective  aberration.  I  reject   the
       possibility of Croydon reaching decisions about  vulnerable  persons
       within its care in order to save it the burden, including  financial
       ones, that such decisions might  entail.   Mr  Buttler,  of  course,
       makes no such suggestion. I accept that, throughout, they have acted
       in good faith.  That said,  good  faith  is  not  sufficient  unless
       supported by evidence.


    Sadiq's age as a datum point


   15. The applicant has consistently stated that he has a brother  who  is
       five years his senior. The applicant's brother, Sadiq, has stated he
       has a brother who is five years his junior. In particular, Sadiq has
       made his claims at a time when the applicant was in Afghanistan  and
       the relevance of his brother's age could not reasonably have been in
       his mind. If Sadiq's age can be adopted as the datum level by  which
       the applicant's age can be calculated, this  is  supportive  of  the
       applicant's claim. Sadiq was  deported  following  his  unsuccessful
       asylum claim. The documents (which are the totality of the documents
       supplied by Sadiq's solicitors to the  applicant's  solicitors)  are
       limited.


   16. I do not rely upon Sadiq's account as being the  truth  or  that  it
       should be preferred to that of the  applicant,  thereby  undermining
       the applicant's claim.  Indeed, quite the reverse.  I assess Sadiq's
       account as untruthful.  This was the basis for its being rejected by
       the First-tier Tribunal.  Yet, neither do I reject everything in his
       account for the sole reason that his claim was  ultimately  rejected
       by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  as  not  credible.   Instead,  the
       brother's claim has to be evaluated like the rest  of  the  evidence
       and weight placed upon those facets within  it  that  appear  to  be
       reliable,  notwithstanding  its  ultimate  failure  to  establish  a
       protection claim.


   17. Sadikola (Sadiq) B's claim was rejected by  the  Home  Office  in  a
       decision made on 29 November 2011 [E9-19].

   18. He had claimed he was born on 1 June 1994 but was  believed  by  the
       Home Office to be five years older,  born  nominally  on  1  January
       1989.  He had also claimed to have been born on 1 January 1990.   He
       had claimed asylum on 15 August 2011 asserting that he was 16� years
       old. He gave an account of his place of birth  which  is  consistent
       with that of the applicant.   However,  although  he  spoke  of  the
       applicant as being approximately 11 years old, he stated that he was
       currently with his mother in Jalalabad.   There is no obvious reason
       for his having lied on this detail  as  it  had  no  impact  on  the
       strength of his asylum claim.  In this sense, it was neutral and not
       a matter which required him to invent.  He gave an  account  of  his
       father having once been in the Taliban and being  abducted  by  them
       when his father refused to participate further. Sadiq  claimed  that
       he had left Afghanistan some 3� years before, suggesting the date of
       departure in the region  of  March  2008.  He  provided  a  detailed
       journey from Afghanistan, claiming to have travelled  through  Iran,
       Turkey, Greece,  Italy,  France,  Belgium  and  finally  the  United
       Kingdom claiming to have entered some 18 months before the  decision
       in November 2011.


   19. He had been fingerprinted attempting to enter the United Kingdom  at
       Calais on 8 January 2010 providing to the authorities there  a  date
       of birth of 1 January 1994 and was fingerprinted again at  Coquelles
       attempting to enter the United Kingdom on 3 February 2010  providing
       a different date of birth of 1 January 1990.  He  was  fingerprinted
       for a third time attempting to enter the United Kingdom on  1  April
       2010 and again on 2 April 2010 providing yet a further date of birth
       of 1 January 1989.  In the  course  of  these  efforts,  he  used  a
       variety of names.  He was finally successful in  obtaining  unlawful
       entry to the United Kingdom  sometime  in  2010.   He  came  to  the
       attention of the United Kingdom  authorities  in  October  2010  and
       again in August 2011.

   20.  The  Secretary  of  State  concluded  that   the   account   lacked
       credibility. This finding  included  the  account  he  gave  of  his
       journey from Afghanistan resulting in the Home Office decision-maker
       concluding that he did not leave Afghanistan as he  had  claimed  in
       March 2008.  Significantly,  perhaps,  his  age  was  considered  in
       paragraph 56 of the decision. The Secretary of State reasoned:


         Regard has been had to your age. It is noted that you claim to  be
         16 years old. However, this is not accepted and in the  absence  of
         any evidence as to your claimed age, you are considered  to  be  22
         years old. It is considered that your age  is  not  a  sufficiently
         compelling factor to justify allowing you to remain in  the  United
         Kingdom.


   21. The reference to Sadiq being 22 years old is presumably a  reference
       to the age attributed to him by the Home Office noted at the top  of
       the decision: '1 January 1989 (believed)'. The Home Office  decision
       was not based on any credible material provided by Sadiq  save  that
       it was the claim he  had  made  in  April  2010  when  he  had  been
       fingerprinted in France on his last unsuccessful  attempt  to  enter
       the United Kingdom. I would not regard it as a  ringing  endorsement
       of his true age.


   22. Sadiq appealed to the Tribunal.   The  determination  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Cooper was promulgated on  12  July  2012,  [E21-33].
       His appeal had come before the Tribunal on 13  June  2012  by  which
       time the issue of his age had lost much of its significance.  Before
       the Tribunal he claimed to have been born on 1 June 1994,  at  which
       time he would then have been  18  years  old.  He  would  have  been
       considerably older had he given reliable evidence when  claiming  to
       have been born in 1989 or 1990. The best that can be said is that he
       relied on the date that coloured his claim most favourably  but,  as
       bad luck would have it, he had reached  his  majority  even  on  the
       basis of that most favourable date of birth.

   23. In paragraph 50 the determination the First-tier Tribunal Judge says
       this:


         Age: In his witness statement made on 12 September 2011, prior  to
         his asylum interview, the appellant stated, 'am 16 years and  three
         months. When I was leaving Afghanistan, my mother told  me  that  I
         was 13 years old. It has been three years and three months since  I
         left my home.'  On the face of the statement [Sadiq] was claiming a
         date of birth around 12 June 1994.


   24. It is a matter of considerable significance that  the  Secretary  of
       State  elected  not  to  attend  the  hearing  of  Sadiq's   appeal,
       notwithstanding the wholesale credibility issues that the  Secretary
       of State had herself  raised  in  the  refusal  letter.  There  was,
       therefore, no cross-examination of Sadiq's evidence. The  Judge  was
       not himself able to embark upon a detailed fact-finding scrutiny  of
       his claim. The Judge commented upon being thus hampered in paragraph
       [53] of his determination, complaining understandably that


         ...in the  absence  of  a  Presenting  Officer,  [Sadiq]  was  not
         subjected to cross-examination, his account did seem to accord with
         what one would expect to have in case of an unaccompanied  minor...
         [54] In the light of this I am satisfied to the necessary  standard
         that the appellant was detained on or around [April  2010]  and  on
         the basis that he was taken to a hostel, that he was accepted as  a
         minor and was probably assessed as being 15 years  old.  [55]  That
         conclusion gives rise to several possibilities as to what  his  age
         is now. [56] The  earliest  date  of  birth  recorded  against  his
         various detentions by the UKBA was 1 January 1994.


   25. That appears to conflict with the evidence  recorded  by  the  Judge
       that he was fingerprinted attempting to enter the United Kingdom  in
       April 2010 and gave his date of birth as  1  January  1989.   Having
       recited from various  passages  from  the  refusal  letter,  Sadiq's
       statements and the submissions of his counsel, the  Judge  concluded
       at [62]:


         I had to admit that at the hearing I accepted at  face  value  the
         statement made by the appellant in the first paragraph of  each  of
         his more recent statements where he said 'I  was  born  on  1  June
         1994. I will turn 17 in June 2012'.  That, of course, I realise now
         is arithmetically incorrect. A person born on that date would  turn
         18 on 1 June 2012. As I find that this was his date  of  birth,  it
         follows that as at the date of the hearing of his asylum appeal  he
         was already 18 years old. Accordingly he falls to be treated as  an
         adult.


   26. It is apparent from the determination that, in spite of the  absence
       of a presenting officer, the Judge was faced with a bewildering  and
       inconsistent array of evidence from Sadiq himself  as  to  his  age.
       The Judge was not himself able to place any  store  on  Sadiq's  own
       credibility and appears to have based his conclusion,  at  least  in
       part, on the fact that, at some time, the  authorities  accepted  he
       was a minor and probably assessed as being 15 years old,  [paragraph
       54].  There is no suggestion that  a  detailed  age  assessment  was
       conducted. Inevitably, in the absence  of  an  age  assessment,  any
       decision-maker is likely to rely substantially on what the  claimant
       himself alleges unless it can be established as falsehood.   In  the
       case of Sadiq, it was not necessary to delve deeper into his age  in
       that he was himself claiming to have been born on 1  June  1994  the
       date from which he could not reasonably resile and which in spite of
       his claim to be only 17  was  mathematically  inaccurate  [paragraph
       62].


   27. The First-tier Tribunal Judge then went on to consider his claim  to
       be at risk of persecution or serious harm and rejected it.

   28. I place little or no  weight  on  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
       finding that he found it reasonably likely Sadiq was  born  in  June
       1994. For the reasons I have set out, there was almost no evidential
       basis upon which such a finding of fact could have been made.

   29. In any event, as is apparent from paragraph 61 of the determination,
       the Judge reached his  conclusion  on  the  basis  of  a  reasonable
       likelihood, that is, the applicable standard  in  an  asylum  appeal
       rather than on balance of probabilities. In saying this, I  entirely
       sympathise with the predicament in which the Judge found himself and
       I make no criticism of his determination. However, I do  not  regard
       it as  more  than  a  starting-point  for  my  own  examination.  In
       particular, I am unpersuaded that there was any  objective  evidence
       which Sadiq was able to produce in support of his age.  Absent  such
       material, but with little to contradict it,  it  is  not  altogether
       surprising that the relevant authorities relied upon the age he  put
       forward most recently. I do not overlook the fact that  he  claimed,
       using his own name, to have been born or  1  January  1989  when  he
       attempted to enter the United Kingdom at Coquelles on 1  April  2010
       or 2 April 2010. There is no reason advanced by  Sadiq  that,  using
       his own identity, he would have wanted to have expressed himself  as
       being five years older than his true age; all the more so  since  by
       then he would have been in his early 20s.   It  was  only  mischance
       and miscalculation that he had become  an  adult  by  the  time  his
       appeal was heard on 13 June 2012.


   30. Mr Buttler, on behalf of the applicant, invited me  to  treat  Judge
       Cooper's  finding  that  this  Sadiq  was  born  in  June  1994   as
       determinative of the applicant's case. If Sadiq were five years  his
       senior, the respondent's claim that the applicant was born  in  2000
       was blown out of  the  water.  Accordingly,  he  submitted,  it  was
       unnecessary to go any further. I reject  that  invitation.  For  the
       reasons that I have given, I am not persuaded that  any  significant
       weight can properly be attached  to  the  determination  in  Sadiq's
       appeal. Whilst there is plenty of  consistent  evidence  as  between
       Sadiq and his brother that there was a  five-year  age  gap  between
       them, I do not accept that 1 June 1994 should  be  accepted  as  the
       datum.

   31. For reasons that I will now develop, the claims that Sadiq  and  his
       brother, the applicant, had independently spoken of a five year  age
       gap must be examined with some caution.


    The applicant's encounter with Sadiq in the United Kingdom


   32. In the applicant's statement of 24 March 2014, there is no reference
       to the  applicant  having  had  contact  with  his  brother,  Sadiq.
       Instead, in paragraph 14 he says [H29] that  his  brother  had  been
       abducted and had not been heard of since.  This is  consistent  with
       what he said in interview on 1 April 2014 [H47 and  49].   The  same
       was said in his statement of 6 May 2016 in which in paragraph 11  he
       reiterated that, since his arrival in the United Kingdom, he had not
       had any contact with his family or friends [H230].  However, in  his
       evidence to me he said that when he  made  the  statement  this  was
       incorrect because 'I had met my brother.  My  solicitor  knew  about
       it.'  We know that the applicant was in  contact  with  his  brother
       whilst his brother was in custody in the United Kingdom because  his
       foster mother Elaine Miller accompanied the applicant when  visiting
       his brother on 28  of  May  2014  and  reported  his  being  visibly
       affected by the experience.


   33. The applicant's acceptance that he had  been  in  contact  with  his
       brother emerges in this statement made on 21 April 2017, a few  days
       before the hearing. In paragraphs 34 to 36 [E 41-42]  the  applicant
       says

         Shortly after I arrived in the United Kingdom,  one  of  my  Afghan
         friends showed me some photos on his mobile phone and I  recognised
         one of the people in the photo of a group of  young  people  as  my
         brother, Sedik [Sadiq]. I could not believe it when I  saw  him  in
         the photo as before that moment I did not know whether he was alive
         or dead. I told my friend that he was my brother and he  said  that
         he did not know where he was anymore but that he would try to  find
         out. I later found out that he was being in  immigration  detention
         and managed to get his telephone number. ...I asked 'Auntie' if she
         could take me to see him and she agreed. We went to visit him on 28
         May 2014. ...My friend gave me a  photograph  of  Sedik  which  was
         taken when he was living in the UK.

   34. The photograph is found at [E 50]. It is impossible to say from  the
       background whether it is taken in the United Kingdom in warm weather
       or elsewhere. The applicant's brother is circled.


   35. It has to be remembered that the applicant  arrived  in  the  United
       Kingdom on 16 January 2014 and is recorded to have  had  a  face-to-
       face meeting with his brother on  28  May  2014,  some  four  months
       later. The applicant did not disclose this in his earlier  accounts.
       It is a significant omission.  I do not accept them the  applicant's
       friend was simply flicking through photographs of various people and
       that, by chance, the applicant happened to see a photograph that  he
       immediately recognised as his brother. How such a photograph came to
       be on the telephone of his friend is not explained.  The  suggestion
       is that it was simply random. Thereafter, the  telephone  number  of
       the person portrayed in the photograph was discovered by  a  process
       which is itself unexplained and telephone contact was  quickly  made
       such as to enable the applicant to meet up with his  brother  on  20
       May 2014.


   36. The applicant's evidence on this issue was unsatisfactory.  He  said
       he saw the photograph on Javid's laptop.  Javid said, 'They  are  my
       friends.'  Javid went on to say 'I know where he lives.  I  will  go
       to him.'  According to the applicant, Javid called  another  friend.
       'Javid said my brother was  in  a  deporting  centre  and  gave  the
       telephone number'.

   37. On 16 April 2014, according to the case notes [G112], the  applicant
       told Mr Waseef Haroon that he had recently  received  a  phone  call
       from his brother who had recently been deported but again managed to
       reach Italy.  If accurate, the note  establishes  contact  was  made
       earlier than the meeting in the detention centre in 20 May 2014.  By
       then, Sadiq knew his brother's whereabouts  so  as  to  be  able  to
       contact him from Italy.

   38. At first, the applicant was not able to tell me whether he had  said
       this to Mr Haroon.  I am sure, however, that he did.  In  his  later
       oral evidence, he denied telling Mr Haroon that his brother  was  in
       Italy.  However, I reject the suggestion  that  Mr  Haroon,  in  the
       course of his professional duties to record his  conversations  with
       the applicant accurately, would have made up this information.  I am
       sure the applicant was not telling the truth when  he  suggested  Mr
       Haroon  fabricated  the  conversation  or  misunderstood  what   the
       applicant told him.

   39. The timing  of  these  events  is  consistent  with  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge's determination promulgated on 12 July 2012 in  which
       Sadiq's appeal was dismissed, opening up the prospect of his removal
       in 2012.  Thereafter he appears to have spent time both in Italy and
       the United Kingdom.

   40. Bearing in mind  my  findings  overall,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
       applicant is not telling the truth about his coincidental ability to
       regain contact with his brother within weeks or months  of  arriving
       in the United Kingdom. I am satisfied that his repeated  claim  that
       he knew nothing of the whereabouts of his brother  whom  he  claimed
       had  disappeared,  having  been  abducted  by  the  Taliban,  was  a
       contrived attempt to bolster his own claim by  suggesting  that  the
       family faced a risk.  I am satisfied no such  risk  existed.   I  am
       sure that the applicant and his brother  remained  in  contact  with
       each other in the course of their respective travels to  the  United
       Kingdom; their meeting was not coincidental.

   41. Their accounts have striking similarities in a number  of  respects.
       The most obvious is the claim that each told  the  authorities  that
       their mother told them their age only at,  or  near,  the  point  of
       departure, see paragraph [23] above  as  it  related  to  Sadiq  and
       paragraphs [55] and [56] below as it related to the  applicant.   In
       Sadiq's case, their mother told him he was 13.  In  the  applicant's
       case, his mother told him he was 14 (in the written material) and 13
       (in his evidence to me).

   42. The finding of fact that I make in relation to the undisclosed level
       of contact between Sadiq and the applicant  further  undermines  the
       reliance I can reasonably place upon the brothers' claims that  they
       had each independently said  that  there  was  a  five-year  age-gap
       between them and this was determinative of the applicant's claim.


The applicant's evidence


   43. The applicant gave evidence with the assistance of a court-appointed
       interpreter. In addition, the applicant  had  the  assistance  of  a
       privately appointed interpreter who, when necessary, intervened when
       matters  of   interpretation   needed   clarification.   The   court
       interpreter readily understood that the applicant spoke some English
       but properly required the assistance of  an  interpreter.   It  was,
       however, apparent to me that the applicant could not read English as
       well  as  he  might  be  able  to  speak  it.  I  noticed  that  the
       interpreter, when translating a  document,  first  read  it  to  the
       applicant in English before translating it.


   44. The applicant described how he did not go to school  in  Afghanistan
       but had attended a Madrassa. He told me that his mother never  spoke
       of his age and did not teach him how old he was until he was at  the
       point of departure from Afghanistan. Until that time he did not know
       his age. However, he described how the village's celebrated Eid  and
       that he did so,  for  the  first  time,  when  he  was  9  or  9  �.
       Inevitably, he  was  asked  how  he  knew  his  age  when  he  first
       celebrated  Eid  when  he  did  not  discover  it  until   he   left
       Afghanistan. His explanation was difficult to understand. First,  he
       said that a child finds out about these things but then went  on  to
       say that he did not ask. He also said that his mother told him  that
       his brother was  five  years  older.  However,  without  his  mother
       telling him the age of his brother or,  indeed,  his  own  age,  the
       utility  of  this   information   must   have   been   limited   and
       unconvincingly fragmentary.

   45.  Notwithstanding the fact that his mother used to tell him that, had
       his brother been present, he would have been five years  older,  the
       applicant said he did not ask his own age.

   46. Similarly, he was told that his sister was older  than  his  brother
       and that he found out she was older by one or two years. He recalled
       a conversation and repeated that, in the conversation,  he  did  not
       ask his own age. He said this on a number of occasions,  saying  his
       mother did not tell him and he did not ask.  At  one  stage  in  his
       evidence he said he found out that his brother was five years  older
       when he himself was aged eight or nine. Inevitably, this raised  the
       question of how he was able to say that he was eight or nine when he
       discovered the age-gap between his brother and  himself  if  he  was
       telling me that he did not know his age.


   47. The applicant went on to say that he had cousins in the village  who
       were both older and younger but did not know  their  ages  but  they
       knew his brother was five years  older.   He  described  how  people
       talked about it but no-one revealed his age. He  described  when  he
       started going to the Madrassa. He did not know  his  age  and  there
       were a range of children who attended of varying ages. He told me he
       stopped attending the Madrassa three or four months  before  leaving
       Afghanistan.


   48. It is simply impossible  to  accept  this  evidence  as  a  truthful
       account.  Merely reading over this material demonstrates to  me  how
       distant it is from the reality of a child's up-bringing; the  normal
       inter-change of information.  It is almost like an individual saying
       that he did not know what rain is because he never  asked.   Certain
       information is the currency of being a social animal.

   49. It is also inconsistent with the record of what he has said.   There
       are a number of references to  the  applicant  stating  his  age  at
       material times in his history. For example, at G 107, it is recorded
       that on 24 January 2014 Mr Haroon recorded the applicant telling him
       that he was 10  years  old  when  he  went  to  the  Madrassa.   The
       applicant told me he did not know how Mr Haroon came  to  say  this.
       The applicant himself did not do so. At one stage he said he told Mr
       Haroon that he was a young child. At another stage in  his  evidence
       to me he said that he may have  said  7  years,  not  10  years.  He
       suggested that maybe the interpreter had got it wrong.


   50. I am satisfied  that  Mr  Haroon  correctly  reported  what  was  an
       innocuous piece of information provided by the applicant.  There  is
       no reason for Mr Haroon to have elaborated or  to  have  inserted  a
       specific date when none was offered. I am sure he did not do so.  It
       follows that I am also satisfied so I am sure that the applicant was
       attempting to distance himself from at least this occasion  when  he
       attributed a date of an event by reference to his own age  in  order
       to maintain the fiction that he did not know his age until the  date
       of his departure from Afghanistan in 2013.

   51. Similarly it was pointed out  that  in  his  Home  Office  interview
       [H47], the applicant stated when asked for a rough date as  to  when
       his father passed away, the applicant had replied  (Q.22)  '5  years
       and 2 months'.  Asked why he was able to give such a specific  date,
       he replied that he had said this because he knew  a  long  time  had
       passed.  When pressed, he went on to explain that, at the  time,  he
       was 9 years old and that was why he was able to say that  it  was  5
       years and 2 months.  He knew he was 9 years old because he was  'old
       enough'.  This is as  unintelligible  as  it  is  untruthful.   This
       establishes to the level of a certainty that the applicant's account
       of spending his childhood without any knowledge of a vital piece  of
       his identity - his age  -  and,  its  corollary,  being  without  an
       awareness of time, is untrue.


   52. In relation to the applicant's claim to be unaware  of  age  or  the
       accurate assessment of the passage of time, the applicant was  asked
       about information that he had provided  in  order  to  complete  the
       Statement of Evidence Form (SEF) [H1-34] dated 24  March  2014.   In
       providing family details, he  had  stated  [H5]  in  response  to  a
       question seeking the date of birth of his deceased father, '52 years
       old'.   By way of explanation to me, the applicant said he had  said
       earlier in the age assessment interview on 13  February  2014  [D17]
       that he did not know his father's age and that his father was '49 or
       52', plus or minus.  He said:

         I was asked 'How old do you think he  was?'  The  solicitor  said:
         'Say some figure.'  So I said this.

   53. I do not accept that his solicitor would have told him,  in  effect,
       to say anything he liked.  On the same form he said that his  mother
       was 48.  This contrasted (although not significantly) with  what  he
       had said at the age assessment interview on 13 February  2014  [D17]
       when he had said that his mother was 44.  He said to me that he  had
       told the interviewer '44 or more':


         I said I did not know.  It could be less or more.

   54.  There is a significant thread running through these  answers.   One
       factor is that the applicant consistently asserts that  his  answers
       were ill-recorded.  The other  is  that,  had  they  been  correctly
       recorded, they would have demonstrated just what a  poor  grasp  the
       applicant had on his understanding of age, time  and  dates.   These
       are but some of the examples.


   55. Perhaps the most significant example arises in relation to  the  age
       he claimed to be on  arrival.   The  applicant  entered  the  United
       Kingdom in January 2014. His overland  journey  took,  according  to
       him, some four months. Whilst it has been impossible to construct an
       accurate timeline by which to identify the  date  of  his  departure
       from Afghanistan, this suggests a departure date in  the  middle  of
       the Afghan year (March to March). The  applicant's  central  dilemma
       with his claim is the account  he  provided  almost  immediately  on
       arrival, in the course of his first age  assessment  on  4  February
       2014.  At D2, when asked how old he thought he was and  how  did  he
       know it,  the  applicant  replied  that  he  was  14.   The  passage
       continues:


         I asked my mother several times before starting journey.  Said: In
         the New Year turned 14.  Spoke on way to mum.  Said again 14.


   56. When asked by Mr Hadden about this passage, it was apparent that the
       clear implication of these answers  (given  in  February  2014)  was
       that, if he was born at Nowruz and was 14 when he left, he was about
       to be 15 in the following month when  the  Afghan  New  Year  marked
       another birthday.  The applicant  understood  the  consequences  and
       said to me that his mother told him that he was 13 when he left, not
       14.  He repeated:


         When I was leaving home, she said I was 13.


   57. He provided an alternative version of the passage I have set out  in
       paragraph 46, suggesting that his mother had not said that he was 14
       at the New Year; rather,  she  had  said  he  would  be  14  in  the
       (following) New Year and  that  the  interpreter  had  mistaken  the
       Afghan New Year for 1 January, not 21 March and by a combination  of
       these errors had set down  that  the  applicant  was  14  because  1
       January 2014 had already passed.  I do not accept this  explanation,
       even insofar as it is intelligible.


   58. If the applicant was told by his mother that he was 14 at departure,
       he had reached his 14th birthday at about the time of the  preceding
       Nowroz. This would not be consistent with his having  been  born  in
       2000.

   59. I do not accept that this was a mistranslation or misapprehension on
       the part of the interviewer. If, as the applicant says, this was the
       first occasion at which his mother had mentioned his age,  it  seems
       to me that it is unlikely she  would  have  been  referring  to  his
       prospective age at a date then sometime in  the  future.  Whilst  an
       individual will often speak of his age  by  reference  to  his  next
       birthday 'I will be 65 next year', this is more likely to be done in
       the context of wishing to suggest what an advanced age  the  speaker
       has reached. It is less likely to occur  in  response  to  a  simple
       request 'How old are you?'. Such a response is  more  likely  to  be
       phrased as 'I am 20' rather than 'I will be 21 on my next  birthday'
       unless, of course, the birthday is imminent,  'I  will  be  21  next
       week'. Notwithstanding the obvious logic in the applicant being told
       by his mother his current age on departure which would  suggest  the
       applicant was born in 1999 rather than in 1998,  the  applicant  has
       never sought to recast his case, even in the  alternative,  that  he
       was born in 1999.


   60. There are clear implications of this, most  of  which  are  obvious.
       First, I am satisfied that the applicant is not  telling  the  truth
       about when he discovered his true age.   Secondly,  I  am  satisfied
       that the applicant himself appreciates the central significance that
       his age has in these proceedings. Thirdly, I am satisfied  that  his
       conscious refusal to be frank is a misguided attempt to  better  his
       prospects in these proceedings. It can only mean that, were he to be
       telling  the  truth,  he  assesses  his  chances   of   success   as
       significantly  reduced.   Why  tell  a  lie  to  no  purpose?    The
       concealment of his true age is at the heart of these proceedings and
       the applicant knows it.  His repeated claim that he spent his entire
       life until mid-2013 unaware of it is not a  peripheral  element  but
       goes to the core of his narrative.  The fact that the applicant  has
       lied about this aspect of his claim is, in my  judgment,  sufficient
       in itself to reject his claim to have been born in  2000.   This  is
       not just a childish fabrication but demonstrates a  degree  of  pre-
       planning and maturity which belies his stated age.  It was obviously
       designed to undermine the respondent's assessment that he  was  born
       in 1998.


   61. It must be accepted that credibility forms a significant part of the
       assessment in this case but it is not a determinative factor, albeit
       material, in the proper assessment of his age. In R (TS)  v  Croydon
       LBC [2012] EWHC 2389 (Admin) the applicant's evidence  was  properly
       treated as a starting-point in determining his age but, as Fulford J
       remarked in paragraph [99]:

         Lies or a disregard for the truth create evidential pitfalls,  and
         the claimant has moulded his account in order  to  provide  himself
         with the lowest  possible  age,  regardless  of  the  consequential
         difficulties. I consider this approach on  his  part  revealed  not
         only determination but also a marked degree of maturity.

   62. These words cannot, of course, be taken to be a statement of law and
       but a finding of fact in the circumstances of that particular  case.
       Nevertheless, because they so obviously  ring  true  as  a  sensible
       reflection upon the evidence,  they  contain  a  sentiment  which  I
       consider applies with equal force in  the  context  of  the  present
       case. I am satisfied that the applicant has sought to lie about  his
       age and  has  done  so  fully  grasping  the  consequences  of  this
       deception. I would regard him as an  intelligent  individual,  fully
       aware of the predicament in which he finds himself as  well  as  the
       benefits that are likely to flow from a finding that he is a  minor.
       This is an intellectual stance that shows maturity consistent with a
       person older than his claimed age.  Furthermore, the  difference  in
       age between his claim and the reality is not just a  question  of  a
       few months or even a year or 18 months.  In my judgment,  it  is  at
       least a couple of years  and,  coincidentally,  resonates  with  the
       respondent's own assessment.


    His conduct in college


   63. It was the inevitable consequence of the respondent's age assessment
       that the respondent would take steps to  place  the  applicant  into
       education appropriate for his age. Accordingly, he was not put  into
       school but was placed in a college providing a  level  of  education
       suitable for young persons aged between 16  and  19.  The  applicant
       spent about two years in college. During  his  time  there,  he  was
       moderately successful. There is no evidence from  the  college  that
       they were seeking to educate a  pupil  who  was  simply  too  young,
       notwithstanding the fact that English was not  his  first  language.
       Whilst it is true that he was removed from college, this was because
       of his poor attendance. Had it been the case  that  his  tutors  had
       taken the view that  he  was  too  young  to  cope  with  a  college
       environment, I would have  expected  this  to  have  resulted  in  a
       consideration of placing him in a school that was more suitable  for
       his current level of ability. There is nothing to suggest  this  was
       ever considered. I accept, of course, that the college may have been
       deficient in its duties towards him and had overlooked the fact that
       he was struggling but no suggestion arises in the evidence that this
       was in fact the case.


   64. Indeed, it is contrary to the applicant's own evidence in  which  he
       spoke of enjoying college and the fact that he was particularly good
       at mathematics.  He told  me  that  he  had  attained  a  number  of
       certificates.


   65. This sits uncomfortably with what he said in his SEF  (Statement  of
       Evidence Form) in which he said at A10 that he  was  'not  educated'
       [H2] or paragraph 3 of his statement [H28] that he  did  not  attend
       any school in Afghanistan but attended a Madrassa from a very  young
       age until 2 months before leaving Afghanistan.  In the  Madrassa  he
       was taught Quranic studies and maths twice a week, attending 7  days
       a week in the mornings.  Bearing in mind the level of education that
       he claimed to have achieved in Afghanistan, I do not accept that the
       applicant could have been placed at a college and to have  prospered
       if on arrival there from Afghanistan, he was aged 14.   His  ability
       to cope is only consistent with the age attributed  to  him  by  the
       respondent.


   66. The applicant himself does not say that he ceased to attend  college
       because he could not cope with the  level  at  which  he  was  being
       taught.  Instead, his evidence that his attendance record  was  very
       good until the summer of 2016.   He  was  then  spending  time  with
       friends, particularly a friend called Zabi.  He spent  time  helping
       out in a pizza shop.  Once again, this suggests he  was  bored  with
       his education and wanted to move on.  Such a sentiment  is  entirely
       consistent with his being older than his claimed age  and,  perhaps,
       even older than the age attributed to him by the local authority.

The record of the applicant's height

   67. The applicant's height was measured in January 2014  at  168.4  cms;
       May 2015 at 168.5 cms and February 2016 at 168 cms.   There  was  no
       evidence that he had continued to grow during this period.   I  find
       as a fact that the manuscript record of these measurements is  as  I
       have set out.  Making due allowance for the  inaccuracies  that  are
       likely to creep into a measurement that is, essentially, by hand and
       eye, I find there is no evidence of growth over a  sustained  period
       in excess of 2 years.  It would be speculative to assume this  is  a
       period of quietus and a prelude to a growth-spurt.

   68. In R (on the application of  AM)  v  Solihull  Metropolitan  Borough
       Council (AAJR) [2012] UKUT 00118 (IAC), the Tribunal  (Mr  Ockelton,
       Vice-President and Upper Tribunal Judge C. Lane) stated in paragraph
       17:

     We have used the word "mostly" in those observations.  Looking  at  the
         authorities and the literature as we have, it appears  to  us  that
         there are two physical indicators which may be of some  assistance,
         but only at the very top end of the range.  The  first  is  general
         growth. As an individual matures, he increases in height, and  then
         his body fills out, so he increases in weight.  When  his  body  is
         mature, the rate of increase of both height and weight  drops  very
         considerably. Unless he is becoming obese, there comes a point when
         there is little change in either. That is a matter that  cannot  be
         assessed by a single measurement. Nor do we think  that  very  much
         assistance can be gained by  attempting  to  assess  any  perceived
         difference or levelling off in the individual's increase in  height
         or weight. Where, on the other hand, accurate measurements  of  the
         claimant's height and weight are available extending  back  over  a
         considerable period of time (say 18 months or more) and show no, or
         no significant, change, we think that that is likely to be  a  sign
         that the individual is now over about 18.

   69. Once again this is not a statement of law but a comment  based  upon
       the authorities and the available literature.  The tentative  nature
       of  the  Vice-Presidential  commentary  is  amply  revealed  in  the
       language used: 'mostly'; 'may be of some assistance'; 'but  only  at
       the very top end of  the  range'  [whatever  that  might  mean]  and
       'likely to be a sign'.

   70. There is no expert evidence on growth in this application and  those
       who have  spoken  about  it  must  acknowledge  their  expertise  is
       rudimentary and, perhaps, somewhat anecdotal.

   71. I would simply regard the fact that there is no evidence  of  growth
       over a sustained period in excess of 2 years as evidentially neutral
       because the point at which puberty ends is  variable.   Even  if  it
       ends before the age of 18 in 90% of cases, that does not exclude the
       possibility of a variation in some cases.  Had there  been  evidence
       of continued, sustained growth, it would be reasonable to infer that
       the applicant was in the process of  pubertal  development  and,  in
       many cases, this would indicate a  person  younger  than  one  whose
       growth has ceased.  However,  the  variables  are  so  great  as  to
       establish that this is an inaccurate science, all the more so, in  a
       case where the 'science' is not contained  within  expert  evidence.
       In the circumstances of this case,  it  is  best  left  out  of  the
       assessment and this is what I have done.  The most that I can say is
       that the evidence of growth (or the lack of it) has not deflected me
       in the conclusion that I have reached elsewhere.


Physical appearance


   72. I have not found the applicant's physical appearance to be  a  guide
       in  resolving  his  age.   There  may  be   cases   where,   however
       unintentionally, a decision maker casts  a  glance  over  a  hirsute
       youth with a well-developed stubble and permits this to  colour  his
       assessment.  I, too, have seen the applicant but I am able to state,
       unequivocally, that I am simply unable to determine his age from his
       appearance.  It is immaterial whether this is because I am  now  far
       removed from having children of my own of a similar age or because I
       lack the judgment of those trained in detecting the indicia  of  age
       amongst adolescents.  The result is that,  based  on  appearance,  I
       simply do not know.


History of shaving


   73. I have already expressed reservations about the weight that  can  be
       attached to height and physical appearance as evidence of  age  when
       the parameters of the assessment are narrow, say,  within  2  years.
       So, too, with the evidence about the growth  of  facial  hair.   The
       evidence suggests a vigorous growth of facial hair, described in the
       report of 11 March 2016 [D30]


         There is a moustache on his upper lip which he grows to meet  with
         a beard on his chin forming a faded goatee which is shaped from his
         facial stubble.  These hairs were previously shaved as the  end  of
         the hairs were blunt and thick as opposed to the softer more  downy
         hairs of a newly forming beard.


   74. This is not controversial but the issue is what does this  establish
       as to his age  given  the  parameters  of  2  years  on  which  this
       application is focussed? It easily establishes he is more than, say,
       12 years old and says nothing about whether he is 18 or  older.   It
       has  little  that  is  determinative  to  offer  about  whether  the
       applicant is 16 or 18 save that these features are commonplace in an
       18 year-old but less common in a 16 year-old.


   75. The principal significance of the applicant's history of shaving  is
       the different accounts that the applicant has given.  Once again the
       striking feature is the applicant's efforts to distance himself from
       the evidence he had provided earlier that places the time  he  first
       started shaving.  In the March 2016 report, he  told  the  assessors
       that he had only been shaving for a year, (since roughly 2015).   By
       then he had been in the United Kingdom since January  2014  and  so,
       regardless of whether  his  recollection  contained  an  element  of
       inaccuracy through poor recollection, this was a positive claim that
       he started shaving whilst present in the United Kingdom. Had he been
       shaving before his departure, I would have expected  him  to  recall
       having the paraphernalia of  shaving  in  Afghanistan  when,  as  he
       claimed, he was 13 or  14.   In  contrast,  however,  the  applicant
       stated on 13 February 2014 [D20] that his uncle told  him  to  shave
       everyday, presumably because it made him look neater or  because  it
       encouraged growth and gave an appearance of greater  maturity.   His
       March 2016 statement is not  inadvertence  or  forgetfulness;  after
       all, the circumstantial evidence of his uncle telling him  to  shave
       everyday is not easily forgotten.  This is a clear  example  of  the
       applicant wishing to re-write his claim (as it were)  to  place  the
       most favourable gloss on his age.  It re-enforces what I  have  said
       about credibility; it demonstrates his careful re-marshalling of the
       facts to conceal his age and it establishes that his motive  was  to
       conceal the truth in the knowledge that the truth would not  benefit
       him.  By claiming he started shaving in about 2015, he advanced  the
       date of the true event (which occurred prior to his  departure  from
       Afghanistan) by at least 2 years.

The weight to be attached to the evidence of Ms Elaine Miller


   76. The applicant was placed in the home of Ms Elaine Miller  who  acted
       as the applicant's foster-carer from his  arrival  in  January  2014
       until March 2016, a period of more than 2 years.  Ms Miller did  not
       give evidence for the reasons which I shall develop later.


   77. In her statement  of  1  November  2016,  made  in  support  of  the
       applicant's claim, Ms Miller spoke of her  experience  as  a  foster
       carer for over 11 years  and  having  fostered  around  15  children
       between the ages of 10 and 18. At  that  time  she  had  three  male
       foster children, two of whom were from Afghanistan. In  paragraph  6
       of her statement, she  spoke  of  the  applicant  on  arrival  being
       extremely shy and quiet and unable to  speak  any  English.  He  was
       compliant  and  mild-mannered.  She  felt  that  the  applicant  had
       struggled with his identity due to  the  ongoing  age  dispute.  The
       applicant had  always  maintained  that  he  was  younger  than  his
       assessed age but has had to live a life as someone two years  older.
       Whilst she agreed that his conduct appeared to be testing boundaries
       and suggested someone older, she did not think  such  behaviour  was
       different from any other  teenager.  Her  conclusion  was  that  she
       thought the applicant was younger than the age attributed to him  by
       the respondent. The immaturity that he displayed was  not  what  she
       would expect from an adult. She concluded, "I still think that he is
       immature and is not yet an adult".


   78. She also spoke in a letter dated 18 May  2016  at  which  point  the
       applicant had moved into  independent  accommodation.   She  thought
       that  the  applicant  did  not  appear  to  be  coping  with  living
       independently and had not been emotionally ready for the change.


   79. However, it later transpired that Elaine Miller no longer  felt  she
       could support the applicant's claimed age and did not feel  able  to
       give evidence.   She  was  not  called  by  the  applicant  to  give
       evidence.  The respondent chose not to apply for an  adjournment  to
       call her; nor did I consider it appropriate that she was  called  as
       the witness of the  Tribunal  whose  function  is  not  normally  to
       participate in the selection  of  witnesses,  even  those  who  have
       relevant evidence to give.  She cited as her reason for re-assessing
       her opinion the fact that the applicant was within a social  network
       of friends considerably older than he claimed to be.

   80. I have a great deal of sympathy for the dilemma in which  Ms  Miller
       was placed.  On the one  hand,  I  felt  she  did  not  wish  to  be
       responsible for a decision which might  adversely  impact  upon  the
       applicant for whom, understandably, she continues  to  have  a  keen
       interest but, on the other,  she  could  not  maintain  her  earlier
       assessment that the applicant was younger than the age attributed to
       him by the respondent.  Perhaps she also felt that, in  a  situation
       where an individual cannot speak out  with  certainty,  her  current
       views  might  be  wrong  with  incalculable  consequences  for   the
       applicant, of whom she was fond.  The applicant's solicitor formally
       confirmed that he did not  intend  to  rely  upon  the  Ms  Miller's
       statement but Mr Buttler, understandably, wished to rely upon it  as
       a piece of the jig-saw.  I consider Mr Buttler is not bound  by  his
       instructing solicitor's concession.  Her statement is, after all,  a
       record of what Ms Miller genuinely felt when she made it.  I do  not
       infer that the respondent is asserting that she was not telling  the
       truth when it was made.

   81. However, the statement cannot be relied  upon  without  also  taking
       into account the fact that it does not represent her  current  view;
       she no longer feels able to support it.  There  are  cases  where  a
       written statement is adduced in evidence without a  suggestion  that
       its contents have been re-assessed by the maker.  However, where, as
       here, there is clear evidence that the maker has currently distanced
       herself from its earlier contents, it is not possible to rely on the
       statement without also considering the maker's subsequent views.   I
       do not regard Ms Miller's evidence as  supporting  the  respondent's
       case because it is not possible to  evaluate  the  strength  of  her
       current assessment without hearing her detailed reasons and there is
       no further statement that assists. The respondent has not called her
       but this is understandable given that  this  would  have  caused  an
       adjournment because the option of doing so  arose  so  late  in  the
       proceedings.  I am satisfied it  was  the  right  decision  for  the
       respondent to take.  That said, there is now no longer evidence from
       a source that might have afforded an independent, long-term  insight
       into the applicant's behaviour as an indication of his age.  That is
       a significant gap in the applicant's case.


 Other evidence

   82. Maya Pritchard of the South London Refugee  Association  provided  a
       statement dated 21 July 2016 in which she offered her assessment  of
       the applicant's age.  She has  considerable  experience  in  dealing
       with young people recently arrived and seeking asylum, many of  whom
       are young males from Afghanistan.  She offers them  support  in  the
       areas of accommodation, education and care arrangements as  well  as
       with their immigration concerns.  She has  been  involved  with  the
       applicant's care since the date of his arrival.  For  a  significant
       period, the applicant was  in  regular  attendance  at  youth  group
       meetings.  During this period, she had obviously had an  opportunity
       to observe the applicant.  The youth group membership ranged between
       16 and 20 year-olds.  Her view was that the  elder  boys  tended  to
       tease and isolate him as if her were younger than the age attributed
       to him by the respondent.  She spoke of him being  immature  in  the
       sense that he failed to see the importance of attending appointments
       and did not appear to see the  significance  of  acting  responsibly
       when required to do so.  Such  behaviour,  she  felt,  had  more  in
       common with boys before they reach the  age  of  17  or  18.   As  a
       result, her view in July 2016 was that the applicant was aged 16.


   83. In her oral evidence she  spoke  of  the  applicant  attending  from
       between 12 to 18 months before ceasing to  attend  the  youth  group
       although he occasionally 'called in' thereafter.  She  told  of  the
       older boys (up to 20 years  old)  ordering  the  applicant  and  his
       friends about.  Afghan boys, she said, tended to go about in groups.
        The applicant and his friends were still  'encompassed  within  the
       dynamic' but the applicant and his friend were the most  unruly  and
       the older boys  would  tell  them  off.    She  accepted  in  cross-
       examination that these  distinctions  might  just  be  a  matter  of
       personality.  She was aware of his earlier high level of  attendance
       at college and  confirmed  he  had  achieved  various  certificates.
       However, the college felt that his misbehaviour was  such  that  the
       placement was no longer suitable.  She had maintained  contact  with
       him when he was made homeless and when he was prosecuted before  the
       magistrates.

   84. One of the applicant's friends, Asad Safi, an Afghan national,  also
       gave evidence.  He  thought  the  applicant  was  16.  In  his  oral
       evidence he stated that he lived with the applicant between  January
       and June 2014 at which point he, Asad Safi, had just reached the age
       of 19.

   85. I entirely accept that Ms Pritchard  and  Mr  Safi  were  intent  on
       providing truthful and accurate information  to  the  Tribunal.   Ms
       Pritchard, in particular, speaks from  a  position  of  considerable
       experience.  However, this is clearly an area where  the  assessment
       is impressionistic rather than scientific.  Traits which demonstrate
       the acceptance of a growing sense of responsibility,  a  recognition
       of the need to  keep  appointments,  good  relationships  with  peer
       groups or elders or teachers or foster carers may all be  indicative
       of growing maturity but, as we  have  seen  before,  variations  are
       likely  to  exist  between  individuals   even   if,   speaking   in
       generalities, young men of 18 as a group are  more  likely  to  show
       greater maturity than younger men of 16.  Ms Pritchard was bound, as
       a matter of common sense, to accept that  it  may  come  down  to  a
       question of personality.  But  there  is  also  something  equivocal
       about this type of assessment.  There was also  evidence  (including
       Ms Miller's statement) that being compliant with authority and  well
       mannered might be seen as the mark of youth (rather  than  maturity)
       before the individual tests the boundaries  and  resists  compliance
       with house rules.  Hence, breaking the boundaries (what an adult may
       call 'acting irresponsibly') might be both an indication of growing-
       up and an indication of the individual lacking maturity.  It follows
       that the evidence of these witnesses must be assessed carefully  and
       scrupulously but cannot be treated as a determinative  view  of  the
       applicant's age.

   86. At a hearing  in  the  Youth  Court,  the  magistrates  treated  the
       applicant according to his stated age and, as a result, the  outcome
       was arranged in accordance with the Youth Offending Team's  approach
       for a person deemed now to be 17.  However, there is no evidence  as
       to how the magistrates reached their decision or the  material  that
       was before them or whether his age was in contention.  All of  these
       considerations are significant  when  assessing  the  weight  to  be
       attached to their decision.  Without knowing these  factors,  it  is
       impossible to assess the relevant weight.  It is of course  accepted
       that his age was crucial to the way the magistrates disposed of  the
       case.  However, where  age  is  disputed,  the  magistrates  may  be
       required to treat the  offender  as  a  child  on  the  basis  of  a
       presumption because the philosophy of treatment is different and the
       welfare of the child takes on a significance which does  not  permit
       the considerations applicable  to  an  adult  to  apply.   See,  for
       example, R (M) v Hammersmith Magistrates  Court  (unreported  5  May
       2017).  Inevitably, my examination of  the  evidence,  adduced  over
       three days in the Tribunal, and focussing on the sole issue  of  his
       age, is likely to have been more detailed than the enquiry conducted
       by the magistrates.  I do  not  therefore  regard  the  magistrates'
       decision as affording me much assistance.  It is a factor  that  has
       to be placed in  the  balance.   It  is  accepted  the  magistrates'
       finding is not binding on the Tribunal.

Conclusion


   87. I can do no more than take all the material before me into  account.
       It is an holistic exercise in which it is impossible to  express  in
       numerical terms the weight that I  attach  to  each  strand  of  the
       evidence.  Taken together, all these considerations  satisfy  me  on
       balance of probabilities that the applicant was  born  on  21  March
       1998 and not later.

DECISION

The applicant was born on 21 March 1998.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 8 June 2017


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/1168/2017


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                     The Queen on the application of SB
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered the documents lodged and having heard  Mr  C.  Buttler  of
Counsel instructed by Coram CLC on behalf of the applicant and Mr R.  Hadden
of Counsel instructed by the London Borough of  Croydon  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent at a hearing at Field House, London on 10 December 2019

     Decision: the applicant was born on  21  March  1998  for  the  reasons
given in the judgment annexed

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal because
(i)  My treatment of the weight to be attached to the finding of fact as  to
      the applicant's age made in the First-tier Tribunal in  the  brother's
      appeal was a starting-point and not determinative.
(ii) Having rejected the applicant's evidence as to his age, it was open  to
      me to conclude as a matter of fact that the applicant was at least two
      years older than his claimed age.
(iii)     The  findings  of  fact  are  not  tainted  by  irrationality   or
      perversity or are otherwise unlawful.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE







Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).


