
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/1537/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                             30 January 2019

                                   Before

                          MR JUSTICE JULIAN KNOWLES

                                   Between

                      THE QUEEN (on the application of)
                               ROMANA FERDOUS

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Michael Biggs, instructed by Samuel Ross Solicitors appeared behalf of the
Applicant.

Leon Glenister, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


The Honourable Mr Justice Julian Knowles:

Introduction
   1. This is an application for judicial  review  with  the  permission  of
      Upper Tribunal Judge Blum following an oral hearing of  the  Secretary
      of State's Administrative Review (AR) decision dated 10  January  2018
      (the AR Decision), which followed her decision to refuse the Applicant
      leave to remain dated 28 November 2017 (the Refusal).


   2. The issues which fall for determination are:


     a. Whether the Secretary of State has a duty to consider exercising  a
        residual discretion at the AR stage of the decision making process,
        where the basis on which he is asked to do so did not form part  of
        the original application.   The  issue  arises  in  this  way.   In
        circumstances where a points-based applicant is  refused  leave  to
        remain (LTR) but she then wants  to  seek  leave  to  remain  (LTR)
        outside of the Immigration Rules (the  Rules),  can  the  applicant
        seek such leave  within  a  request  for  AR  of  the  points-based
        application (as the Applicant argues), or does that person need  to
        make a fresh application (as the Secretary of State suggests).


     b. Whether it is highly likely the outcome would have  been  the  same
        for the Applicant even if the Secretary  of  State  had  considered
        exercising her decision.  This involves consideration of  s  31(2A)
        of the Senior Courts Act 1981 (the 1981 Act).


   3. Judicial review was sought on two other  grounds,  however  permission
      was refused in relation to those by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum and so I
      need say no more about them.


   4. The Secretary of State at the relevant time was female, and so in this
      judgment when I am referring to the Secretary of State in the  context
      of the decision which I am  concerned  with  I  will  use  the  female
      pronoun.    Otherwise I shall use the male pronoun.


    Relevant factual background


   5. The Applicant is  a  citizen  of  Bangladesh.   She  has  a  dependent
      husband. On 22 September 2016 she entered the UK as a Tier  4  Student
      with entry clearance valid until 25 January 2018. On 12 May  2017  her
      leave was curtailed to expire on  18  July  2017  on  account  of  her
      Sponsor college  informing  the  Home  Office  it  had  withdrawn  her
      sponsorship on 14 November 2017 because of her poor attendance.


   6. On 18 July 2017 the Applicant applied for leave to remain  outside  of
      the Rules. The basis of her application was set out in a cover  letter
      from her solicitors. In essence, she sought  more  time  so  that  she
      could find a different educational Sponsor.


   7. On 14 August 2017 a letter was sent which said that the Applicant  was
      soon expecting admission  into  an  educational  institution.   On  30
      August 2017 the  Applicant  varied  her  original  application  to  an
      application for further LTR  as  a  Tier  4  (General)  Student.   The
      application, as varied, was supported by a Confirmation of  Acceptance
      for Studies (CAS) issued by the London School of Commerce (a  Division
      of St Piran's School (GB)) Limited) (the School).


   8. The Secretary of State refused that application on 28 November 2017 on
      the grounds that the School had by then withdrawn the Applicant's CAS,
      as well as on other grounds.


   9. On 13 December 2017 the Applicant applied for an AR of that  decision.
      The application made a number of points which are not relevant to  the
      claim before me.  The pertinent point raised for the purposes of  this
      judicial review application was as follows:
              "12. Furthermore, the applicant had given birth earlier  this
             year. There have been some interruptions to her study. She has
             also been medically unwell. She has been  receiving  treatment
             and  thus  there  are  clearly  compelling  and  compassionate
             reasons. Having regard to these factors, the applicant further
             submits that the circumstances warrant a period of 60 days  to
             be given to enable  the  applicant  to  find  another  sponsor
             and/or  regularise  her  position.   Given   her   exceptional
             circumstances this course of action  is  strongly  encouraged.
             She  has  been  suffering  from  mental  health  illness   and
             relapsing, see for example the NHS letter dated 27 July 2017."




  10. She accompanied her application with medical evidence,  including  the
      NHS  letter  dated  27  July  2017.   This  was  from   a   consultant
      psychiatrist and said:


             "This lady is known to my service with a severe  and  enduring
             mental illness. She has  a  chronic  relapsing  and  remitting
             psychotic illness which requires close ongoing  treatment  and
             review.


             If she were to be relocated back to Bangladesh in  my  opinion
             her mental health would suffer and she would be at significant
             risk of relapse, the full treatment she can access in  the  UK
             would not be available in Bangladesh.
             I understand she has applied for a Visa to study in the UK and
             I would support her in  wanting  to  do  this,  she  is  fully
             engaged  with  our   service   and   attends   for   all   her
             appointments."


  11. On 10 January 2018 the Secretary of State gave her AR  decision.   One
      of the original grounds for refusal  (not  relevant  this  claim)  was
      removed, but AR was refused overall and the decision to  refuse  leave
      was maintained.  In relation to the medical evidence, the AR  decision
      stated:


             "As an application for a Tier 4  Visa  is  within  the  Points
             Based System we cannot consider the medical evidence you  have
             supplied with your Administrative Review.   If  you  wish  for
             this evidence to be considered, you are able to submit a fresh
             application in the relevant category."


  12. It is this decision  which  is  challenged  on  this  application  for
      judicial review.


    The parties' submissions


  13. Essentially, the Applicant's case is that the Secretary of  State  had
      the power to consider the medical evidence as part of the  AR  process
      and should have done so; and that had she  done,  so  she  would  have
      granted the Applicant LTR outside of the Rules or, more precisely, she
      says that the Secretary of State cannot show to the requisite standard
      that she would not have done so.    She  says  that  she  had  thereby
      implicitly invited the Respondent to waive any Immigration Rules which
      precluded disposing of the application for AR on this basis


  14. The Secretary of State submits in response that  the  AR  process  has
      ousted his general discretion.  Alternatively, if he  is  wrong  about
      that, he says that it is highly likely that he  would  have  exercised
      his discretion against the Applicant and so relief should  be  refused
      pursuant to s 31(2A) of the 1981 Act.


    The Applicant's submissions


  15. On behalf of the Applicant, Mr Biggs submitted as follows.


  16. The Secretary of State has a duty to consider whether to  grant  leave
      outside the Rules as a matter of discretion and  must  consider  doing
      when expressly asked to do so: R (Behary and  Ullah)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2016] 4 WLR 136, [38]-[39].    Although
      this case concerned decisions taken in 2012, before the  AR  procedure
      was introduced, he submitted that this principle is also applicable to
      a request made as part of an application for AR.  In that case Burnett
      LJ (as he then was) said:

             "38 ... there is no doubt that there is a general  discretion
             to grant leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  outside  the
             Rules ... Mr Malik accepts that there is no  legal  obligation
             upon the Home Office to consider its  discretion  outside  the
             rules in every application for leave  to  remain.  He  submits
             that whether it is required to  do  so  as  a  matter  of  law
             depends upon the facts of the case ...


             39 ... There is an obligation to consider such a  grant  when
             expressly asked to do so and, if but briefly,  deal  with  any
             material relied upon by an applicant in support."


  17. The Secretary of State's power to grant leave to remain  to  a  person
      who is a non-British citizen is a statutory one contained in ss 3, 3A,
      3B and 4 of the Immigration Act 1971 (the 1971 Act).  Mr Biggs  relied
      on what Lord Dyson said in R (Munir) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2012] 1 WLR 2192, [44]:


             "In my view, it is the 1971 Act itself which is the source  of
             the Secretary of State's power to  grant  leave  to  enter  or
             remain outside the immigration rules. The Secretary  of  State
             is given a wide discretion under sections 3, 3A, 3B and 3C  to
             control the grant and refusal of leave to enter or to  remain:
             see  paras  4-6  above.  The  language  of  these  provisions,
             especially  section  3(1)(b)(c),  could  not  be  wider.  They
             provide clearly and without qualification that, where a person
             is not a British citizen, he may be given leave  to  enter  or
             limited or indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom.
             They authorise the Secretary of State to grant leave to  enter
             or remain even where  leave  would  not  be  given  under  the
             immigration rules."


  18. Hence, Mr Biggs submitted that it  would  be  an  unlawful  fetter  of
      discretion and Wednesbury unreasonable for the Secretary of  State  to
      decline to consider an application for leave outside the Rules as part
      of the AR process.  He says  that  that  process  forms  part  of  the
      Secretary of State's overall consideration of an application for leave
      to remain.  He points to the fact that  the  Rules  expressly  provide
      that the Secretary of State may re-decide  an  application  for  leave
      when considering an application for AR by withdrawing the decision  or
      by maintaining the refusal of an application  for  leave  for  new  or
      additional reasons: Appendix AR, [2.2]; [34N(2)] of the Rules.


  19. He says this is supported by the statutory scheme, which  operates  to
      extend leave to remain until the AR process has ended: s  3C(2)(a)-(d)
      of the 1971 Act; Leave extended by section 3C (and leave  extended  by
      section 3D in transitional cases), v9 (January 2019).


  20. Mr Biggs submitted that the Secretary of State's discretion  to  grant
      leave outside the Rules is not curtailed by the AR process,  in  other
      words, that discretion subsists and is not curtailed by the fact  that
      he is considering an application  for  AR.    He  says  that  just  as
      restrictive  requirements  of  the  Rules  governing  the  substantive
      requirements for an  application  for  leave  can  be  waived  in  the
      Respondent's discretion, a point underpinning the reasoning in  Behary
      at [38]-[39],


  21. Mr Biggs referred to the principle  that  a  discretion  conferred  by
      statute cannot be fettered by an unduly rigid policy, often  known  as
      the British Oxygen principle: British Oxygen Co  Limited  v  Board  of
      Trade [1971] AC 610, 625; see also R (Sandiford) v Secretary of  State
      for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs [2014]  1  WLR  2697,  [54]-[55],
      [60]-[61], [82]-[83]. He said there was no principled  basis  to  hold
      that the British Oxygen principle does not apply when  the  Respondent
      considers an application for AR.


  22. Hence, he submitted  that  the  Respondent  was  wrong  to  refuse  to
      consider the request for the exercise of her discretion to grant leave
      outside of the Rules and that the AR decision is therefore vitiated by
      an error of law.


  23. In response to the Secretary of State's argument that relief should be
      refused because the failure to consider the exercise of her discretion
      would not have produced a different outcome, and so was immaterial, Mr
      Biggs submitted as follows.


  24. He accepted that the applicable test is that contained in s 31(2A)  of
      the 1981 Act:


             "(2A) The High Court -


             (a) must refuse to grant relief on an application for judicial
             review, and


             (b) may not make an award under  subsection  (4)  on  such  an
             application,


             if it appears to the  court  to  be  highly  likely  that  the
             outcome for the applicant would not  have  been  substantially
             different if the conduct complained of had not occurred.


             (2B) The court may disregard the  requirements  in  subsection
             2A(a) and (b) if it considers that it is appropriate to do  so
             for reasons of exceptional public interest."


  25. Mr Biggs accepted that there was no scope for  the  application  of  s
      31(2B) in this case.  He said the  question  for  me  is  whether  'it
      appears ... to be highly likely that the  outcome  for  the  applicant
      would not have been substantially different if the conduct  complained
      of had not occurred' (my emphasis) (the  'no  substantial  difference'
      test or NSDT).  He reminded me that in R (Bokrosova) v London  Borough
      of Lambeth [2015] EWHC 3386 (Admin), [88],   Laing  J  held  that  the
      burden of showing that the NSDT test was met lay on the  defendant  in
      judicial review proceedings, being the party asserting that  the  test
      was made out.


  26. He said that the Respondent's reliance on [2.4] of Appendix AR,  which
      provides that the Reviewer will not consider any evidence that was not
      before the original decision maker (save for non-relevant exceptions),
      was misplacedon .


  27. Firstly, he said that the Respondent  has  the  power  to  waive  this
      embargo and there are examples of her  having  done  so,  and  of  her
      taking such evidence into account,  including  R  (Kifiat  Hussain)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department, JR/12805/2017, [24].


  28. Second, on the facts, he said  that  the  medical  evidence  had  been
      submitted to the  Respondent  before  she  made  her  decision  on  24
      November 2017 to refuse the application for leave to remain as a  Tier
      4 (General) Migrant.  He referred to letters dated 14 August 2017,  18
      September 2017  and  30  October  2017,  enclosing  (inter  alia)  the
      consultant psychiatrist's letter and a letter from  a  clinical  nurse
      specialist confirming that the Applicant suffers  from  a  severe  and
      debilitating mental illness).   Mr  Biggs  sought  leave  to  rely  on
      evidence not before the Secretary of State, namely a witness statement
      from the Applicant proving posting of this material, and said I  could
      receive this on the principle in  R  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Environment ex parte Powis [1981] 1 WLR 584  (fresh  evidence  can  be
      admitted on an application for judicial review in order to  show  what
      material was before the Secretary of State or tribunal).


  29. Overall, he submitted that the NSDT is not satisfied in this case.


    The Respondent's submissions


  30. On behalf of the Respondent, Mr Glenister submitted as follows.


  31. The basis for this ground being granted permission was the judgment in
      Behary, supra. However, the AR did not exist at  the  time  Ullah  was
      decided, and therefore the judgment was in respect of  an  application
      only.  The Applicant in the present case attempts to extend  the  duty
      set out in Behary to AR. The difference between the  parties  on  this
      ground is narrow, but crucial. The  Applicant  argues  that  where  an
      applicant makes a points-based application and is refused leave, it is
      open to the applicant to apply for AR seeking  leave  outside  of  the
      Rules, even though that was not part of the original application.  The
      Secretary of State argues that such an applicant could  apply  to  for
      leave outside of the Rules, but that has to be in a fresh application.
      This is because AR is a defined process in the  Rules,  restricted  to
      reviewing the original decision. The Secretary of State is effectively
      being asked to disapply the 'limited and clear' AR rules  to  consider
      what, in truth, is a new basis for leave.


  32. Administrative review is restricted to consideration of whether  there
      was a 'case working error' in a decision: Appendix AR, [AR2.3].   Case
      working errors are defined in [AR2.11] and include  certain  types  of
      decision  being  'incorrect'  (see  AR2.11(a));  where  the   original
      decision maker applied the Rules incorrectly  (AR2.11(d));  and  where
      the original decision maker failed to apply the Secretary  of  State's
      relevant published policy and guidance in relation to the application.




  33. The parties agree  that  the  Applicant's  request  for  consideration
      outside the Rules does not  fall  within  the  definition  of  a  case
      working error.


  34. The Secretary of State submits  that  the  Rules  are  clear  that  an
      applicant for AR cannot allege any other basis for being granted leave
      that was not in the initial application, including any human rights or
      protection claim and cites [AR2.6]:


             "The Reviewer will  not  consider  whether  the  applicant  is
             entitled to leave to remain on some other basis and nothing in
             these rules shall be taken to mean that the applicant may make
             an application for leave or vary an existing  application  for
             leave, or make a protection or human rights claim, by  seeking
             administrative review."


  35. This is reflected in the Administrative Review Guidance  (April  2017)
      which states at p39:


             "The administrative review cannot be used to apply  for  leave
             on another basis. The Home Office will not consider any  human
             rights,  asylum  or  EEA  grounds  that  are  raised  in   the
             application. This is in accordance  with  paragraph  AR2.6  of
             Appendix AR of the Immigration Rules.


             Seeking leave on another basis


             Applicants cannot use an application for administrative review
             of an eligible decision to apply for leave on  another  basis,
             for example to claim that they should be granted leave under a
             different tier of the points-based system. If they attempt  to
             do so, you must  tell  the  applicant,  in  the  rejection  or
             decision notice, to make the appropriate application for leave
             in the manner specified.


             Human rights or protection claims


             A human rights or protection claim made in  an  administrative
             review  application   will   not   be   considered.   If   the
             administrative review maintains  the  decision  the  applicant
             will be served with a notice under section 120 of the 2002 Act
             which will provide an opportunity to make any human rights  or
             protection claim."


  36. The Secretary of State says that  the  limited  scope  for  review  is
      reflected in the limited scope for new evidence on AR  in  [A2.4].   I
      referred to this in my recitation of the Applicant's submissions.


  37. Mr Glenister makes the following observations on the Rules in relation
      to AR:


     a. Administrative review is just that - a review  -  of  the  original
        decision. It is not a fresh decision


     b. The scope of what can be reviewed is limited  to  a  'case  working
        error', which is specifically defined in  the  Rules.  The  parties
        agree there is no such alleged error in the present case.


     c. The Rules specifically exclude from consideration leave  to  remain
        on a basis other than that which was set out  in  the  application,
        which would include leave outside of the  Rules,  and  particularly
        references that an applicant may not  make  a  human  rights  claim
        within AR.


     d. Where a human rights  claim  is  made,  the  Secretary  of  State's
        Guidance  specifies  that  a  notice  under  section  120  of   the
        Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 will be served so  the
        applicant can make an appropriate  application  for  leave  in  the
        manner specified.


  38. As such, the AR procedure is specific to  a  review  of  the  original
      decision, and it is not open to applicants to seek further leave on  a
      different basis to that sought in the original  decision.  It  follows
      that where the original application does not seek for leave to  remain
      outside of the Rules and that is a  basis  an  applicant  subsequently
      seeks to rely upon, the recourse is to make  a  fresh  application  to
      undergo substantive consideration.


  39. Mr Glenister says it is agreed between the parties that the  AR  rules
      themselves do not permit  the  Secretary  of  State  to  consider  his
      residual  discretion  where  it  was  not  raised  in   the   original
      application. As such, he says the crux of the Applicant's argument  is
      that the Secretary of State should  have  considered  disapplying  the
      rules in relation to AR in another form of  the  discretion  to  grant
      leave outside of the Rules as set out in Behary, supra.


  40. Mr Glenister says that this does not follow. An application  to  grant
      leave outside the Rules is a request for the  Secretary  of  State  to
      disapply a substantive requirement in the Rules because  it  would  be
      compassionate to do so. What the  applicant  is  seeking  is  for  the
      Secretary of State to disapply the  procedural  requirements,  and  in
      effect, to consider a fresh application as part of the AR process. If,
      after receiving a decision by the Secretary  of  State,  an  applicant
      seeks leave on a new basis, the appropriate procedure  is  to  make  a
      fresh application.


  41. In summary, Mr Glenister says that the Secretary of State says that he
      did all that was required of him. He determined that there was no case
      working error in the AR process and served a s 120 notice  in  respect
      of a potential human rights claim. If the applicant wanted to pursue a
      grant  of  leave  pursuant  to  the  Secretary  of  State's   residual
      discretion it was open to her to do so in a fresh application  (as  in
      due course she did).


  42. Further and in any event, Mr  Glenister  submits  that  it  is  highly
      likely the outcome would have been the same for the Applicant had  the
      Secretary of State exercised his discretion in the Applicant's favour.


    Discussion
    Did the Secretary of State have a duty to  consider  leave  outside  the
    Rules as part of the AR process ?


  43. The Rules are made by the Secretary of State pursuant to  the  express
      power given to him in s 3(2) of  the  1971  Act.    That  provides  in
      pertinent part:


             "The Secretary of State shall from time to time (and  as  soon
             as may be) lay before Parliament statements of the  rules,  or
             of any changes in the rules,  laid  down  by  him  as  to  the
             practice to be followed in the administration of this Act  for
             regulating the entry into and stay in the  United  Kingdom  of
             persons required by this Act to have leave to enter, including
             any rules as to the period for which leave is to be given  and
             the conditions to be attached in different circumstances ..."


  44. The rules governing Administrative Review are  contained  in  Appendix
      AR.


  45. The nature of the Immigration Rules was analysed by the Supreme Court
      in Ali (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  1
      WLR 4799. Lord Reed (giving the judgment of the Court) noted  at  [17]
      that the Rules are not law but a statement of the Secretary of State's
      administrative practice. But he also said:


             "Nevertheless, they give effect to the policy of the Secretary
             of  State,  who  has  been  entrusted   by   Parliament   with
             responsibility for immigration control and is accountable to
             Parliament for her discharge of her responsibilities  in  this
             vital area. Furthermore, they are laid before Parliament,  may
             be the subject of debate, and can  be  disapproved  under  the
             negative resolution procedure. They are therefore made in  the
             exercise of powers which have been  democratically  conferred,
             and are subject, albeit to a  limited  extent,  to  democratic
             procedures of accountability."


  46.  As Lord Dyson observed in Munir,  supra,  the  1971  Act  grants  the
      Secretary of State wide powers to grant leave to  remain  outside  the
      Rules.   In my judgment, that power includes the power to consider  an
      application for leave to remain outside of the Rules as part of the AR
      process.  It is clear that on occasion the  Secretary  of  State  does
      waive aspects of the rules governing AR,  of  which  the  decision  in
      Kifiat Hussain, supra, is an example.  The  question  is  whether  the
      Secretary of State has a duty to  consider  granting  leave  in  these
      circumstances, or whether he is entitled to require  an  Applicant  to
      make a fresh application for leave to remain outside the Rules.


  47. Mr Biggs rested his case on the public law principle that  a  decision
      maker exercising a statutory power should not operate a  policy  which
      is overrigid so as to  automatically  determine  the  outcome.   In  R
      (Sandiford) v Secretary of State  for  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth
      Office [2014] 1 WLR 2697, [61] Lord Carnwath and Lord Mance (with whom
      Lord Clarke and Lord Toulson agreed) said:


             "61.  The  basis  of  the  statutory  principle  is  that  the
             legislature in conferring the power, rather than  imposing  an
             obligation to exercise it in one sense, must have contemplated
             that it might be  appropriate  to  exercise  it  in  different
             senses in different circumstances. But prerogative  powers  do
             not stem from any legislative source, nor therefore  from  any
             such legislative decision, and there is no external originator
             who could have imposed any obligation to exercise them in  one
             sense, rather than another. They are intrinsic  to  the  Crown
             and it is for the  Crown  to  determine  whether  and  how  to
             exercise them in its discretion."


  48. At [81] Lord Sumption said:


             "The basis of the rule against the  fettering  of  discretions
             ... is that a discretion conferred on a decision-maker  is  to
             be exercised. Within the limits of that discretion, which will
             normally be derived from terms  in  which  it  was  conferred,
             members of the class of potential beneficiaries have  a  right
             to be considered, even if they have no right to any particular
             outcome. The effect of the  decision-maker  adopting  a  self-
             imposed rule that he will exercise his discretion in only some
             of the ways permitted by the terms in which it was  conferred,
             is to deny that right to those who are  thereby  excluded.  It
             also leads to the arbitrary exclusion of information  relevant
             to the discretion  conferred,  and  thereby  to  inconsistent,
             capricious and potentially irrational decisions."


  49. To what extent do these principles apply to the  Rules?  The  question
      was considered by the Court of Appeal in R (Sayania) v Upper  Tribunal
      [2016] 4 WLR 58, in which the Appellant  challenged  [322(1A)],  which
      provided that leave was to be refused where  material  facts  had  not
      been disclosed on an application.  At [2] and  [3]  Beatson  LJ  (with
      whom Clarke LJ and Arden LJ agreed) set out the rival contentions:


             "2 It is  submitted  by  Mr  Zane  Malik  on  behalf  of  the
             appellant, Sandip Narpatsinh Sayaniya, that paragraph  322(1A)
             of the Rules  is  ultra  vires  because  it  is  expressed  in
             mandatory  terms  and  thus  unlawfully  fetters   the   broad
             discretion conferred on the Secretary of State by section 3(1)
             of the 1971 Act to grant or refuse leave to enter or remain in
             the United Kingdom. Mr Malik maintained  that  in  making  the
             rule the Secretary of State in effect abdicated her  statutory
             power under this provision because  the  nature  of  the  rule
             excludes consideration of  all  other  factors  which  may  be
             relevant in a particular case but cannot trump its terms.
             3 Mr Sharland, on behalf of the Secretary of State, submitted
             that the non-fettering principle does not apply to  a  statute
             which expressly permits rules to be  made,  as  the  1971  Act
             does, and, in any event, in the present context the  necessary
             flexibility exists because the Secretary of State may grant  a
             person discretionary leave to remain 'outside the rules'."


  50. At [15] he said:


             "My  starting  point  is  that  the  decisions  on  the  'non-
             fettering' principle relied on by Mr Malik such  as Attorney-
             General ex rel Tilley v  Wandsworth  London  Borough   Council
             [1981] 1 WLR 854 and R v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department,    Ex    p     Venables     [1998]     AC     407,
             469; [1997] 3 WLR 23 did not concern a statute which expressly
             permits rules to be  made,  as  the  1971  Act  does.  Neither
             does British Oxygen Co Ltd v Board of Trade  [1971]  AC  610;
             which contains an earlier and classic review of the  position.
             While, as will be seen, immigration rules are not law  in  the
             sense that a statute or a statutory instrument is,  there  are
             many decisions of the House of Lords  and  the  Supreme  Court
             involving the application of provisions of a mandatory  nature
             in the Immigration Rules. They are susceptible to challenge on
             grounds  of  error  of  law, Wednesbury unreasonableness  or
             irrationality and proportionality but in none of the cases  is
             it suggested that their mandatory nature in itself makes  them
             ultra vires. The second reason is that given by the judge when
             refusing permission to apply for judicial review. It is  that,
             although  paragraph  322(1A)  is  in  mandatory   terms,   the
             Secretary of State may depart from it  by  making  a  decision
             more beneficial to an applicant such as to grant discretionary
             leave to remain 'outside the rules'  when  the  Rules  provide
             that leave should not be given."


  51. At [21] he said:


             "21 The Immigration Rules do not constitute  "rules"  in  the
             sense that a statute or  a  statutory  instrument  do.  But  I
             reject the submission of Mr Malik, relying on statements in  a
             number of decisions,  that  they  are  statements  of  policy,
             subject to all the public  law  constraints  on  policies  and
             discretionary powers including the non-fettering principle. At
             this stage, I observe only that it was not suggested in any of
             the cases Mr Malik relied on that an Immigration Rule which is
             in mandatory terms is,  for  that  reason,  ultra  vires.  The
             statements in them must be seen in their contexts, which  (see
             para 25 below) involved very different issues to that in  this
             case."


  52. At [24] he said:


             "It is well recognised that some  of  the  provisions  of  the
             Immigration Rules are expressed in mandatory language and some
             are expressed in a more open-textured way and  are  closer  to
             advisory  guidance  or  a  statement  of  policy.  The   issue
             in Alvi's case [2013] 1 WLR 2208, to which I have referred,
             was whether and when a policy statement was required, pursuant
             to section 3(2) of the 1971 Act, to be laid before Parliament.
             Although not in precisely the same language, the Supreme Court
             held that policies setting out criteria which are  or  may  be
             determinative of an application for leave to enter  or  remain
             must be in immigration rules laid before Parliament:  see,  in
             particular, Lord Dyson at para 97. As I have stated, there  is
             no suggestion in that or any of the other cases in  the  House
             of Lords or the Supreme Court that an Immigration  Rule  which
             is in mandatory terms is, for that reason, ultra vires."


  53. Having said that the Rules were not statements of  policy  subject  to
      all the public law constraints on policies  and  discretionary  powers
      including the  non-fettering  principle,  since  they  were  expressly
      contemplated by ss 1(4) and 3(2) of the 1971 Act, the Court of  Appeal
      dismissed the appeal.  Further, it said that to the  extent  that  the
      non-fettering principle applied to the  Rules,  a  rule  expressed  in
      mandatory terms did not fall foul of it since the Secretary  of  State
      had a discretion outside the rules which he could exercise  in  favour
      of those who did not qualify under them and that, therefore, [322(1A)]
      was not ultra vires.


  54. In my judgment this decision (which, I regret to say, was not drawn to
      my attention by either counsel) is dispositive of the first issue  and
      thus of this application for  judicial  review.    Paragraph  [AR2.6],
      which provides that the  Administrative  Reviewer  will  not  consider
      whether the applicant is entitled to leave to  remain  on  some  basis
      other than that in the original application, is lawful  and  does  not
      represent an unlawful fetter of the Secretary of  State's  discretion.
      The Secretary of State is entirely free to specify the way in which an
      application for him to grant leave outside the Rules is  to  be  made.
      The vice of overly rigid policies lies  in  the  fact  that  they  may
      defeat the statutory purpose behind the discretionary power  given  to
      the decision maker.  But that rationale  does  not  readily  apply  to
      procedural rules as to how an application  for  the  exercise  of  the
      discretion is to made,  and  certainly  not  to  the  rule  which  the
      Secretary of State has made constraining AR to  the  original  grounds
      for  the  application  and  requiring  an  application  for  leave  on
      different grounds to be made.   The Secretary of State accepts that he
      is bound to consider the Applicant's application for leave outside the
      Rules


  55. For these reasons, the Secretary of State was not under a duty as part
      of the AR to consider the medical  evidence  and  other  evidence  put
      forward in support of the application for  leave  outside  the  Rules.
      She was  lawfully  entitled  to  apply  [AR2.6]  and  to  require  the
      Applicant to make a fresh application.


    Conclusion


  56. This disposes of  this  application  for  judicial  review,  which  is
      dismissed.  I do not therefore  need  to  consider  the  second  issue
      concerning s 31(2A) of the 1981 Act.







                                                                JR/1537/2018


                            Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


               The Queen on the application of Romana Ferdous
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before

                  The Honourable Mr Justice Julian Knowles


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Biggs, of Counsel, instructed by Samuel  Ross
Solicitors, on behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  Glenister,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 30 January 2019.

     Decision: the application for judicial review is dismissed

(1)  The Upper Tribunal's reasons for refusing this judicial review are  set
      out in my reserved judgment given following the hearing on 30  January
      2019.

Order


(2)  I order, therefore, that the judicial review application be dismissed.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

(3)  I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal because I  am  not
      satisfied that there is an arguable error  of  law  in  my  judgement.



Costs

(4)  The Applicant pay the Respondent's costs agreed in the sum of
�5,528.00.





         Signed:


                                The Honourable Mr Justice Julian Knowles




        Dated:








Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------
Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).



