

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR 1593 2020


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of
                                      SA
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                          Westminster City Council
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr D Greene,  counsel,  instructed  by  Instalaw
Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Mr M Paget,  counsel,  instructed
by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  at  a
hearing at Field House, London on 7, 8 and 9 September 2021.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is refused


 1) My reasons are set out in the  transcript  of  my  extempore  judgement
    attached to and part of this order.

Order


(2)    I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review   application   be
      dismissed.

(3)   Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the applicant.
      Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  I  make
      this order because the applicant is an asylum seeker and  is  entitled
      to privacy.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

(6)   I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal because I see  no
      arguable error in my decision.

Costs

(7)   The Applicant shall pay the Respondent's costs to be assessed  if  not
      agreed, this part of the Order not  to  be  enforced  without  further
      Order.



       Signed:   Jonathan Perkins


                       Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins


        Dated:    16 September 2021



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 30 September 2021

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/1593/2020

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            9 September 2021


                                  The QUEEN
                         (ON The application OF SA)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


                          WESTMINSTER CITY COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr D Greene, instructed by Instalaw Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr M Paget, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE PERKINS: I find that the applicant was born on 10 November 2000.  The
time-tabling of this case was too generous but that has enabled me to have
plenty of time during the course of the hearing to reflect on the evidence
and as a consequence of that I find that I am able to give an extempore
judgment.

   2. With permission granted by Mr Justice Holman the applicant challenges
      the decision of the respondent on 5 July 2019 that he was born on 10
      November 1996 and so is 24, nearly 25 years old.  He says he was born
      on 10 November 2002 and so is now 18, nearly 19 years old.

   3. The applicant seeks a declaration that he is his claimed age or at
      least a child when he arrived in the United Kingdom, that the
      respondent's age assessment was unlawful and/or wrong in its
      conclusion and an order quashing the age assessment.  I confirm that I
      have read the documents in the two bundles and the pleasingly few
      additional papers including the submissions and/or skeleton arguments
      of Counsel.  I also appreciate the efforts of the solicitors.  It has
      been a pleasure to work with documents that are clearly paginated.

   4. I remind myself that I must determine the applicant's age as a
      precedent fact and I must reach my conclusion on an evaluation of the
      evidence as a whole.  Neither party bears a burden of proof.  I remind
      myself that any lies that I find the applicant told are not evidence
      of his age and that his general appearance and presentation, although
      relevant, is a notoriously poor guide to his actual age.

   5. Several important facts are agreed.  The applicant is Kurdish and is a
      national of Iraq.  He arrived in the United Kingdom on about 4
      December 2018 when, according to the parties, he was aged either 16 or
      22 years.  He was apprehended by the authorities on 4 December 2018
      and arrested as a suspected illegal immigrant but was accommodated as
      a putative child.  The respondent's age assessment is dated 5 July
      2019 and the outcome was communicated to the applicant the next day.

   6. It is the applicant's case that on his way to the United Kingdom he
      had dealings with the Italian authorities and gave them his date of
      birth.  Clearly, the information that he gave might be of interest in
      this case.  On 17 May 2021 Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor ordered
      that the applicant consent to the respondent approaching the Italian
      authorities and seeking information about their interaction.  On 26
      May 2021 the order was varied so that the applicant was obliged to ask
      the Italian authorities for help.  There was no evidence before me
      about the outcome of any enquiries but I was told by Mr Greene, I am
      sure for good reason, that there has been no meaningful response.

   7. Although this does not reflect the order in which the evidence was
      given I begin by considering the age assessment itself.  Mr Greene has
      criticised this assessment in his submissions.  However, it is clear
      that there was a serious attempt at making a fair and considered
      assessment.  The applicant was supported by an appropriate adult and
      an interpreter and a formal notice explaining the purpose of the
      interview was read out to him.  It is plain from the assessment of the
      evidence that there was evidence of several people who doubted the
      applicant's claimed age.  There is reference to his appearing a lot
      older to the police, for example, and it was not believed by the care
      worker that he was 16 and the foster carer thought he was over 18 but
      these things are not explained in any great detail and are on the
      peripheries of my finding.

   8. During the course of his assessment he was asked about his life in
      Iraq and his reasons for travelling to the United Kingdom.  He said he
      was an only child.  He started school when he was aged 6 and left in
      the summer when he was aged 10 or 11.  His father worked as a mechanic
      and decided it was better for the applicant to help him in the family
      business than to attend school.  The applicant showed no aptitude for
      mechanics and did not progress much beyond tidying the workshop.  He
      said that he worked with his father for seven to eight years.  If that
      is right and if he left school between his 10th and 11th birthday he
      was between 17 and 18 years old when he left Iraq.  It is a feature of
      the applicant's case that he has consistently maintained that he was
      born on 10 November 2002 and I have borne that very much in mind.

   9. Clearly, the chronology that he gave does not work.  On readback the
      applicant said that he worked with his father for four to five years
      but did not deny saying seven or eight years or explain why he had
      given the wrong answer.  I find merit in Mr Greene's contention that
      it is regrettable that this change in the account was not investigated
      further when it was raised but that is the evidence I have.

  10. I note at the end of page 103 the applicant is recorded as saying that
      his father took him out of school in 2010.  That claim fits the
      evidence of his having worked for his father for seven or eight years
      better than it fits the claim to have work for four to five years.
      Later the applicant denied saying that he left school in 2010 and
      speculated that the interpreter had erred because the applicant's
      reference to leaving school at 10 years had clouded his mind.  That
      contention is entirely speculative.  There is no good reason to doubt
      the competence of the interpreter and I do not.  It follows that I am
      satisfied that the applicant did say that he left school in 2010 and
      did say that he worked for his father for seven or eight years.

  11. The assessors went on to assess the ages indicated above.  I do not
      follow the reasoning there at all.  Mr Paget explained that the
      assessed age in the middle was in the middle of the bracket identified
      by the assessors.  That much I do understand but although there is
      reference to the applicant's general air of confidence and competence
      the boundaries of the bracket are, I find, plucked from the air.  I
      attach little weight to that part of the assessment.

  12. I look now at the evidence in more detail, starting with the evidence
      of the applicant.  The applicant presented clean-shaven and neatly
      dressed in a fashionable shirt and looked to me very much like he did
      in his photograph at page 71 in volume 2 of the bundles.  Subject to
      the caveat about appearances being unreliable I am happy to note that,
      initially, I guessed the applicant to be in his early to mid-20s but
      as I watched the way he carried himself and conducted himself I
      rapidly lost confidence in that crude preliminary assessment and if I
      have not made it clear already I make it clear now that that has not
      been a major feature in my reasoning at all; it is just too dangerous.

  13. The applicant gave evidence and, subject to a small and, I found,
      inconsequential amendment about the location of his home village in
      Iraq, he adopted his statements dated 28 November 2018, 2 July 2020
      and 30 September 2020 as his evidence-in-chief.  There he said he was
      born on 10 November 2002 and he entered the United Kingdom irregularly
      on 4 December 2018.  He said that his parents had told him his date of
      birth and, although his birthdays were not celebrated in the family,
      his parents referred to his age from time to time.  He recalls that
      after he left Iraq his mother told him he would be 16 in a couple of
      months.  He also went on to say he had seen his date of birth in his
      Iraqi identity document the family kept in a safe place in a box in
      the house.  Although he could not read Arabic he could read it enough
      to identify his name and age.

  14. He said that he started his formal education at primary school when he
      was 6 years old and that he left school after four years when he was
      10 or 11, which he thought was 2013 but he was not really sure.  He
      explained he did not realise until it was pointed to him that he had
      he had not achieved a particular age until the anniversary of his
      birth and so he might have given incorrect answers simply by adding
      the number of years he attended school to his age when he started
      without considering whether he left before or after his birthday.  I
      accept that the applicant comes from a culture where birthdays are
      unimportant and I accept his explanation for being perhaps one year
      out when he estimated his age on leaving school.

  15. However, he also said he did not remember saying in his age assessment
      interview that he completed school in 2010.  He remembered saying he
      left school in 2010 and speculated the interpreter got confused.  I
      have already indicated I find that answer unsatisfactory.

  16. He left school to help his father in the motor-repairing business,
      and, as I have already said, he had little aptitude for mechanics, he
      did not progress beyond tidying the workshop.  He said he was an only
      child and lived with his parents.  He said his mother was born in 1963
      and his father born in 1961 but he accepted that at interview he had
      said that his mother was born in 1961 but that was wrong.  He
      explained how he and his mother, with the help of his maternal uncle,
      arranged to leave Iraq after his father was kidnapped, they believed,
      by ISIS.  He left Iraq in September 2018 with the help of agents and
      was separated from his mother when they were placed in different
      lorries in, he thought, Greece.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in
      December 2018 and made his way to a police station where the officers
      initiated procedures that led to his being supported by the
      respondent.  He is appreciative of his time in shared housing when he
      lived with four other young people and was helped to cook and clear
      the house.

  17. He then talked about the age assessment.  He confirmed that two social
      workers and an appropriate adult and an interpreter were present.  He
      stated of the interpreter at paragraph 24 of his statement that "I
      could understand him well".  He understood that his date of birth was
      assessed as 10 November 1996, making him six years older than he
      claimed to be.  He explained that they had concluded this because they
      had told him he had worked for his father for seven years.  He did not
      deny saying that but did say he was guessing.  He claimed he was
      unhappy in his present accommodation that he shared with four adult
      men.  He felt intimidated by them.  He missed his mum.

  18. In his second statement he explained how he had suffered from low mood
      and that he had benefitted from a counselling service called "Off The
      Record" and from English lessons with "Young Roots".  He delighted in
      the company of friends aged about 17 when he was able to meet them as
      part of Eid celebrations.  In his third statement he gave details of
      an occasion when he was lost in London because the taxi driver
      employed to take him to a review meeting took him to the wrong place.
      It was clearly an unpleasant experience in his life but I did not find
      it helpful in determining his age.  Most people would have been
      unsettled by being lost in London if they could speak very little, if
      any, English.  It was pleasing to read how the police had helped him
      when he introduced himself to them on that occasion.

  19. He had made some friends in the United Kingdom and found solace in
      football.  He appreciated the help given by support staff in learning
      to manage his life.

  20. He acknowledged then when he was first given �10 pocket money he spent
      it on fried chicken and chips, which was a new experience for him that
      he found "very delicious".  This spending might be thought a little
      irresponsible but it does not help me determine his age; he was
      enjoying having some spending money for the first time in a long time.

  21. He tried to explain the school timeline.  He insisted that he left
      school when he was 10.  He particularly remembered his father telling
      him that he was aged 10 when he finished school and started to help
      him in his garage.  He could not recall saying he left school in 2010,
      only that he was aged 10.  He did recall correcting the assessors in
      saying wrongly that he left school in 2012 and he speculated that the
      interpreter had made a mistake.  I assume he means the interpreter
      misunderstood the answers rather than translated wrongly.  I accept
      that he had no reason to doubt the competence of the interpreter
      except that he did not remember saying he left school in 2010.  He
      accepted that he had no reason to doubt the competence of the
      interpreter except on that point.

  22. He said he was nervous of the interview and his heart was beating very
      fast.

  23. He did not feel comfortable in the present accommodation with people
      he considered to be significantly older than his own age.

  24. He was cross-examined and confirmed he had no identification
      documents.  He denied having his own mobile phone when he left Iraq.
      He said he did not know his mother's mobile phone number or the number
      of his uncle who arranged their departure.  He claimed to be afraid to
      contact anyone in Iraq lest that created difficulties for the person
      in Iraq with the group that is in charge.  He claimed not to have
      details about how to contact his uncle.  He repeatedly and
      unsuccessfully asked his agent for help.  He had asked the Red Cross
      for help but could not tell them very much.

  25. He was asked about his journey to the United Kingdom.  He confirmed
      that he had travelled on the last part of his journey with the men.
      He was asked why at his age assessment he had told the assessor he had
      worked for his father for eight years.  He suggested he may have made
      a mistake.  He claimed not to know how long he had worked for his
      father.  He could not explain why he had claimed to have left primary
      education in 2010 and suggested that that was not what he said.

  26. Mr Ali Habib gave evidence.  He adopted his witness statement at page
      152 in the bundle.  It is not dated.  There he explained he was an
      Iranian national, lawfully in the United Kingdom and that he was born
      in 1994.  He first met the applicant at a "Kurdish" restaurant in
      London.  He was dining on his own and the applicant joined him.  Mr
      Habib thought that the applicant looked quite young and asked him his
      age.  The applicant said he was 17 but the Home Office did not believe
      him.  Mr Habib accepted the applicant's alleged age at the time and
      subsequently explained that the applicant prioritised playing video
      games, eating snacks and looked to him, Mr Habib, for occasional
      subsidies and clothes.  He met the applicant on about twenty occasions
      and was surprised that his claim was doubted.

  27. He was cross-examined.  He seemed reluctant to answer questions
      directly.  I recognise there may be cultural rather than disreputable
      reasons for that but Mr Paget found it hard to conduct his planned
      cross-examination.  Mr Habib said, or seems to have said, that the
      applicant looks like a child now, which of course he is not.  Mr Habib
      pressed him and said that the applicant did not look like a child now.
       He was asked to explain why he thought that the applicant looked like
      a child when he first saw him and he could not develop that answer.

  28. He was also pressed to explain how the conversation between them
      started.  He found that difficult but said they were sitting near to
      each other and both of them said they were sitting on their own, which
      might have been an explanation for the two coming together.

  29. I asked him if he could explain why he thought that the applicant
      seemed young when the other people such as the police and social
      workers thought he seemed older.  There were many possible answers to
      this including the context in which the applicant was seen but,
      perhaps unsurprisingly, Mr Habib could not illuminate the point.

  30. Overall, I found Mr Habib an unsatisfactory witness.  I want to be
      clear; I do not say he was being deliberately unhelpful, still less
      dishonest, but he was trying to assist his friend by repeating points
      made in his witness statement rather than answering the questions
      asked with the consequence that he avoided his evidence being tested.

  31. The short point is that he accepts the applicant's claim that he was
      17 when he arrived and has given some reasons based on his behaviour
      to explain it but none of them are compelling or, I find, particularly
      pressing.

  32. Mrs Afsana Aramesh gave evidence, adopting her statement of 27 June
      2020.  Mrs Aramesh then worked as a senior caseworker with Young
      Roots. She has recently changed her job.  She was allocated to the
      applicant specifically as a caseworker and had, at different times,
      rather a lot to do with the applicant.  She helped him organise his
      private life and learn to cope in the adult world.  She never doubted
      his claimed age and certainly never had any reason to place him
      outside the range of 11 to 25 years that she supported.

  33. I also heard from a Miss Hanna Lehikoinen, who was a project
      coordinator with Football United, a charity that offers young people
      such as the applicant a chance to play football.  She was one of a few
      people who say unequivocally that her first impressions of the
      applicant put him into about his declared age.  I bear in mind that
      she saw him taking part in physical activities and she found that he
      fitted in well socially and physically with young men around the 18
      years mark.

  34. Mr Gerhard Boer gave evidence.  He is employed as a lead coordinator
      for Refugee Response projects by Hillsong Church in the United
      Kingdom.  His evidence was similar to that of Miss Lehikoinen's.

  35. Each of these three witnesses was transparently honest and
      independent.  However, they have no positive reason to know the
      applicant's age or to think critically about his claims.  Their role
      was to befriend and support him.  Nevertheless, if the applicant is as
      old as the respondent claims it is remarkable that none of them
      questioned his claimed age.

  36. Overall, there are several examples of the applicant learning to cope
      on his own and not quite managing.  I have indicated he was given
      small gifts of cash from time to time.

  37. It is very difficult to know how to evaluate this strand of evidence.
      On any version of events, he has come from Iraq in rather dangerous
      circumstances, which must have been a maturing experience.  Quite what
      life skills he had to adopt into life in the United Kingdom is a
      matter of considerable speculation and it really does not help very
      much.  All I can say is there is nothing about his efforts to fit in
      in the United Kingdom that are particularly compelling or revealing.
      Certainly, there is evidence that he has been willing to listen to
      advice and respond to suggestions from adults.  A flippant part of me
      suggests that this makes him a bit older than 17 but that is not an
      entirely considered response.  The fact is that he has behaved well.
      It could be that he was a younger age but I find it is not the reason
      when I consider the evidence as a whole.  Rather, he was taking
      advantage of the opportunities, responding appropriately to people who
      were helping him and generally trying to fit in.

  38. I did not find him a truthful witness.  I cannot accept that there was
      no plan about how to keep in touch with his mother in the event of
      their separation.  I find it very unlikely that he had not leaned his
      mother's telephone number.  He certainly remembered his claimed date
      of birth but even if he could not remember one 'phone number he could
      surely have kept a note or at least remembered enough to have had a
      stab at it but he could not manage that when he was cross-examined.

  39. I do not understand why if all else failed he could not have contacted
      his uncle in Iraq who helped him leave.  I do make the point that this
      "uncle" was identified as his mother's brother. It was not the word
      used in a generic sense to describe a friend or as a euphemism for an
      agent.  I see no justification at all for the professed concern that
      contacting him could create difficulties; it just does not follow but
      even if that possible route for contact failed for some reason I
      cannot understand why there was no-one in Iraq who could have been
      approached with the simple message "have you heard about my mum?".
      Neither can I accept that his chronology was wrong.  Rather, I find he
      let his guard drop and said truthfully that he had worked for his
      father for seven or eight years.

  40. I have reflected on the lack of education, on Mr Greene's submissions
      that the applicant's conduct is confirmed by Mrs Aramesh, who gave
      evidence about him having poor organisational skills and being
      constantly anxious about where he should be.  I have weighed that in
      but I have to make a decision and I find on reflection that what he
      said at interview was about right, that he left school when he said
      and he worked for his father for seven or eight years, and putting
      those together, I find, as I indicated at the start, he was born on 10
      November 2000.  This I find reconciles the credible evidence from the
      support workers about their lack of concern about his declared age
      with the rest of the evidence before me.
