









         JR/1626/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


Heard at Field House
On 12 June 2019


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara





                                           Between




                 The Queen (on the application of FwF & FrF
                       (by his litigation friend NF))
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Applicant

                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms C  Kilroy  QC  &  Ms  M  Knorr,  of  Counsel,
instructed by Bhatt Murphy Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicants and Mr  R
Dunlop QC & Ms J Moore, of  Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal
Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,
London on 12 June 2019.


      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted


The Tribunal has made an anonymity direction  and  the  applicants  will  be
referred to throughout as "FwF and FrF".  The applicants'  brother  will  be
referred to as "NF" and other relatives are similarly anonymised.




Introduction

   1. The issues in this challenge are threefold. Firstly, whether there was
      a failure by the Secretary of State to disclose reasons for  the  Take
      Charge Request (TCR) refusal and/or to correct  the  misimpression  of
      the French authorities. Secondly whether the  respondent's  delay  and
      failure to accept responsibility for the applicants' asylum claims was
      unlawful and in breach of EU law, common law and Article  8  ECHR  and
      thirdly, whether the applicants' fundamental rights were  breached  as
      the United Kingdom was the Responsible Member State by default from 15
      January 2019.

Background and Procedural History

   2. The applicants are nationals of Afghanistan. They are now aged 16  and
      18. The applicants were orphaned by early 2014  and  left  Afghanistan
      around three years ago with their  elder  sister  who  abandoned  them
      during their journey. The applicants arrived  in  France  in  December
      2017. Thereafter they approached  the  Red  Cross  stating  that  they
      wished to reunite with their brother NF in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      applicants came under the care of French social  services  in  January
      2018.


   3. It is accepted that NF is  the  applicants'  older  brother.  NF  left
      Afghanistan in the year 2001 and was recognised as a  refugee  in  the
      United Kingdom in the year 2002. He became a British Citizen in  2008.
      He is married to SF and they have three children of their own.

   4. The applicants' asylum claim was registered by the French  authorities
      on 8 November 2018.  France made a 'Take Charge  Request'  ("TCR")  in
      respect of each applicant to the UK under Art 8(1) of the  Dublin  III
      Regulation on 15 November 2018.  At this  point  the  applicants  were
      aged 17 and 15.


   5. On 28 January 2019 the respondent rejected the TCR in relation to FwF.
       The respondent was not satisfied that NF  was  FwF's  brother  as  he
      claimed. A decision was made to reject the TCR  in  respect  of  FrF's
      claim, but this decision was not communicated.


   6. On 1 March 2019, a pre-action protocol letter was sent by Bhatt Murphy
      Solicitors in which it  was  argued  that  the  respondent  had  acted
      unlawfully in several respects. There appears to have been no response
      to the said letter.


   7. On 8  March  2019  sent  the  Afghan  documents  relied  upon  by  the
      applicants to the FCO in Kabul for verification. On or around 23 March
      2019, the respondent asked the French authorities to send new TCRs.


   8. These proceedings  were  issued  on  21  March  2019  on  the  grounds
      summarised in [2]. An application for urgent consideration was granted
      the same day. The applicants sought various orders and declarations.


   9. The respondent received further TCRs relating to FwF  and  FrF  on  25
      March 2019.


  10. On 29 March 2019, the respondent filed an  Acknowledgment  of  Service
      and Summary Grounds of Defence.








  11. Permission was granted on the papers on 4 April 2019 by Upper Tribunal
      Judge Allen on the following basis.


        "The grounds of  challenge  identify  arguable  challenges  to  the
        failure on the part of the Respondent to  accept  the  Take  Charge
        Requests/give reasons for the refusal. All  three  grounds  may  be
        argued. For the reasons set out in the Reply,  I  accept  that  the
        claim cannot properly be regarded as being academic."

  12. On 8 May 2019, the respondent filed Detailed Grounds of  Defence.   On
      22  May  2019,  the  respondent  confirmed  that   it   accepted   the
      relationship between the applicants and NF.


  13. On 3 June 2019, the respondents informed the French  authorities  that
      the TCRs were accepted. The Secretary of State subsequently  wrote  to
      Bhatt Murphy Solicitors to state that he  considered  the  applicants'
      Dublin III claim to be academic and  inviting  them  to  withdraw  the
      claim. An attached skeleton argument explained that  the  respondent's
      view was that part of the second ground was the subject of argument in
      R (FA  (a  child  by  her  Litigation  Friend  HA)  and  HA)  v  SSHD,
      JR/5523/2018; R (TT (a child by her Litigation Friend ST)  and  ST)  v
      SSHD, JR/5405/2018 and R (AT (a child by her Litigation Friend OT))  v
      SSHD, JR/5406/2018 (hereinafter referred to as FA &  Others)  and  the
      remaining grounds had been overtaken by events.


  14. In a decision sent on 7 June 2019, I gave permission to the applicants
      to rely on further evidence which was filed on 30 May 2019 and sent in
      reply to evidence relied upon by the respondent.


  15. On 10 June 2019, counsel for the applicants forwarded a  note  on  the
      scope of  the  substantive  hearing,  which  robustly  challenged  the
      respondent's attempt to dismiss the claim as academic or  to  restrict
      the scope of the claim owing to the issues before the  Upper  Tribunal
      in FA & Others. Reference was made to four similar cases  before  this
      Tribunal in which permission had been granted in circumstances where a
      TCR had been accepted and where  the  respondent's  attempts  to  seek
      stays had been unsuccessful.


Relevant Legal Framework


The Dublin III Regulation

  16. Article 8(1) which provides:


      "Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor, the Member State
      responsible shall be that where a family member or a sibling of the
      unaccompanied minor is legally present, provided that it is in the
      best interests of the minor..."


  17. Article 21 provides, materially, as follows:


      "Submitting a take-charge request
      Where a Member State with which an application for international
      protection has been lodged considers that another Member State is
      responsible for examining the application, it may, as quickly as
      possible and in any event within three months of the date on which the
      application was lodged within the meaning of Article 20(2), request
      that other Member State to take charge of the Applicant."

  18. Article 22 of Dublin III provides, materially, that:


      "Replying to a take charge request
      1.The requested Member State shall make the necessary checks, and
      shall give a decision on the request to take charge of an applicant
      within two months of receipt of the request.


      6. Where the requesting Member State has pleaded urgency in accordance
      with the provisions of Article 21(2), the requested Member State shall
      make every effort to comply with the time limit requested. In
      exceptional cases, where it can be demonstrated that the examination
      of a request for taking charge of an applicant is particularly
      complex, the requested Member State may give its reply after the time
      limit requested, but in any event within one month. In such situations
      the requested Member State must communicate its decision to postpone a
      reply to the requesting Member State within the time limit originally
      requested.

      7. Failure to act within the two-month period mentioned in paragraph 1
      and the one month period mentioned in paragraph 6 shall be tantamount
      to accepting the request, and entail the obligation to take charge of
      the person, including the obligation to provide for proper
      arrangements for arrival."

  19. Article 29(1) provides.

      "Modalities and time limits
      The transfer of the applicant or of another person as referred to in
      Article 18(1)(c) or (d) from the requesting Member State to the Member
      State responsible shall be carried out in accordance with the national
      law of the requesting Member State, after consultation between the
      Member States concerned, as soon as practically possible, and at the
      latest within six months of acceptance of the request by another
      Member State to take charge or to take back the person concerned or of
      the final decision on an appeal or review where there is a suspensive
      effect in accordance with Article 27(3)."


Implementing Regulation

  20. Regulation (EC) No. 1560/2003 ("the Implementing Regulation") was
      enacted so as to enable Regulation (EC) No. 343/2003 (the Dublin II
      Regulation) to be applied (see Recital (9)).

  21. Article 5 of the Implementing Regulation provides:


      "1. Where, after checks are carried out, the requested Member State
      considers that the evidence submitted does not establish its
      responsibility, the negative reply it sends to the requesting Member
      State shall state full and detailed reasons for refusal.
      2. Where the requesting Member State feels that such a refusal is
      based on a misappraisal, or where it has additional evidence to put
      forward, it may ask for its request to be re-examined. This option
      must be exercised within three weeks following receipt of the negative
      reply. The requested Member State shall endeavour to reply within two
      weeks [...]"





  22. Article 12(2) of the Implementing Regulation states that:


      "2. The fact that the duration of procedures for placing a minor may
      lead to a failure to observe the time limits set in Article 18(1) and
      (6) and Article 19(4) of Regulation (EC) No 343/2003 shall not
      necessarily be an obstacle to continuing the procedure for determining
      the Member State responsible or carrying out a transfer."


Sandhurst Treaty

   23. Article 2 (5) makes the following provisions in respect of UAMs:

      a) Where the United Kingdom receives a TCR from France  under  Article
      8(1) or 8(2) of   [Dublin III], the United  Kingdom  shall  provide  a
      decision on the TCR to France within 10 working days of the conclusion
      of engagement with the relevant United Kingdom local  authority;  and,
      where France request an urgent reply in such cases, the United Kingdom
      shall endeavour to provide a decision in a shorter time.

      b)  Where  either  party  accepts  responsibility  for  examining   an
      application for international protection under Article 8(1) or 8(2) of
      [Dublin III], the party where the unaccompanied minor has  lodged  the
      application for international protection shall  aim  to  transfer  the
      unaccompanied minor to the other party within 15 working days.




Home Office Policy on Dublin III Regulation Version 1.0 (2 November 2017)  -
page 38 of 46

   24. Unaccompanied children: notifying local  authorities  and  or  social
       services

        "You must  ensure  that  both  local  authority  children's  social
        services at the child's point of entry and where the child's family
        member, sibling or relative reside are  notified  of  the  transfer
        request under the Dublin III Regulation. This must be done as  soon
        as possible after the formal request to  take  charge  is  received
        from the requesting State."

        "You must engage the  local  authorities'  children's  social  care
        teams throughout the process, seeking their advice in every case."

The hearing


   25. In advance of the hearing, two files of pleadings and  evidence  were
       provided along with two files of relevant authorities.


   26. Counsel for both parties provided  detailed  skeleton  arguments  and
       oral submissions.



The applicants' case


   27.  The basis of the applicants' legal  challenge  is  set  out  in  the
       grounds of claim and in counsels' written and oral submissions.




   28.   In relation to ground 3, Ms Kilroy objected to a  new  issue  being
       raised in the respondent's skeleton argument, that issue  being  that
       there  was  no  family  life  between  the  applicants  and  NF.  She
       summarised a number of authorities which supported the  existence  of
       family life between family  members,  particularly  involving  minors
       where there had been a long separation. Ultimately, I decided that  I
       would not consider this issue because it was not properly pleaded  by
       the respondent and no application had been made to amend the  DGD.  I
       therefore did not invite Ms Kilroy's  detailed  submissions  on  this
       aspect.

   29.  The core of the claim in relation to the second ground, based on  Ms
       Kilroy's submissions can be summarised as follows.


   30.  Regarding what were termed the Secretary of State's key failures, Ms
       Kilroy  identified  a  series  of  issues  which  differed  to  those
       affecting the claimants in FA and others. These were:


        i. The inertia of the EIU on receipt of the TCR and the failure  to
           consider it until after the deadline passed;
       ii. The unlawful refusal  of  the  TCR  in  FwF's  case  because  by
           operation  of  Article   22(7),   the   UK   was   automatically
           responsible;
      iii.  The  failure  to  investigate  the  relationship  between   the
           applicants and NF properly  or  in  line  within  his  published
           policy;
       iv. The failure to consider the admission of the applicants for  DNA
           testing in circumstances where the UK was already responsible;
        v. The failure to respond at all to the TCR in FrF's case;
       vi. There was an unlawful failure to reconsider the rejections  when
           new material was presented;
      vii. The failure to refer to the relevant local authority (LA);
     viii. The insistence of verifying documents provided with the  FCO  in
           Kabul which wasted 3 months with no verification occurring.

   31.   In addressing the respondent's  argument  that  these  claims  were
       academic, Ms Kilroy explained that  the  applicants'  claim  differed
       from that of the claimants in FA and others. In the applicants'  case
       there was no contact with the LA by the EIU, no holding letters  were
       sent to the transferring state prior  to  the  2-month  deadline  for
       response, no attempt at placement of the applicants and there  was  a
       refusal of the TCR request in FwF's case.






   32.   Regarding the respondent's reliance on Article 12(2), she described
       this as a red herring because it was not the duration  of  placements
       which caused the delay  here  but  inactivity  on  the  part  of  the
       Secretary of State. As France was not informed  that  more  time  was
       needed, responsibility for the applicants passed to the UK. Ms Kilroy
       acknowledged the justification for invoking Article  12(2)  given  in
       the Detailed Grounds of Defence (DGD) was to ensure  that  NF  was  a
       relative and not a trafficker, however this was not why the  TCR  was
       refused.


   33.   Ms Kilroy argued that the Sandhurst Treaty had  no  application  as
       there was no engagement by the respondent with the LA. She  contended
       that the only thing  in  common  between  FA  and  others  and  these
       applications was that the respondent's unlawful conduct caused delay.






   34.   It was argued that the Secretary of State had not explained why  he
       would be permitted to send letters after the deadline to reverse  the
       effect of Article 22(7);  why would Article 12(2) permit him to  take
       an unlawful approach in breach of R(MS) v SSHD (Dublin III;  duty  to
       investigate)[2019] UKUT 00009 and  arguably  there  was  a  different
       burden if responsibility had already passed. Neither 12(2) nor  22(7)
       were mentioned in any  correspondence.  There  was  no  evidence  the
       respondent tried to pass responsibility back to France and there  was
       no proper defence to this claim.


   35.    Ms Kilroy emphasised that the relevant TCR was the first  one  and
       that the timescales for each  stage  of  the  process  could  not  be
       amalgamated into one.  She relied upon Ghezelbash [2016] 1 WLR  2961,
       as the authority that Dublin III could be  enforced  by  individuals.
       Mengesteab v Bundesrepublik Deutschland [2018] 1  WLR  865  was,  she
       argued, the authority for the right to  bring  challenges  after  the
       expiry of time limits and in this case the UK  argued  unsuccessfully
       against that. At [59] of  Mengesteab  it  was  held  that  timescales
       cannot be derogated amongst member states.  An approach confirmed  by
       Shiri [2018] 2 CMLR 3.

   36.   Ms Kilroy briefly mentioned X & X v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid
       en Justitie [2018] 3 CMLR 20, as authority for the proposition that a
       holding response could not be sent. She argued  that  the  timescales
       for children should be shorter and those timescales  were  longstops,
       with reference to [84] of SSHD v ZT Syria  [2016]  1  WLR  4894,   MA
       (Eritrea) v SSHD (ECJ) [2013] 1  WLR  2961  at  [55-61]  as  well  as
       Article 24 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union
       (CFR).


   37.   Turning her attention to the Implementing Regulation No  1560/2003,
       Ms Kilroy relied on Article 3(2) which she argued was the key  source
       of  the  duty  of  investigation,  as  well  as  Article  5(1)  which
       stipulated that detailed reasons for refusal were required.


   38.   Ms Kilroy addressed the respondent's reliance on Article  12(2)  in
       some detail. She argued that it did not  say  anything  about  delays
       being lawful, rather that delays were not necessarily an obstacle  to
       determining responsibility. This provision was relevant as to where a
       child was placed, which was not the case here because the  respondent
       had initially decided there was  no  family  link.  Furthermore,  she
       argued that there was  no  provision  for  reversing  the  effect  of
       Article 22(7)  of  Dublin  III.  Finally,  this  provision  was  only
       intended  to  protect  the  child's  best  interests  where  strictly
       necessary, MA (Eritrea) considered.

   39.   Ms Kilroy argued that the delays in this  case  were  not  strictly
       necessary and contended that  the  TCRs  were  overlooked  until  the
       caseworker was reminded by a liaison officer in France that there had
       been no response. She submitted that there was nothing in 12(2) which
       amounted to a licence for a member state to  fail  to  act  promptly.
       That  clear  timescales  applied  was   clear   from   the   updating
       Implementing Regulation No 118/2014, where  it  was  emphasised  that
       investigating family links had to be done within  the  deadlines.  Ms
       Kilroy argued that there was nothing to indicate  that  if  a  member
       state exceeded the deadlines, it could rely on 12(2) as a "get out of
       jail free card." In essence, Article 12(2) did not apply and it could
       not be said  that  procedures  for  placing  the  minors  caused  the
       extension of time. Further,  it  was  not  in  the  applicants'  best
       interests for the UK not to accept the TCRs.












   40.   Addressing the respondent's argument that automatic  responsibility
       had passed to the UK after two months but that the  respondent  could
       carry on considering the question of responsibility with  a  view  to
       rejecting it, Ms Kilroy argued that there was nothing to say a member
       state could unlawfully reject TCRs after the time limit  had  passed.
       At this point Ms Kilroy handed me a table of delays in this case  and
       took me to the GCID records for FwF. Briefly, there was  no  activity
       for nearly a month after the TCR was received on 15 November 2018. On
       12 December 2018 NF's file was retrieved. Thereafter  an  undertaking
       form was sent to NF on 12 December 2018, following which there was no
       further activity until the respondent's French liaison officer chased
       the matter on 24 January 2019. The case was reallocated on 25 January
       2019 and the refusal of the TCR followed on 28 January 2019.


   41.   Ms Kilroy asked me to note that there was  no  mention  of  Article
       12(2) in the GCID notes or elsewhere. She argued that  it  was  clear
       that the TCR was rejected in a panic. There was no attempt to contact
       NF to see if he had more evidence. For completeness, the GCID records
       regarding FrF were similar but for the fact that the  TCR  was  never
       rejected.


   42.   Ms Kilroy's submissions turned to whether the  decision  to  refuse
       the TCRs was lawful in  any  event.  She  argued  that  even  if  the
       respondent was entitled to rely on Article 12(2),  the  decision  was
       still unlawful because he did not comply with MS and R  (MK,  IK  and
       HK) v SSHD [2016] UKUT 231. She contended that in a one-day period of
       decision making, there had been a failure to assess  the  applicants'
       best  interests,  cursory  steps  were  taken  to  investigate  their
       relationship to NF, they had failed to contact the  local  authority,
       failed to put the lack of  evidence  to  the  applicants,  failed  to
       consider DNA testing (in breach of MS/MK, IK) and failed to  consider
       the evidence of the relationship which they had.  She added that when
       NF realised there was an issue with evidence,  he  swiftly  rectified
       this by  sending  a  large  quantity  of  material  relating  to  the
       relationship to the EIU on 12 February 2019. According  to  the  GCID
       records, there was no activity on receipt of  this  material  and  NF
       called the EIU twice to chase the matter. Ms Kilroy  stated  that  it
       was only once the applicants' Pre-Action Protocol letter was received
       on 4 March 2019 that the respondent elected to send the documents  to
       the FCO in Kabul, which  led  to  further  delay  and  eventually  an
       acceptance  of  the  relationship  based  on  that  material  without
       verification.

   43.   Ms Kilroy  took  me  to  Annex  II  to  the  updating  Implementing
       Regulation where in List A it is stated that if there is no probative
       evidence  of  the  relationship,  DNA  or  a  blood  test  should  be
       considered, which  was  a  recognition  that  proof  was  not  always
       available. She argued  that  the  respondent  had  an  obligation  to
       investigate  with  reference  to  the  headnote  in  MK,   IK   whose
       conclusions were  reinforced  in  MS.  The  duty  was  that  of  best
       endeavours.


   44.   Referring to the respondent's GCID notes, Ms  Kilroy  asked  me  to
       note that there had been no mention of consideration of admission  of
       the applicants for DNA testing. She clarified that she was relying on
       a duty to consider admitting as opposed to a duty to admit.

   45.   Ms Kilroy argued that the  respondent  had  a  continuing  duty  to
       investigate and that he ought to have told  NF  that  the  TCRs  were
       going to be refused unless he sent further  information.  She  stated
       that that one telephone call would have  prompted  all  the  material
       that NF provided and that when it arrived, the  respondent  ought  to
       have considered it. With reference to MS where DNA evidence  was  not
       considered until after the decisions made, Ms Kilroy argued  that  it
       was unlawful for the respondent not to consider it before or to admit
       the applicants for the purpose of testing.




   46.   On the basis that not all the documents had been passed to  the  UK
       by France, Ms Kilroy contended that the applicants had provided  more
       than enough information to conclude they were likely to  be  related.
       She also made the following points. Regarding the  undertaking  form,
       NF had been given a tight deadline to complete this while  having  no
       legal representatives.  He provided no additional evidence because of
       his erroneous belief that France had forwarded all  the  evidence  he
       provided previously. The  respondent  then  did  nothing.  Ms  Kilroy
       argued that if there is a requirement to  send  additional  evidence,
       the Secretary of State must contact an individual to ask for more. NF
       had been given no guidance as  to  what  more  was  required  and  he
       believed that all the material had already been provided. She  argued
       that by the Secretary of State rejecting the TCR the implication  was
       that NF was lying and this ought to have been  put  to  him.  In  any
       event, even when NF voluntarily provided more evidence,  it  was  not
       considered. Additionally, in FrF's case no rejection of the  TCR  was
       sent  to  France  and  no  explanation  had  been  provided  for  not
       considering it.


   47.   Ms Kilroy argued that the respondent's failure to  engage  with  LA
       was a different issue to that in FA, where the Secretary of State had
       made a positive decision  on  family  link  and  was  awaiting  a  LA
       assessment. In the applicants' case, the assessment was  prompted  by
       NF and the LA was able to provide useful information about the family
       link after visiting NF and his family.  Ms  Kilroy  referred  to  the
       respondent's "blanket policy" of never contacting  the  LA  unless  a
       positive family link was made which was a breach of the Secretary  of
       State's Dublin III Regulation guidance.


   48.   With reference to aspects of the policy, Ms Kilroy asked me to note
       that the decisions of the EIU were informed by the LA assessment. She
       argued that this policy was discussed with  LA  representatives,  the
       respondent's policy team and the EIU before being drawn up.  Evidence
       disclosed during the hearing in FA and others and which was  produced
       for this claim, confirmed that the policy  team  were  aware  of  the
       importance of the LA in assessing the family link.  In  summary  that
       evidence showed the EIU previously told the policy team that  it  was
       not their practice to request a  LA  assessment  until  the  positive
       family link had been established, however the advice to the  minister
       was that the LA should be contacted in every case. Ms  Kilroy  argued
       that for the respondent not to comply with policy had the  effect  of
       depriving the Secretary of State of highly  relevant  information  on
       the family link. In the applicants' case, the LA had no hesitation in
       assessing the family link, at the applicants' request, and provided a
       report in 17 days.

   49.   In relation to the impact on the applicants of the stated failures,
       Ms Kilroy took me to the evidence of the damage which she argued  was
       caused by the delay  and  the  refusal  of  the  TCR.  That  evidence
       included psychiatric assessments of the applicants which included the
       effect on the applicants caused by their separation in France because
       the delay had led to FwF coming of age.  Separation was not the  sole
       source of trauma. The applicants  were  extremely  vulnerable  and  a
       swift reunification was required.


   50.    Ms  Kilroy  submitted  that  the  respondent's  delay   caused   a
       deterioration in the applicants' respective mental states  which  led
       to risks of suicide and damage. She advised me that  the  day  before
       the respondent rejected the TCRs, he had been informed by UNHCR of  a
       group of  children  who  had  self-harmed  and  were  suicidal  while
       awaiting reunification.


   51.   On the question of damages, Ms Kilroy confirmed that this would  be
       addressed in written submissions, if necessary,  after  judgment  had
       been reached.


   52.   Ms Kilroy confirmed that she still relied on Ground 1 but  did  not
       wish to supplement the submissions set out in her skeleton argument.


   53.   In concluding, Ms Kilroy submitted that the respondent's  decision-
       making was clearly  unlawful  and  interfered  with  the  applicants'
       family life. The applicants had  still  not  arrived  in  the  United
       Kingdom and no date had been given for their transfer from France.




The Respondent's case


   54.  The respondent's case is set out in the Detailed Grounds of  Defence
       and in Mr Dunlop's amended skeleton argument  and  oral  submissions,
       summarised as follows.


   55.   Mr Dunlop did not pursue his objection to the additional  documents
       the applicants sought to have admitted, given that I  had  previously
       granted permission for these documents to be relied upon.


   56.   Regarding Ground one, Mr Dunlop was, like  Ms  Kilroy,  content  to
       rely on his skeleton argument.


   57.   Mr Dunlop's principal argument was that the applicants' claims were
       academic. He submitted that if  it  was  right  that  the  UK  became
       responsible for the applicants on 15 January 2019 (rather than 3 June
       2019 when the Secretary of State wrote to accept responsibility)  the
       period of 6 months referred to in Article 29(1) of Dublin III had yet
       to expire and thus there was no  breach  of  EU  law  or  Article  8.
       Relying on [30] of his skeleton argument, Mr Dunlop expanded  on  the
       principles involved. He particularly relied on what was said in  R  v
       SSHD Ex p. Salem [1999] 1 AC 450 at [457] regarding a good reason  in
       the public interest being required, which also  applied  to  judicial
       review hearings, applying R v SSHD ex P Goloshvili  [2019]  EWHC  614
       (Admin).

   58.   Addressing the argument that  permission  was  granted,  Mr  Dunlop
       argued  that  this  was  not  determinative  in  that  the  grant  of
       permission merely decided  whether  the  grounds  were  arguable.  Mr
       Dunlop submitted that the Tribunal should not grant remedies in  vain
       and resources should not be used for academic cases. He  acknowledged
       that this application raised issues  of  importance  but  that  these
       points were to be determined elsewhere in FA and others. He expressed
       concern regarding the potential for a difference in approach  by  the
       Tribunal.

   59.   Regarding the third ground, Mr Dunlop accepted that  there  was  no
       contention in the DGD that there  was  no  family  life  between  the
       applicants and NF but nor was there an express  admission  of  family
       life. Ultimately, he argued that the onus was on  the  applicants  to
       demonstrate a breach of Article 8.  He argued that if family life was
       presumed, there would be no breach because  the  delay  was  far  too
       short to amount to a breach of Article 8.


   60.   Mr Dunlop submitted that the first TCR was  made  less  than  seven
       months ago, if the French authorities complied with Sandhurst Treaty,
       15 working days from 3 June would be 24 June 2019 and  there  was  no
       reason to think the applicants would not be  transferred.  He  argued
       that even if all those seven months were the UK's fault  there  would
       be no breach. Some of the delay was inevitable  because  NF  did  not
       submit all the documents.


   61.   Referring to Askar v UK App. No 26373/95, Mr Dunlop submitted  that
       that judgment was handed down five years  after  an  application  for
       family reunion was made; that  application  was  seen  as  manifestly
       unfounded and the delay did not prejudice the final determination. In
       the applicants' case, the sponsor had not lived with them before, but
       this did not prejudice the outcome.  Referring to R(Mambakasa) v SSHD
       [2003] EWHC 319 (Admin), which he asked me to note was upheld by  the
       Court of Appeal in Anufrijeva v Southwark LBC [2004] QB 1124  it  had
       taken six months to get confirmation of  refugee  status,  while  the
       delay was found to be unreasonable under common  law,  there  was  no
       breach of Article 8 found. He contended that Ms Kilroy's  submissions
       on administrative failings did not demonstrate a breach of Article 8.



   62.   Mr Dunlop repeated  the  submissions  on  family  life  which  were
       included in his skeleton argument but were not pleaded previously.  I
       have  not  summarised  these  arguments  because  this  point   never
       previously formed part of the respondent's case.


   63.   Mr Dunlop addressed the Dublin III time limits,  stating  that  the
       overall time limit of eleven months had not been breached and thus it
       was hard to see how it could be a breach of Article 8.  The  decision
       in A and S v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid  en  Justitie  [2018]  3
       CMLR 20 amounted to recognition that  the  11-month  time  limit  was
       often exceeded. He submitted that the seven-month delay was  not  all
       the fault of the UK because somewhere along the way NF's evidence was
       not produced  to  the  Secretary  of  State.  That  missing  evidence
       included the names of the parents of NF and the applicants, which  NF
       had recognised and provided later.  Also missing was a signature from
       the applicants showing they consented to the TCR.  Their  letters  to
       that effect were not sent to the Secretary of State and the  evidence
       which was provided did not prove a family link.  The respondent wrote
       to NF inviting him to provide evidence to prove the relationship.  It
       was not in dispute that NF  did  not  send  any  further  information
       because he reasonably and  wrongly  believed  all  the  evidence  had
       already been sent. The Secretary of State should not  be  blamed  for
       this. It was only in February, three months after the  TCR  that  all
       the information was provided.  Any delay was well short of  the  time
       needed to result in a breach of Article 8. He indicated that he would
       leave the issue of damages until after a decision had been reached on
       whether there was a breach.


   64.   Mr Dunlop responded directly to Ms Kilroy's  submissions  regarding
       the respondent's conduct. He  emphasised  that  Ms  Kilroy  had  said
       little about the first ground.

   65.   As for ground two, Mr  Dunlop  argued  that  The  Sandhurst  Treaty
       procedure required a departure from  the  2-month  time  limit  under
       Article 22(7) of Dublin III where the best  interests  of  the  child
       were in issue. He further argued that  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
       deemed responsible until ten days after the conclusion of  engagement
       with the relevant local authority. He submitted that it would not  be
       right for there to be no exceptions and  that  the  receiving  member
       state should  respond  within  two  months  regardless  of  the  best
       interests of the child, for example in a case where the TCR was  made
       without the child's consent.


   66.   Mr Dunlop contended that the proper interpretation was to say  even
       if the two-month limit had passed, a member state should continue  to
       consider whether it is in the best interests  for  the  child  to  be
       transferred and this is what happened here.






   67.   Returning to the Sandhurst Treaty, Mr Dunlop  emphasised  that  the
       time limits start after conclusion of engagement with the LA  because
       the best interests have to be determined first. He  argued  that  the
       only conclusion was that the UK became responsible for the applicants
       on 15 January 2019 not 3 June 2019 as an automatic consequence of the
       lack of response.

   68.   Referring to Mengesteab v Bundesrepublik Deutschland [2018]  1  WLR
       865, where there had been a delay in asking  a  previous  country  to
       take charge, there had been no need for any  further  correspondence,
       as well as Shiri [2018] 2 CMLR 3  where a delay of six months of  the
       other country taking the person back led to an automatic transfer  of
       responsibility.  Applying  this  here,  the  United  Kingdom   became
       responsible on 15 January 2019, but this did not  mean  there  was  a
       breach. The sanction was an automatic transfer of responsibility  and
       in any event, there is no breach of Article 29 where the transfer  is
       within 6 months.

   69.   In relation to the other  points  made  by  Ms  Kilroy,  Mr  Dunlop
       categorised them  as  common  law  points  which  would  not  attract
       damages. Regarding the refusal of  the  TCRs,  all  the  UK  had  was
       identity documents in same surname and a letter from NF  and  it  was
       not unreasonable to conclude that this was not enough without  signed
       consent from applicants.  The  respondent  needed  to  rule  out  the
       possibility of trafficking.   The  evidence  of  Ms  Farnham  in  her
       witness statement of 29 January 2019 was that this was all  that  was
       received by the Secretary of State, however there was  no  reason  to
       dispute NF's claim that he sent more  evidence.  Nonetheless  it  was
       reasonable for the Secretary of State not to accept the family link.


   70.   As for the submission that the respondent  ought  to  have  sent  a
       minded to refuse letter to NF, Mr Dunlop argued that  this  would  be
       too much of an administrative burden and that the  letter to NF  made
       it clear and obvious that he needed to provide supportive evidence of
       the relationship. There was no need for further notice for common law
       fairness


   71.   On the issue of engagement with the LA, advice was sought from  the
       LA in this case, but not at the start of the process.  There  was  no
       absolute requirement to follow published policy. The reason  for  not
       doing so was that the caseworker did not want to tax the LA where the
       family link was not accepted which was a good reason.


   72.   As for DNA testing, it did not follow it was needed in every  case.
       In this case there was no evidence of a family link at first but when
       further evidence came to light it was  considered  and  accepted  and
       there was therefore no  need  to  consider  DNA.  He  asked  where  a
       declaration would take these applicants.

Applicants' reply

   73.   Ms Kilroy  argued  that  the  respondent's  academic  argument  had
       undergone a metamorphosis. Today, the respondent was arguing that the
       delay would have made no  difference,  the  defence  run  in  FA  and
       others, in that Article 8 is separate to  the  Dublin  III  breaches,
       relying on the eleven-month overall timescale.  By  contrast  in  the
       skeleton argument it was effectively accepted by the respondent  that
       findings on Dublin III were required in order to decide if there  had
       been a breach of Article 8. Ms Kilroy asked me to note that there was
       no reliance on the eleven-month argument previously. She disputed  Mr
       Dunlop's contention that this case raised only  common  law  fairness
       issues, stating that there were mixed issues of Dublin III, Article 8
       and common law fairness.  In FA  and  others,  the  issues  had  been
       different as the family link was accepted.
   74.   Regarding the case law on Article  8,  Ms  Kilroy  emphasised  that
       Mambakasa said the question was whether the delay was so  extreme  as
       to  constitute  an  interference  with  their   Article   8   rights.
       Addressing the respondent's submissions on Askar she argued that  the
       issue was whether delay alone sufficed where there was no  prejudice.
       At [107] of Askar an issue of  resources  was  raised,  which  was  a
       defence in FA and others. At the time of the  TCRs  being  issued  in
       November 2018 this was no longer an issue as more resources had  been
       provided to the EIU.  The key issue in  this  case  was  not  whether
       there  was  interference,  which  there   was   because   denial   of
       reunification under Dublin III amounts to an interference with family
       life, but  whether  it  was  proportionate.  She  stressed  that  the
       applicants' argument did not only concern  delay  but  also  unlawful
       actions, inaction, breach of  guidance,  breach  of  the  Dublin  III
       timescales,  unlawful  decision  making  which  led  to  an  unlawful
       decision.

   75.   Ms Kilroy  argued  that  the  respondent's  submissions  raised  no
       defence to the Secretary of State's  conduct  and  described  Article
       12(2) as a blanket permission to extend the timescale. This could not
       be right because it would  not  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
       children to  have  permission  for  a  member  state  to  extend  the
       timescale  because  they  forgot  about  the  case.   That   was   in
       contravention of X & X.

   76.   Regarding the Sandhurst Treaty, while Mr Dunlop said this  provided
       justification, he had not addressed the preamble  which  stated  that
       there was nothing in the Articles which  alter  the  requirements  to
       comply strictly with timescales or to act in the  best  interests  of
       the child. There was no blanket extension of  Article  22(7)  and  no
       wording to that effect. The time for accepting a  TCR  runs  from  10
       days from engagement with the LA and did not mean timescales could be
       extended.

   77.   Ms Kilroy  argued  that  Mr  Dunlop's  argument  that  the  various
       failures made no difference because the six-month period ran from  15
       January 2019 was the wrong way of looking at it.   The  position  was
       that France should carry out the transfer as  soon  as  possible  and
       within six months. Owing to the Sandhurst Treaty, the deadline was 15
       days, that being around the end of January or early February 2019.


   78.   With reference to R (Citizens UK) v  SSHD  [2018]  4  WLR  123,  Ms
       Kilroy argued that the decision had been unlawful. NF could not  have
       known what evidence of  the  family  link  the  respondent  had.  The
       Secretary of State could have listed what evidence they had and there
       was no guidance generally or on  the  facts  as  to  what  additional
       evidence was required. With reference to [39] of MK, IK as well as MS
       there was also a duty to investigate rather than to simply sit back.


   79.   Ms Kilroy argued that Mr Dunlop was wrong  to  state  that  the  LA
       issue in relation to the policy guidance was dealt  with  in  FA  and
       others. She submitted, with reference to MS and MK, IK  that  in  the
       Secretary of State not asking the LA for their  view  on  the  family
       before rejecting the TCRs, he had carried out an unlawful practice.

   80.   On the DNA evidence point, Ms Kilroy argued that if undertaken this
       could have resulted in the family link being  accepted  much  earlier
       than the week prior to the hearing. The respondent could have decided
       to admit the applicants months ago and do DNA rather than waiting for
       documents to be verified in Kabul. The delay was  not  in  accordance
       with the law and not proportionate.


   81.   Responding to Mr Dunlop's argument that there was no proof provided
       to the respondent to establish a family link, Ms Kilroy  argued  that
       sufficient evidence was provided or at least enough to trigger a need
       to investigate rather than to refuse the TCRs.

   82.   Lastly, Ms Kilroy relied on TP & KM v United Kingdom (2002) 34 EHHR
       2 at [83] where a procedural breach involving a  failure  to  respect
       family life and breach of Article 8 was found to result in a loss  of
       the opportunity of being together as well as stress and anxiety.  The
       substantive breach  in  the  applicants'  case  was  the  failure  to
       reunify.


Discussion

   83.   Mr Dunlop resurrected the argument made earlier that this claim was
       academic. The permission decision addressed this point and considered
       it arguable that the claims were not academic. The fact that the TCRs
       were accepted shortly before the substantive hearing of  this  matter
       does not render the applicants' arguments academic. Furthermore,  the
       matters raised in the second ground, as to whether  the  interference
       with the applicants' family life was in accordance with the  law  and
       proportionate, are relevant to the claim for declarations and damages
       under EU law and the Human Rights Act 1998. Indeed, the  respondent's
       DGD at [64] suggested that the focus at the substantive hearing be on
       the determination of the  substantive  issues,  with  damages  to  be
       decided separately.


   84. I will address the grounds in numerical order.


       Ground one


   85.   The first ground relates, partially, to  the  contention  that  the
       French authorities refused to provide any written material  emanating
       from the Secretary of State due to concerns that the UK wished France
       to withhold such material. Ms Kilroy elected not to expand  upon  the
       content of her skeleton argument on this issue. There was no evidence
       before me that the respondent is responsible for any apprehension  on
       the part of the French or  that  the  French  authorities  have  been
       misled. If the French authorities are acting  unlawfully,  then  this
       conduct ought to be challenged elsewhere. It is also  the  case  that
       the first ground refers to the respondent's failure to  disclose  the
       reason for the TCR refusal to the applicants. This  aspect  could  be
       incorporated into the complaints as to the  respondent's  conduct  in
       the second ground. This first ground is, therefore, not made out.

      Ground two


   86.   The Secretary of State's processing of the TCRs was unlawful and in
       breach of EU law, common law and Article 8  ECHR  for  the  following
       reasons.


   87.   The respondent was required to reach a decision in response to  the
       TCRs within the two- month time limit stipulated in Article 22(1)  of
       Dublin III and failed to do so.  As  a  result,  the  respondent  was
       obliged to take charge of the applicants under Article 22(7). Indeed,
       Mr Dunlop did not argue that the transfer of responsibility  did  not
       take place. Nor did the Secretary of State reach a  decision  on  the
       TCRs within a reasonable time.





   88.   The witness statement of Ms Farman does not explain or justify  the
       failure by the EIU to respond to the TCRs. There were  no  supporting
       witness statements provided  by  any  of  the  caseworkers  who  made
       entries on the GCID records which might explain the delays. There  is
       no indication on the face of those records  that  there  was  a  good
       reason for the delay. The picture painted by the GCID records  is  of
       no activity of any description taking place following the receipt  of
       the TCRs on 15 November 2018 and 9  December  2018.  The  first  GCID
       entry was made on 10 December 2018. The evidence shows that there was
       no attempt by the EIU to process the TCRs with any sense of  urgency.



   89.   The GCID records show that there was  a  little  activity  from  10
       December 2018, when initial administrative steps were taken to obtain
       NF's Home Office file and send him undertaking  forms.  The  dilatory
       approach continued after receipt of the file and forms,  where  there
       is no indication of any  decision  making  taken  place  until  after
       responsibility had automatically passed to the Secretary of State  on
       15 January 2019.

   90.   The respondent was prompted into  action  after  a  query  from  Ms
       Villanueva, the respondent's French-based Dublin III liaison  officer
       on  24  January  2019.  The  Secretary  of  State's  response  to  Ms
       Villanueva's query, contained in a letter dated 24 January 2019,  was
       that the EIU  were  still  "making  enquiries  and  conducting  safe-
       guarding checks." There is no evidence on the face of the GCID  notes
       or elsewhere that this was the case. There were no enquiries made  or
       safeguarding checks made subsequently, instead  an  almost  immediate
       decision was made to refuse both applicants on 25 January 2019,  with
       no evidence  of  thought  being  given  as  to  whether  any  further
       investigation was required. That there is a duty of investigation was
       established in MS and MK, IK.


   91.   Further failings include the unlawful refusal of FwF's  case  after
       responsibility had automatically passed to the  UK  by  operation  of
       Article 22(7), the lack of a formal response to the TCR in FrF's case
       and the respondent's failure to reconsider the rejections  after  the
       new material was received from NF.


   92.    The  respondent  relies  on  Article  12(2)  of  the  Implementing
       Regulation as well  as  Article  2(5)(a)  of  the  Sandhurst  Treaty,
       stating that the latter requires a departure from the  time-limit  in
       Article 22(7) of Dublin III and consequently the  UK  is  not  deemed
       responsible for minors until at least ten  working  days  after  "the
       conclusion of engagement with the relevant UK local authority."  This
       is not an attractive argument. The Sandhurst Treaty  enables  a  more
       rapid, simplified, process for the purpose  of  protecting  the  best
       interests of unaccompanied minors as opposed to enabling  the  UK  to
       evade the strict timescales of Dublin III. Furthermore,  Article  2.4
       of the Sandhurst Treaty states that Dublin III timescales apply  and,
       in any event, has no relevance to the  applicants'  case  because  no
       referral to the LA was ever made.

   93.   While Article 12(2) applies to the duration of procedures, in  that
       a failure to observe the time limits  shall  not  necessarily  be  an
       obstacle to determining the member state responsible, this  does  not
       assist the Secretary of State given the series of failings by the EIU
       which led to the delays in this case or the resulting damage  to  the
       mental health of the applicants. The purpose of Article 12(2)  is  to
       protect the best interests of the child and it is for the  respondent
       to demonstrate why it was in the best interests of the applicants  to
       exceed the timescales. That argument has not been made.



   94.   The evidence before the Secretary of State  sufficed  to  establish
       the family link in this case, even if not all the evidence sent by NF
       was provided by France with the TCRs. On that last point, it is still
       unclear what evidence  was  disclosed  by  France  or  what  of  NF's
       documents  were  not  included  with  the  TCRs.  The  evidence   the
       respondent considered included evidence of the identity of NF and his
       family as well as  evidence  from  Afghanistan  which  supported  the
       identities of the applicants. NF and the applicants  share  the  same
       family name. Given that there is no strict requirement  under  Dublin
       III for proof of a family link to be submitted  with  the  TCRs,  the
       respondent's decision to refuse the applications without carrying out
       any investigation or referring the case to the LA was unreasonable.


   95.   The respondent points to the fact that NF did not send the evidence
       which  he  had  already  provided  to  France  in  response  to   the
       respondent's letter. This is an unreasonable criticism given that  NF
       was unrepresented at this stage and  had  never  been  informed  what
       documents the French authorities had  included  with  the  TCRs.  The
       respondent could have simply informed NF that there was  insufficient
       proof of a family link on file, specified what evidence  was  on  the
       applicants' file or telephoned NF to discuss the  likely  outcome  on
       the evidence available. It is worth emphasising  that  there  was  no
       evidence  before  the  respondent  to   undermine   the   applicants'
       relationship to NF. Nonetheless, the respondent  had  an  alternative
       option available to him if he was dissatisfied with the  evidence  of
       family link, that of admitting the  applicants  to  the  UK  for  DNA
       testing, if this could not be achieved in France, in accordance  with
       MK/IK and MS. Had these alternatives been considered, the  respondent
       would have been bound to accept the TCRs  in  a  prompt  manner.  The
       respondent has  provided  no  explanation  as  to  why  DNA  was  not
       considered, nor is there any defence to  this  aspect  of  the  case.
       Consequently, the claim made  in  the  grounds  that  the  respondent
       failed to give the applicants and NF the opportunity  to  respond  to
       concerns and failed to consider  admitting  the  applicants  for  DNA
       testing amounts to procedural failings.


   96.   The respondent caused further delay in  taking  responsibility  for
       the applicants  by  requiring  further  verification  of  the  Afghan
       documents (Taskeras) from the  FCO  in  Kabul,  notwithstanding  that
       certified translations had been provided and there was no  reason  to
       doubt the family link. The request for verification  was  made  on  8
       March 2019, nearly two months after responsibility for the applicants
       had automatically passed to the UK. A disclosed email refers  to  the
       respondent being concerned that the documents  were  issued  recently
       and had been provided late. Both of those claims were inaccurate. The
       Afghan documents predated the applicants' departure from  Afghanistan
       and had already been provided to the French  authorities.   There  is
       nothing in any of the material provided which  indicates  that  there
       was ever any reasonable basis for doubting the family  link.  Indeed,
       the respondent's Dublin III Guidance refers  to  copies  of  Taskeras
       being  evidence  of  a  relationship,  without   verification   being
       required.

   97.   The respondent pursued the  verification  of  the  Taskeras  for  a
       further two months and until informed that there was no  prospect  of
       this taking place. By contrast,  admitting  the  applicants  for  DNA
       tests would have addressed the family link without the need for  such
       an unproductive delay.


   98.   The Secretary of State failed to engage with the LA in  this  case,
       in breach of his own policy. The said policy requires the  respondent
       to notify the local authority of  a  transfer  request  "as  soon  as
       possible" after the TCR is received, to  "engage  local  authorities'
       children's social care teams throughout the  process,  seeking  their
       advice in every case" and to take into account the  LA's   assessment
       in deciding whether to accept or reject a TCR.
   99.   The LA's assessment of a family link and the best  interests  of  a
       child ought  to  have  been  central  to  the  respondent's  duty  to
       investigate upon receipt of the TCRs, yet there was  no  referral  to
       the relevant LA in this case at any stage. The respondent's position,
       communicated in a letter from the GLD dated 26 April  2019  was  that
       the Secretary of State was taking his usual position and would  "only
       contact the local authority once the family link  is  established..."
       This practice of only contacting the local authority  if  a  positive
       assessment is made meant, in the applicants' case,  that  a  negative
       decision was made without any input  from  the  LA.  Ultimately,  the
       applicants' solicitors requested an assessment from the LA, which was
       obtained in a little over two weeks and provided strong  support  for
       family reunification. Had the respondent engaged with the LA from the
       outset as the policy requires, the assessment was likely to have been
       available within the two-month deadline and it is further likely that
       the TCRs would have been accepted.


  100. The respondent's breach of policy is not inadvertent in this case but
       a departure from his published policy. Not only  is  it  unlawful  on
       ordinary public law principles but the policy to involve  the  LA  in
       every case was expressly approved by the Minister notwithstanding the
       EIU evidence to the policy team about their  previous  practice.  The
       justification for the breach of policy set out in the DGD is that the
       policy did not envisage a request for an assessment. This is  plainly
       wrong, given that the policy requires the respondent to  engage  with
       the LA "throughout the process." It  would  be  nonsensical  for  the
       respondent to merely notify the LA of the TCR and then not to  follow
       this up with a request for an assessment of the family link and  best
       interests of  the  children.  The  respondent  also  raises  concerns
       regarding conserving the resources of the LA in cases where a  family
       link is not established, by way of an explanation for  not  referring
       all cases. There is no rational justification for this departure from
       the policy given the desire of  the  LAs  to  be  engaged  with  this
       process on receipt of the  TCRs  (as  stated  by  Ms  Farman  in  her
       statement dated 13 May 2019) and the willingness of the  relevant  LA
       in this case to conduct the assessment at the applicants' request. Mr
       Dunlop suggested that the policy and practice in question were  under
       review but referred to no evidence in support of that contention.  On
       the contrary, the relevant parts of the policy are unchanged  in  the
       most recent version published on 18 April 2019.


       Ground three


  101. Under Dublin III and the CFR, the  applicants  have  a  right  to  an
       effective remedy. In view of the above findings, it is the case  that
       their fundamental rights  have  been  breached  by  the  UK,  as  the
       responsible member state as of 15 January 2019.

  102. There were never any  safeguarding  concerns  raised  by  either  the
       French or UK social services regarding  the  applicants  and  in  any
       event the respondent belatedly accepted the  TCRs  on  3  June  2019.
       There have, in this case, been a series  of  breaches  of  Article  8
       ECHR/Article 7 CFR.


  103. The applicants and NF  are  siblings  and  notwithstanding  that  the
       applicants were born  in  Afghanistan  after  NF's  departure,  there
       exists a family life between them. The applicants  are  orphaned  and
       NF, as their adult sibling,  has  stepped  into  the  breach.  He  is
       willing and able to care for the  applicants,  has  visited  them  in
       France and provided them with financial and emotional  support.  Were
       it not for the respondent's failure to  act  promptly  at  all  times
       including in accepting the  TCRs,  the  applicants  would  have  been
       transferred to the UK far earlier and most likely  within  the  usual
       timescales of two months  for  a  decision  and  15  days  for  their
       transfer to the UK. The applicants had not arrived at the time of the
       hearing.
  104. The respondent's multiple breaches  of  Dublin  III  led  to  a  more
       prolonged delay to family reunion than was necessary. In addition  to
       being minors at the time of the TCRs, the applicants were  vulnerable
       as orphans, having been abandoned by  another  sibling  and  enduring
       difficult conditions during the two years  or  more  between  leaving
       Afghanistan and arriving in France. The unchallenged medical evidence
       is that the applicants suffer from complex PTSD and FwF  additionally
       suffers from Major Depressive Disorder. The psychiatric report refers
       to the effect of the delay and uncertainty on the applicants'  mental
       health which include distress, risks of self-harm and suicide and  to
       cause them to lose  trust  in  NF.  Indeed,  FrF  expressed  suicidal
       ideation and refused to eat for days after learning of the refusal of
       the TCRs.

  105. It is apparent from the substantial quantity of  documents  disclosed
       in FA and Others, that the Secretary of  State  was  advised  of  the
       serious  risks  caused  by  delays  in  progressing  the   cases   of
       unaccompanied  minors  but  failed  to  prioritise  the   applicants'
       welfare, instead causing delay in the manner set out in the preceding
       paragraphs.  An email to the Secretary of State on 24  January  2019,
       refers to the French government receiving "very problematic news from
       UNHCR concerning minor cases with the UK. We have serious fears about
       the mental and physical health  of  these  minors....  Due  to  these
       excessive delays, their mental state has deteriorated considerably; a
       child tried to kill himself last weekend and  others  are  on  hunger
       strike."

  106. The respondent argues that there was no breach of Dublin III  because
       the overall 11-month time frame has yet to be exhausted. There is  no
       merit to this argument because each member state is  responsible  for
       compliance with the particular timescales imposed on them  under  the
       regulations. There is no provision for a  member  state  to  use  the
       entire time frame for its own purposes. To ignore these  time  frames
       would render Dublin III meaningless and unenforceable.

  107. The respondent's conduct amounted to  a  clear  interference  in  the
       applicants' rights under Article 8  ECHR.  As  at  the  date  of  the
       hearing the interference was ongoing. Given the breach of Dublin III,
       this breach cannot be said to be in accordance with the law.  Nor  is
       the breach necessary  or  proportionate  given  that  the  TCRs  were
       accepted. Indeed, Mr Dunlop did not argue that it was.


The following Orders are made

   1.  A declaration that the respondent's delay in responding to  the  TCRs
      and his failure to properly investigate and accept responsibility  for
      the applicants' asylum claims is unlawful;

   2. A declaration that the respondent breached his  obligations  under  EU
      law (Dublin III and the CFR) and Article 8 ECHR;

   3. The parties are to provide written  submissions  on  the  question  of
      quantum of damages, if not agreed.

                            T Kamara
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

        Dated:

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Applicants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Applicants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

                                                                     UTIJR15

                                                                JR/1626/2019
                               Upper Tribunal
                    Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                                    Order




    The Queen (on the application of FwF & FrF (a child by his litigation
                                friend, NF))



                                 Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




           Decision and Directions of Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


UPON  hearing  Ms  Charlotte  Kilroy  QC  and  Ms  Michelle  Knorr  for  the
Applicants and Mr Rory Dunlop QC and Ms Jo Moore for  the  Respondent  at  a
hearing on 12 June 2019;

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

   1. The Applicants' application for judicial review is allowed;


   2. There be a declaration that the Respondent's delay  in  responding  to
      the  TCRs  and  his  failure  to  properly  investigate   and   accept
      responsibility for the Applicants' asylum claims was unlawful;

   3. There be a declaration that the Respondent  breached  his  obligations
      under EU law (Dublin III and the CFR) and Article 8 ECHR;

   4. The question of quantum of damages is to be decided following  written
      submissions by the parties to be submitted by 12 July 2019;

   5. The Respondent pay the Applicants' reasonable costs, on  the  standard
      basis, to be assessed if not agreed;

   6. There is to be a  detailed  assessment  of  the  Applicants'  publicly
      funded costs, which are payable by the Lord Chancellor under Part 1 of
      the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.


                             TKamara
      Signed:
                       Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

      Dated:                                15 August 2019



Sent  to  the  Applicant,  Respondent  and  any  interested  party   /   the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:
