

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                               JR/10622/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                               9 August 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                         (ON The application OF AN)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms K Olley of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors, appeared on
behalf of the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                   JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    JUDGE pitt:


 1. This is an application against a decision dated  28  June  2016  and  a
    supplementary letter dated 7 February 2017 which refused to  find  that
    further submissions made by the applicant amounted to  a  fresh  asylum
    claim.

Background

 2. The applicant is an Iranian national born in 1982.  He  maintains  that
    in 2000 and in 2001 he was arrested for short periods in  Iran  because
    of his anti-regime activities.  The applicant also claims that in March
    2007, whilst he was not at home, there was a raid on the  accommodation
    he shared with friends and his cousin. They  were  all,  including  the
    applicant, involved in activities critical of the  regime.  His  cousin
    was shot dead trying to escape from the raid. One of  the  friends  who
    lived at the property was arrested and given the death  penalty,  later
    commuted to a life sentence in prison.

 3. When the applicant heard  about  the  raid  he  went  into  hiding  for
    approximately six months in Iran and then to come to the UK via Greece.
    He maintains that he arrived in the UK in  November  2007  and  claimed
    asylum on 26 November 2007.  As he had passed  through  Greece  he  was
    returned there under the Dublin Convention  on  8  February  2008.   He
    remained in Greece until 25 April 2010 when he returned to the UK.

 4. After returning to the UK, the applicant made another asylum  claim  on
    13 May 2010.  That application was refused on 11  November  2010.   The
    appeal against that refusal was  heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Miles on 16 February  2011.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appeal in a decision promulgated on 24 February 2011.  The  applicant's
    claim set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 above was not found  credible.  The
    applicant became appeal rights exhausted on 21 June 2011.

 5. The applicant made further submissions in support of his  asylum  claim
    on 8 January 2013.  Those submissions were originally  refused  by  the
    respondent on 7 August 2015.  After the  applicant  indicated  that  he
    intended to judicially review that decision the  respondent  agreed  to
    reconsider on 8 October 2015.  That reconsideration led to the decision
    currently  under  challenge  dated  28  June  2016  that  the   further
    submissions did not meet the fresh claims test.

 6. The applicant issued a pre-action Protocol letter on  26  August  2016.
    The respondent replied on 9 September 2016.  This judicial  review  was
    issued on 28 September 2016.  The application was given  permission  to
    appeal on the papers by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum in a  decision  dated
    13 December 2016.

 7. The respondent issued a supplementary decision on 7 February 2017 which
    is the second decision under challenge here.





Preliminary Issue

 8. Following the supplementary letter of 7  February  2017  the  applicant
    sought on 21 July 2017 permission to admit a witness statement dated 21
    July 2017, a letter from a translator dated 13  July  2017  and  a  new
    translation of a court  summons.  Those  documents  sought  to  address
    points made by the respondent in the supplementary letter of 7 February
    2017. The application for those documents to be admitted  was  directed
    to be made orally on the day of the hearing as a preliminary matter.

 9. The applicant  maintained  that  the  question  of  admission  of  such
    documents in judicial reviews of this nature and where the Secretary of
    State has issued her supplementary decision was a "grey area" and  that
    the Tribunal should exercise its discretion to admit the new documents.
    The respondent objected to those documents  being  admitted  and  taken
    into consideration in this matter so late in the proceedings.

10. My decision was that the documents provided on 21 July 2017 should  not
    be admitted. Firstly, the general principle is that the  lawfulness  of
    the respondent's decisions should be  assessed  on  the  basis  of  the
    materials that were before her, that is on 28 June 2016 and 7  February
    2017.

11. Secondly, if the applicant has new materials he considers  material  to
    his asylum claim, he can submit them to the respondent in support of  a
    fresh claim.

12. Thirdly, even if those principles did not have  sufficient  force,  the
    application to admit the new materials was made over 5 months after the
    decision of 7 February 2017, the decision they purport to address,  and
    this is very late. The documents provided with the application  suggest
    that the authority of the Legal Services  Commission  was  required  to
    incur costs for the new translation of the court summons but the matter
    only appear to have been raised with them  in  July  2017  and  nothing
    explains delay in providing the witness statement or  the  letter  from
    the translator over the period February 2017 to July 2017.

The Applicant's Further Submissions of 8 January 2013

13. The applicant's further submissions dated 8 January 2013 are  at  [52]-
    [124] of the application bundle.  The new materials addressed the claim
    rejected by the First-tier Tribunal concerning events  in  Iran  before
    the applicant left and the ensuing adverse  interest  in  him  and  his
    family. I refer to this part of the applicant's claim as "the  original
    claim"

14. The further submissions  addressing  the  original  claim  included  an
    undated witness statement from the applicant which is at [60]-[66].

15. At [72]-[73] there was what purported to be a court summons  from  Iran
    dated 25 June 2011. The applicant's case was  that  this  document  had
    been sent to him by his parents inside a birthday card, at [67], a copy
    of the envelope containing those documents being at [70]-[71].

16. The applicant also sought to rely on what he  maintained  was  a  death
    certificate of the cousin who was killed when their  accommodation  was
    raided in Iran in March 2007.  A copy of that document is at  [80]  and
    the translation at [81].

17. The further submissions  also  included  witness  statements  from  the
    applicants' sisters.  The witness statement of his  sister,  Z,  is  at
    [113] to [116] of the bundle.  It states in paragraphs 6 to 15:

         "6.  Since [AN] fled Iran, I have visited Iran on four occasions to
             visit my parents. On the first occasion, I arrived in Iran  on
             17 June 2008. When I returned to my parents' house in  Qazvin,
             things were turned  upside  down.  My  parents  told  me  that
             members of the security services had regularly been coming  to
             their house to search for Ali and for evidence  that  Ali  had
             been living there.

         7.   As I had travelled back with my husband and young daughter, my
             husband said it was  too  dangerous  for  us  to  stay  in  my
             parents' house because of the regular raids from the  security
             services.  During the 4 weeks that  I  was  in  Iran,  on  two
             occasions when I was in my  parents'  house,  members  of  the
             security  services  barged  into  the  property  without   any
             warning.

         8.   On the first  occasion,  four  plain-clothed  members  of  the
             security services entered my parents' house.  They  said  that
             they were looking for my brother Ali and just started  looking
             through the house for him or for evidence  that  he  had  been
             there.  They did not even give us  time  to  cover  our  hair,
             which women are required to do  if  strangers  come  into  the
             house.  They searched through every  room  including  all  the
             cupboards, banging doors to scare us.  My mother was very pale
             and scared and we were worried  about  her  condition  at  the
             time.

         9.   Once they had searched the whole house, they told  us  do  not
             think we are leaving, we can come back at any time.  They said
             we will definitely find him,  referring  to  my  brother  Ali.
             Even though we knew that Ali was safe out of  the  country  at
             the time, it still scared us as the language they  were  using
             suggested they knew Ali's whereabouts and were  going  to  get
             him.

         10.  As well as  the  security  services  who  entered  the  house,
             uniformed soldiers waited outside the house  when  the  plain-
             clothed people were raiding the house.  This was very shameful
             for my family as all  the  people  around  the  area  saw  the
             uniformed guards around the house, and assumed that my  family
             must have done something terrible and  shameful  to  make  the
             authorities come.

         11.  On the second occasion, within a period of two weeks from  the
             first  raid,  three  plain-clothed  members  of  the  security
             services entered the house and quickly showed  us  a  warrant,
             which they did not give us time to read.   They  searched  the
             house in the same way, but this time once they finished,  they
             gave my mother a handwritten piece of paper which said she was
             obliged to call the police if Ali returned home.  It said that
             if she did not do this, she would be as guilty as  Ali.   They
             read this out to my mother and she  was  very  scared  so  she
             signed it.  They then took the paper with them  and  left  the
             house.

         12.  I then left Iran with my family around a week after this raid.
              Before I left the country, a family friend of  ours  how  had
             connections with the security services,  showed  us  that  the
             telephone  conversations  in  my  parents'  house  were  being
             recorded.  He did this by telling us that if there were a  few
             beeps at the beginning of your conversation, this  meant  that
             your telephone was being heard by the  security  services.   I
             checked this and there were beeps on the phone at the start of
             a call so I knew that this was happening.

         13.  Because of these raids, my mother has become  very  vulnerable
             as three of her children have left Iran  and  she  has  no-one
             other than my father living with her.  She was very  dependent
             on her neighbours, but because of  all  the  raids  that  were
             happening, the neighbours didn't want anything to do with  our
             family any more.

         14.  My parents initially hoped that the Iranian authorities  would
             give up searching for Ali, but when it became clear that  they
             were going to do so as the raids continued, they decided  that
             they had to move to another area due to the  shame  caused  by
             the constant raids.  It took a long  time  for  them  to  sell
             their house, but they were eventually able to move to  another
             area.

         15.  When I went back to see my parents in later years, although  I
             didn't see any raids  myself,  my  mother  told  me  that  the
             authorities would still come to the house and would  sometimes
             leave warrants for Ali's arrest with them.  My mother told  me
             when giving her the warrant that they would be able to  arrest
             Ali whenever he entered or  exited  the  country  as  all  the
             border posts would know to  arrest  him.   Because  they  said
             this, I assume that Ali is on a blacklist, so if he was to  be
             returned  to  Iran,  he  would  definitely  be  arrested   and
             punished."

18. The applicant also relied on a witness statement dated 26 November 2011
    from a second sister, sister, S, which is at [122]-[124] of the bundle.
    This sister did not have first-hand knowledge of  events  in  Iran  but
    maintained that she had heard from her cousin's family of the  cousin's
    death in the raid  in  2007  and  of  the  arrest  of  the  applicants'
    housemates. She maintained that she knew through her relatives in  Iran
    that the authorities had raided the family home after the applicant had
    gone into hiding.

19.  The  further  submissions  also  put  forward  a  new  aspect  of  the
    applicant's claim  to  be  in  need  of  international  protection.  He
    maintained that his internet activities in  the  UK,  in  particular  a
    Facebook account in an assumed identity showed him to  be  at  risk  on
    return. I refer to this part of the applicant's case as the "sur  place
    claim".

20. The applicant stated in paragraph 28 of his undated  witness  statement
    that he had set up a group on Facebook to  express  anger  against  the
    Muslim religion. At paragraphs 25-33 of the witness statement  he  gave
    details of this group. He stated that it  had  around  40  members.  An
    internet search would show him to be the founder of the group.

21. The applicant included copies of pages from his Facebook account  which
    are at [84]-[112] of the bundle.  The applicant maintained that he  was
    identifiable from a number of photographs on his Facebook profile.  The
    photos would be considered anti-regime, for example a photo of him next
    to the flag of the former Iranian Shah and he also submitted  that  the
    Facebook account contained anti-regime statements. The  applicant  also
    indicated that he had a previous Facebook account which he  was  forced
    to shut down in June or July 2011 due to what appeared to be  technical
    problems but which he suspected may have been  some  form  of  hack  or
    technical interference by the Iranian authorities.

Respondent's Decision of 28 June 2016

22. The respondent's initial view of the further submissions is set out  in
    the decision of 28 June 2016 and is contained at [153] to [157] of  the
    bundle. The reasoning on the court summons,  death  certificate  is  as
    follows:

         "You have submitted  a  court  summons  dated  25  June  2011  with
             translation  and  a   photocopy   of   your   cousin's   death
             certificate.

             You claim that these documents relate to  your  initial  claim
             that you are still wanted by the authorities in Iran.

             These documents have been considered in line with the case-law
             of Tanveer Ahmed IAT [2002] UKAIT 00439 STARRED.   This  means
             that it is for you to show that any documents you rely  on  to
             support your case can be relied on.

             Your documents have not been viewed in isolation.  This  means
             that they have been considered as part of  all  the  available
             evidence that they relate to.

             The document from Ministry of Justice of Islamic  Republic  of
             Iran dated 25 June 2011 has been considered.

             It has been noted that you have sent the document both in your
             native language and  translated  into  English,  however,  the
             following issues have been taken into account when considering
             this document.

                . You have provided  no  proof  that  this  is  an  official
                  document.

                . The  translation  has  been  completed  by  Abdul  Nishat,
                  Universal Language Services LTD and I can find  no  record
                  of anyone with that name working as a sworn translator.

                . You have provided an  envelope  that  is  post  marked  as
                  coming from Iran (within the birthday card),  however  you
                  failed to establish or prove that  this  document  was  in
                  that envelope when it arrived.

                . The Adjudicator in the Appeal determination of 21 February
                  2011 rejected your account that you would face a real risk
                  of persecution upon your return to Iran and found  you  to
                  lack credibility.

                . The document is of poor quality.

                . The document has no official stamp.

                . Objective evidence suggests the document  does  not  share
                  similarities/characteristics of other court summons issued
                  around that date.

             Therefore taking these factors into consideration, it has been
             concluded that no weight should be attached to these documents
             and that you have failed to establish that the  Court  Summons
             is in fact a genuine document.

             Your cousin, F's, death certificate has been considered.

             It has been noted that  you  have  sent  a  photocopy  of  the
             document in your native language and translated into  English,
             however, the following issues have  been  taken  into  account
             when considering this document.

                . The document is a photocopy of an original.

                . The document is of poor quality.

                . You have provided an  envelope  that  is  post  marked  as
                  coming from Iran (within the birthday card),  however  you
                  failed to establish or prove that  this  document  was  in
                  that envelope when it arrived.

                . The Adjudicator in the Appeal determination of 21 February
                  2011 rejected your account that you would face a real risk
                  of persecution upon your return to Iran and found  you  to
                  lack credibility

             The  court  summons  and  the  death  certificate  have   been
             carefully considered but for the reasons given above they have
             not been found to assist your  credibility.   Having  examined
             your claim as a whole and applying the principles stated,  the
             documents do not support your fear of risk on return  to  your
             country of origin.

23. The respondent's view of the  witness  statements  of  the  applicant's
    sisters was as follows:

         "You have submitted a total of 3 witness statements  which  confirm
             your character and reiterate your claim.  The statements  from
             your siblings have been taken to be  genuine  statements  from
             said people.  However, the  statements  are  considered  self-
             serving and contain only personal opinion from people who know
             you and do not present any facts.  Therefore, it is considered
             the statements add no weight to your claim."

24. The respondent also considered the sur  place  claim,  relying  on  the
    country guidance case of BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return)
    Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36  (IAC).  The  conclusion  that  the  applicant's
    Facebook materials did not show a realistic prospect of success  before
    a Tribunal was reached on the basis that:

             "You have submitted Facebook extracts from your profile, dated
             01  September   until   13   September   2011   with   English
             translations.  However, it is considered that the  nature  and
             timing of these sur place activities are in order to establish
             a further right to remain  in  the  UK.   You  have  made  the
             Facebook posts under an alias.  You have submitted no evidence
             that the Iranian authorities would  know  about  or  have  any
             interest in your claimed UK activities.  You have not provided
             any  evidence  that  you  have  attended   demonstrations   or
             activities  that  have   been   monitored   by   the   Iranian
             authorities.   It   is   therefore   considered   that   these
             submissions do not demonstrate that you will be identified  by
             the Iranian authorities  upon  return  to  Iran  due  to  your
             claimed political activities in the UK."

Respondent's Supplementary Decision of 7 February 2017

25. The respondent's supplementary decision of 7 February 2017 is at [286]-
    [292] of the bundle. This letter gave further reasons for finding  that
    the court summons, death certificate, and Facebook material  could  not
    found a fresh claim. At [288], [289], [290] and  [291]  the  respondent
    made specific comment on those core aspects of the applicant's case  as
    follows:

    "Court Summons

    You have provided a court summons dated 25/6/11  which  you  claim  was
         received by your parents on 2/7/11.  You have provided  an  undated
         English translation completed by Abdul Nishat of Universal Language
         Services LTD.   You  claim  that  you  received  this  document  on
         17/10/11 and this was hidden inside a birthday card, the  proof  of
         postage from Iran has also been submitted.

    The summons states the reason for  accusation  is  'Propaganda  against
         state  and  religious  values'.   The  summons  is  dated  25/6/11,
         although from the English translation it is unclear as to what  the
         specific date for attendance at  court  is,  no  specific  time  is
         stated for which you must attend court.  You claim it was handed to
         your parents on 2/7/11 when the security  forces  came  into  their
         house and looked for you.

    It is noted that a warning appears on the bottom of the  summons  which
         states 'Warning will be issued in case of absence and if you do not
         attend the specific time for hearing a decision  will  be  made  in
         your absence'.  However, although you now claim that  the  security
         forces gave this summons in person to your mother on 2/7/11,  there
         is no evidence of the outcome of any charges you  claim  were  made
         against you.

    You have stated in your  personal  statement  dated  8/1/13  that  your
         parents have received many summonses but have not kept them due  to
         their  fear  of  the  authorities.   You  claim  that   there   are
         outstanding charges against you.  However, the  only  evidence  you
         have supplied of these  claimed  anti-government  and  anti-Islamic
         accusations is a summons which states  that  even  if  you  do  not
         attend court a decision will be made in your absence.  You have not
         supplied any further evidence of this outcome despite you  claiming
         that the security forces have searched your parents' home  on  many
         occasions.

    You have also not explained why, when you claim that you received  this
         document in the post on 17/10/11, you have waited until  8/1/13  to
         submit this to the Home Office.  You now claim  that  this  crucial
         piece of evidence demonstrates that there are  outstanding  charges
         against you and will  place  you  at  risk  if  returned  to  Iran.
         However, this document would have been in  your  possession  for  1
         year 3  months  before  you  decided  to  submit  this  as  further
         submissions.  Also, when looking at your Home Office  records,  you
         were  attending  mandatory  reporting  events   at   Becket   House
         Enforcement Office during this  time  and  records  show  that  you
         attended on 8/11/11, 10/1/12, 13/3/12 & 8/5/12.  It  is  considered
         that had you been in receipt of a vital document such  as  a  court
         summons on 17/10/11 you could have brought this to the attention of
         the Home Office when attending for immigration control purposes.

    Therefore, when taking this document alongside  the  findings  of  fact
         made by the Immigration Judge in your appeal dated 24/2/11 and  the
         long delay in submitting this to the Home Office, it is  considered
         that you have submitted  this  false  document  in  an  attempt  to
         enhance the credibility of your claims which  had  previously  been
         dismissed at appeal.

    Death Certificate

    You have supplied a photocopy of what you claim is your cousin's  death
         certificate, you claim that this  was  sent  via  email  from  your
         family friend in Iran 'Alireza Chegini' who received it  from  your
         mother, your mother received this from your uncle's wife.  However,
         in the email from Alireza Chegini dated 14/9/11 it does  not  state
         how he managed to obtain this death certificate, furthermore, there
         is no mention whatsoever in this email of a death  certificate  and
         no evidence that it was attached to an email as you claim.

    You claim at paragraph 23 of your witness statement that you originally
         asked your uncle's wife to send you  this  document,  however,  you
         have provided no evidence of this request.  If this was  by  email,
         there are no explanations as to why you have not provided this.

    Therefore, the claim that this is a copy of a claimed original document
         cannot  be  verified  as  being  an  original  death   certificate.
         Furthermore, you claim in your witness  statement  that  the  death
         certificate states that the cause of death was due to a blow to the
         back of the head.  It  actually  states  the  cause  of  death  was
         'Trauma due to the skull bone', it does not mention the back of the
         head and trauma does not necessarily have to be caused by  a  blow.
         You claim that your cousin was shot in  the  head  by  the  Iranian
         authorities and that they have attempted to  cover  this  up.   You
         have not provided any evidence or reasons why you  assert  why  the
         government would try to cover up your cousins (sic) death.

    In your witness statement (paragraph  20)  you  state  that  the  death
         certificate states that your cousin died on 7/4/07.  It  does  not.
         The death certificate actually states that the date  of  death  was
         3/4/07.

    Therefore, when taking the delay in submitting this document  alongside
         the credibility findings of the Immigration Judge, it is considered
         that this is not a genuine record of  events  and  again  you  have
         submitted a false document to support a weak asylum claim.

    You claim that your cousin was killed by  the  Iranian  authorities  on
         7/4/07  (your  statement  is  contradictory  to  the  actual  death
         certificate).  However, you did not leave Iran  until  towards  the
         end of 2007 and arrived in the UK on 26/11/07.  You  were  returned
         to Greece after it was discovered that you  had  your  fingerprints
         taken there prior to arriving in the UK, you failed to claim asylum
         in Greece despite your claim that you had to flee Iran as your life
         would be at risk.  Had you genuinely been in need of  international
         protection then it is considered that you would have claimed asylum
         in the first safe country you reached.  You claim that you remained
         in Greece for 3 years before again travelling illegally to  the  UK
         on 25/4/10, you also failed to claim asylum on re-entering  the  UK
         but instead waiting for 3 weeks until 13/5/10 which the Immigration
         Judge noted also undermined your credibility of  claiming  to  fear
         persecution in Iran.

    Facebook Activity

    You have supplied print  outs  of  your  Facebook  profile  and  online
         activity, whilst an internet search does bring up  the  details  of
         this account you have not provided any evidence to demonstrate  how
         the Iranian authorities would  be  aware  of  this  activity.   The
         Immigration Judge has  previously  rejected  your  account  of  the
         reasons for leaving Iran and it was not accepted that you had  been
         involved in any anti-government or anti-Islamic activity whilst  in
         Iran.

    You failed to claim  asylum  in  Greece  despite  your  claim  to  have
         remained there for 3 years when you were  originally  removed  from
         the UK in 2007, had you genuinely been in need of protection it  is
         considered that you would  have  taken  the  opportunity  to  claim
         asylum in Greece.  You also failed to claim asylum  on  arrival  in
         the UK on 25/4/10,  but  instead  chose  to  wait  3  weeks  before
         submitting your claim on 13/5/10.  This delay and failure to  claim
         asylum at the earliest opportunity in the first  safe  country  all
         casts doubt on your credibility, as was found  by  the  Immigration
         Judge in the appeal dated 21/2/11.

    Your claimed online activism has been considered alongside the relevant
         case law BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk  on  return)  Iran  CG
         [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC), this is taken into account when assessing the
         risk on return due to your  claimed  sur  place  activities.   This
         caselaw, at paragraph  4,  outlines  the  relevant  factors  to  be
         considered when assessing risk on return having regard to sur place
         activities.

    Nature of sur place activity

    Identification risk

    Factors triggering inquiry/action on return

    Consequences of identification

    Identification risk on return

    The position of people who engage in political opposition in the UK was
         considered in the case of BA (Iran) CG (Demonstrators in Britain  -
         risk on return) [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC).  In this case it was held:

             'Given the large numbers of those who demonstrate here and the
             publicity  which  demonstrators  receive,   for   example   on
             Facebook,  combined  with  the  inability   of   the   Iranian
             Government to monitor all returnees who have been involved  in
             demonstrations here, regard  must  be  had  to  the  level  of
             involvement of the individual here as well  as  any  political
             activity which the individual might have been involved in Iran
             before seeking asylum in Britain."

    You have submitted Facebook extracts  from  your  profile,  dated  from
         September 2011  with  English  translations.   You  have  made  the
         Facebook posts under an alias and whilst an  internet  search  does
         bring up your name, you have submitted no evidence that the Iranian
         authorities would know about or have any interest in  your  claimed
         UK activities.  You have not provided any evidence  that  you  have
         attended demonstrations or activities that have been  monitored  by
         the Iranian authorities or that  you  are  involved  in  any  anti-
         government/anti-Islamic organisation.  You have not  been  to  Iran
         since 2007 and you have not provided any  evidence  to  demonstrate
         why the authorities would monitor what you post  on  Facebook.   It
         was not accepted  by  the  Immigration  Judge  that  you  had  been
         involved in any political/religious activities whilst in  Iran  and
         your evidence has not been accepted as reliable.

    You claim at paragraph 33 of your witness statement 'I  know  that  the
         Iranian government monitors what Iranians post on  Facebook  and  I
         believe that because  of  my  activism  on  Facebook,  particularly
         because I set up the Anti-Islam group, this will create  a  further
         risk to my life'.  However, you have provided no evidence that your
         Facebook account is monitored or that the  authorities  would  have
         reason to monitor your online activity, therefore,  this  claim  is
         just speculation and is not substantiated by any evidence.

    It is therefore considered that these submissions  do  not  demonstrate
         that you will be identified by the Iranian authorities upon  return
         to Iran due to your claimed political/religious activities  in  the
         UK.  This claimed online  activism  is  also  considered  alongside
         recent  Country  Guidance  noted  on  Iran   country   policy   and
         information note: journalists and internet based  media  -  October
         2016.  This updated guidance states  the  following  in  regard  to
         claimed online activity in the UK:

             'Since the Iranian Government  is  not  able  to  monitor  the
             activities of every individual, decision makers must  consider
             the level of involvement of the person,  in  addition  to  any
             political activity that the person may  have  previously  been
             involved with in Iran'.  (Paragraph 2.2.4)

             'Decision makers must be satisfied that persons claiming to be
             journalists or bloggers are able  to  demonstrate  that  their
             activities have brought, or will bring them,  to  the  adverse
             attention of the Iranian authorities.  Decision makers  should
             give consideration  to  all  relevant  factors,  including  in
             particular:

                . the subject matter of the material in question;

                . the language and tone used;

                . the method of communication;

                . the reach of the publication (i.e.  how  many  people  are
                  they communicating with);

                . the publicity attracted;

                . the frequency of such publications;

                . any past adverse interest by the authorities'.  (Paragraph
                  2.2.5)

    Therefore, you have provided no credible evidence to  demonstrate  that
         you have ever been involved in any political activity  I  interview
         and apart from your Facebook profile, there is no evidence  of  any
         significant activity in the UK.  Your court summons  is  considered
         to be unreliable and you have provided no further evidence  of  any
         anti-government or anti-Islamic activity either in Iran or the  UK.
         Therefore, when taking all these matters  in  the  round  with  the
         negative credibility findings  of  the  Immigration  Judge,  it  is
         considered that you have failed to  demonstrate  that  the  Iranian
         authorities would have any adverse interest in you should  you  now
         return to your country of origin.  The United Kingdom would not  be
         in breach of its obligations under Articles 2 or 3 of the  ECHR  by
         removing you to Iran."

The Applicant's Submissions

26. The applicant  brings  a  number  of  challenges  to  those  decisions.
    Regarding the  court  summons,  the  comment  that  the  applicant  had
    provided no proof "that this is an official document" was difficult  to
    understand and it was not clear what the respondent meant  by  this  or
    how he could show it to be an official document other than by providing
    the original copy, which is what he had done.

27. The applicant also objected to the comment that  the  translations  had
    not been done by a "sworn translator" where it was not clear  what  the
    respondent meant by this or where she found authority for this being  a
    requirement for weight to afforded to a document.

28. The applicant also objected to the respondent's view that the  envelope
    that he had provided could not be definitively linked to the  documents
    he claimed were sent to him from Iran. He maintained that this position
    was irrational as the only way that he could have proved the link would
    have been to have had a witness to him opening the documents or to have
    videoed it and that this was not a rational requirement.

29. The applicant also submitted that the respondent's  concerns  that  the
    court summons was of poor quality, had no official stamp  and  did  not
    show similarities or  characteristics  of  other  court  summonses  was
    insufficiently particularised and so did not justify a conclusion  that
    they could not show a realistic prospect of success before a  Tribunal.
    The applicant also objected to the finding  at  [155]  that  the  court
    summons was not "a genuine document".

30. The applicant made similar submissions on the  respondent's  view  that
    the death certificate was a photocopy, not an original, that it was  of
    poor quality, that there was no proof that it was an official  document
    and nothing linking it to the envelope provided.

31. The applicant also objected to the statement on [156] that the  witness
    statements of the applicant's sisters were self-serving. That might  be
    the view of the respondent but it was irrational  to  conclude  that  a
    Tribunal would not consider their corroboration as  inherently  without
    merit as they were relatives. Further, the  respondent's  opinion  that
    the sisters' witness statements contained "only personal  opinion  from
    people who know you and  do  not  present  any  facts"  was  manifestly
    irrational. The witness statement of Z contained a very detailed first-
    hand account of raids on the family home in Iran as  a  result  of  the
    adverse interest in the applicant.

32. As regards the sur place claim, the applicant accepted that the case of
    BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011]  UKUT  36
    (IAC) would be  relevant  in  any  assessment  by  a  Tribunal  of  the
    applicant's  new  claim.   BA   mainly   concerned   participation   in
    demonstrations in  the  UK  and  whether  internet  coverage  of  those
    demonstrations would be known to the authorities, however. It  did  not
    provide determinative guidance  on  the  sur  place  claim  here  which
    concerned anti-regime and anti-Islamic materials on a Facebook  account
    which could be accessed publicly and linked to the applicant.

33. The applicant  also  maintained  that  the  respondent's  decision  was
    irrational where it stated on [156] that the sur place claim  was  made
    purely "in order to establish a further right to  remain  in  the  UK".
    The case of Danian v SSHD [1999] EWCA Civ 3000 was authority for a  sur
    place claim made in bad faith still retaining the potential to make out
    a protection claim.

34. The applicant relied in particular on  the  reported  case  of  AB  and
    Others (internet activity - state of evidence) Iran  [2015]  UKUT  0257
    (IAC) by way of support for his submission that the sur place claim had
    to be found  to  show  a  realistic  prospect  of  success  before  the
    Tribunal. The case was reported. That did not make it binding  but  the
    Presidential Guidance Note 2011 No 2 at paragraph 13 indicated  that  a
    case with this designation "may be of  some  general  interest"  or  of
    "importance for other determinations" and of "persuasive value only  on
    the facts". The list of issues addressed in that case, at paragraph 10,
    showed it to be highly relevant to this applicant's  sur  place  claim.
    The evidence of the experts in that case was  essentially  unchallenged
    and found to be reliable; see paragraph 448.

35.  In  particular,  AB  contained  evidence  that  the  security   forces
    infiltrated Facebook groups (paragraph  213),  that  substantial  anti-
    regime or religious statements on  website  were  monitored  (paragraph
    156), that a blog with a group of under thirty followers led to adverse
    interest (paragraph  112),  that  the  Iranian  authorities  would  not
    consider "insincerity" in  such  internet  activity  as  of  importance
    (paragraph 252). The evidence in AB also  indicated  at  paragraph  122
    that interview on return  was  a  "near  certainty"  and  that,  as  in
    paragraph 126, a high likelihood of "internet activity being discovered
    during background investigations even if the person being returned  was
    not already known". Paragraph 155 of AB referred to a "high  risk  that
    critical web activity will be picked up on return".

36. The applicant had established the type of internet  profile  and  group
    identified in AB as capable of leading to adverse interest,  therefore.
    The materials from his Facebook account at [84]  to  [112]  showed  him
    making significantly anti-Islamic comments in the posts, for example at
    [97] and [101].  At [106]  he  made  adverse  comment  on  the  Prophet
    Mohammed.

37. The applicant maintained that the similarity of his sur place claim  to
    those found to have merit in  AB  and  the  accepted  evidence  of  the
    experts in that case would be matters that a Tribunal would  inevitably
    have to refer to and this  point  alone  showed  the  sur  place  claim
    material was sufficient to meet the "modest" fresh claim test.

The Respondent's Submissions

38. For the Secretary of State, Mr Malik took me to the adverse credibility
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal which are contained at [45] to [49]
    of the applicant's bundle.  It was argued that the Secretary  of  State
    had to consider the fresh claim against that background and  that  this
    was a significant factor where the applicant  was  found  to  lack  any
    credibility as to having been of adverse interest  for  any  reason  in
    Iran prior to departure, the Tribunal's findings being  to  the  effect
    that the entire claim was made up.

39. The respondent had also taken a correct approach to the new  documents,
    assessing them correctly following Tanveer Ahmed.

40. The respondent  had  made  three  entirely  sound  points  against  the
    applicant's reliance on the court summons in the February 2017 decision
    at [288] of the bundle.  The document was  unreliable  as  it  did  not
    indicate the specific date for attendance at court  or  specific  time.
    Secondly, the applicant had submitted the document over a  year  and  a
    half after he had obtained the  document  from  his  parents  in  Iran.
    Thirdly, he had not explained why there had been no further progression
    of the case against him and this is what the  court  summons  indicated
    would happen were he not to  appear.   Those  matters  when  considered
    together with the  previous  adverse  credibility  findings  manifestly
    entitled the Secretary of State to find the document not  reliable  and
    incapable of founding a fresh claim.

41. The respondent had also  made  five  sound  points  against  the  death
    certificate, those points being set out on [289] of the bundle.  Again,
    the applicant had delayed significantly in providing what could only be
    a critical document in support of his case from September 2011 until  8
    January 2013 when it was provided to the respondent  with  the  further
    submissions.  The applicant had given insufficient details  of  how  he
    had managed to obtain this document or how those in Iran had managed to
    obtain it.  He had not provided evidence as to having tried  to  obtain
    the document from his uncle's wife.  The translation did not show  what
    he claimed, which is that his cousin had been shot in the back  of  the
    head.  The fifth point which the respondent made  validly  against  the
    applicant was that the applicant maintained that his cousin had died on
    7 April 2007 but the death certificate stated that this was on 3  April
    2007.

42. In addition to the previous adverse credibility findings there was also
    the overarching matter of the applicant having remained in  Greece  for
    three years  without  having  made  an  asylum  claim  which  was  also
    manifestly something which went against the new material being  capable
    of founding a fresh claim and supported the respondent's case that  the
    applicant was not entitled to a further statutory appeal.

43. As regards the Facebook material  and  how  this  was  treated  by  the
    respondent in her two decisions, it was maintained that she was obliged
    to follow the country guidance case of BA and  not  to  go  beyond  it.
    This was obligatory upon her following the Practice  Direction  of  the
    President to the effect that a country guidance case would  be  binding
    on a Tribunal hearing a fresh claim based on the new materials  and  it
    was pointed out that the new Tribunal would not be obliged in the  same
    way to take into account the findings in AB.  The respondent's case was
    that the Tribunal's position in BA was not disturbed by AB.  There  was
    express reference in BA to the importance of a  Facebook  account,  the
    head  note  stating  that  given  the  large  numbers  of  people   who
    demonstrated and any publicity of that, "for example on Facebook",  was
    not sufficient to make out a claim.

44. It was also pointed out for the Secretary of State that the  assessment
    of any sur place activity had to be made on the basis of the  level  of
    involvement and of the activity.  That was  also  a  binding  principle
    arising from the country guidance and it would have been  an  error  of
    law for the respondent not to follow it.  Even following AB it was  not
    sufficient for an applicant to say that they  had  a  Facebook  account
    criticising the Iranian regime.  The claim would have to make out  more
    than that.

45. As regards the witness statement of  the  applicant's  sisters  it  was
    maintained that the Secretary of State was entitled to find  that  they
    were not objective evidence but  views  of  the  applicant's  siblings.
    They had to be considered in that context and also in  the  context  of
    the  previous  adverse  credibility  findings.   The  respondent  acted
    reasonably and rationally in finding that  they  were  not  capable  of
    adding weight to his claim.

My Findings

46. I have considered carefully all of  the  material  before  me  and  the
    arguments made upon it by Counsel for whose  well-ordered  and  focused
    submissions I was grateful.

47. I can give my decision on this  matter  relatively  briefly  given  the
    degree of detail set out above.   Certainly  the  respondent  here  was
    entitled to find that it was material to a  fresh  claim  that  adverse
    credibility findings were made against the applicant by the Tribunal on
    his original claim. The respondent also cannot be criticised for taking
    against him his failure to claim asylum in Greece from 2008 to 2010.

48. It was also my view that  the  respondent's  assessment  of  the  court
    summons and the death certificate were, in isolation, rational and open
    to her for the reasons set out by Mr Malik  in  paragraphs  40  and  41
    above.

49. It remains the case those findings  had  to  be  reached  alongside  an
    assessment of  the  witness  statements  of  the  applicant's  sisters.
    Firstly, the respondent's view that they did not contain specific facts
    was clearly incorrect. The witness statement of Z was a  very  detailed
    first-hand account of a raid on the family  home  and  of  other  raids
    taking place  whilst  she  was  in  Iran.  Even  when  taken  with  the
    legitimate concerns of the respondent regarding the original claim  and
    other new documents, my view was that this witness  statement  had  the
    potential to be highly probative if placed before a Tribunal. Reference
    to the witness statements as "self-serving"  does  not  act  to  reduce
    their potential importance. As in  R  (on  the  application  of  SS)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department ("self-serving"  statements)
    [2017] UKUT 00164 (IAC)  the  expression  "self-serving",  alone,  says
    little.

50. It is  also  my  conclusion  that  the  respondent's  approach  to  the
    applicant's sur place claim is irrational in seeking to rely solely  on
    the ratio of BA and as  if  the  extensive,  relevant  and  potentially
    determinative expert evidence in AB and findings  of  the  Tribunal  in
    that case would not be taken into account  by  a  judge  assessing  the
    claim now. Examples of relevant passages of AB are set out above and  I
    do not need to rehearse them again here. They show that there would  be
    a realistic prospect of success on the sur place claim  notwithstanding
    any further adverse findings on the original claim and the respondent's
    position on the sur place claim was not a rational one.

51. For those reasons I grant judicial review.

Order


52. I make an order quashing the respondent's decisions dated 22 June  2016
    and 7 February 2017.


Costs


53. The respondent is  to  pay  the  applicant's  reasonable  costs  to  be
    assessed if not agreed with reference to the applicant's Legal Services
    Commission funding.


Permission to Appeal to the Court of Appeal


54. I make a decision on an appeal to the Court of Appeal  under  Procedure
    Rule 44(4B) where the respondent has not applied  for  permission.  The
    reasoning set out above does not show legal error and so permission  is
    refused.







Signed: [pic]                                Dated:  21 September 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------



 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


