
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal    JR/1333/2020 (V)
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)




             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


Heard at Field House by Skype for Business
on 25 September 2020


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                       The Queen on the Application of

                                     IAD
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant: Ms M Knorr, Counsel, instructed by Simpson Millar LLP
For the Respondent: Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal
Department.


                                  JUDGMENT
   (Amended under Rule 42 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
                                    2008)

  1. The applicant, an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child from  Afghanistan
       now aged  17  years,  challenges  the  respondent's  decision  of  12
       December  2019  refusing  the  request  from   the   Directorate   of
       Immigration, France, to take charge of his asylum claim, pursuant  to
       Article 8(2) of Regulation 604/2013 of the EU Council Regulation (the
       Dublin  III  Regulation)  and  the  decision  of  17  February   2020
       maintaining  the   refusal   decision   following   a   request   for
       reconsideration.

    2. The applicant had left Afghanistan in 2019 and arrived in  France  in
       July 2019 and claimed asylum. His claim was registered by the  French
       authorities in October 2019. The take-charge request (TCR)  was  made
       by the French authorities in order for  the  applicant  to  join  his
       maternal uncle, FR, in the UK. FR was an Afghan national who had been
       granted refugee status  in  the  UK  and  had  subsequently  acquired
       British citizenship. The TCR was refused by  the  respondent  on  the
       basis that the relationship between the applicant and FR had not been
       satisfactorily established by the evidence.

    3. The applicant sought permission  to  apply  for  judicial  review  to
       challenge  the  respondent's  decisions  on  the  grounds  that   the
       respondent's  processing  of  the   TCR   and   refusal   to   accept
       responsibility was unlawful and in breach of EU law, common  law  and
       Article 8 of the ECHR. The remedies sought by the applicant  were:  a
       declaration that the UK was the  responsible  Member  State  for  the
       applicant's asylum claim under Dublin  III;  an  order  quashing  the
       decisions of 12 December 2019 and 17 February 2020 refusing the  TCR;
       an order that the respondent communicated her responsibility  to  the
       French authorities and arranged to have him transferred to the UK, or
       alternatively to take a new decision on the TCR; a  declaration  that
       the  respondent's  failure  properly  to   investigate   and   accept
       responsibility for his asylum claim was unlawful; a declaration  that
       the respondent had breached her  obligations  under  Dublin  III  and
       Article 8; and damages.

    4. Permission was granted at an oral hearing on 4 August 2020  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Kopieczek.

    5. In the detailed grounds of defence, the respondent accepted that  she
       ought to withdraw and reconsider her decision to reject the TCR. In a
       letter dated 24 September 2020  the  respondent  confirmed  that,  in
       light of DNA evidence produced by  the  applicant,  the  family  link
       between the applicant and FR  was  accepted,  and  it  was  therefore
       considered that the applicant's  judicial  review  claim  had  become
       academic. A  consent  order  was  proposed  in  terms  requiring  the
       applicant to submit the new DNA evidence to  the  French  authorities
       following which it was agreed  that  a  family  assessment  would  be
       requested once a new TCR was made by the French authorities.

    6. In response the applicant objected to the respondent's  proposal  and
       to the need for a further TCR to be  made  and  the  requirement  for
       further evidence to be sent to the French authorities.

    7. The matter then came before me for  a  hearing  without  the  parties
       having managed to reach an agreement on the terms of a consent order.

    8. Ms Knorr re-stated  the  objection  to  the  terms  proposed  by  the
       respondent and the requirement for a further TCR to be  made  by  the
       French authorities. She referred me to other orders made  in  similar
       circumstances, where the claim had been conceded  by  the  respondent
       but the terms of a consent order were not agreed, and where there had
       been no such requirement, in particular the judgment  in  AM  v  SSHD
       (JR/3831/2019) and the final order in R (on the  application  of  BAA
       and Another) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  (Dublin
       III: judicial review; SOS's duties) [20201 UKUT 227.

    9. In light of the applicant's objection, and  in  the  absence  of  any
       proper explanation by the respondent as to why a further TCR  request
       was required and why the applicant was  required  to  submit  further
       evidence to the French authorities, I did not consider  the  proposal
       to be a reasonable one  and  I  preferred  the  terms  of  the  order
       proposed by the applicant.

   10. In the circumstances, and  following  my  conclusion  as  above,  the
       following order and directions were agreed by the parties:

    1) The Respondent request a family assessment within 2 working days;

    2) The Respondent make a new decision on the Take Charge Request within
       3 working days of receipt of the family assessment and communicate
       that decision to the French authorities and the Applicant via his
       solicitor;

    3) The parties to propose directions for the outstanding matters in the
       claim within 28 days of a decision on the TCR;

    4) The Respondent will pay the Applicant's reasonable costs to date;

    5) Future costs reserved.





                                                             JR/1333/2020(V)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                       The Queen on the application of

                                     IAD
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede



                                Interim Order

    Having considered all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  from  the
    parties' respective representatives, Ms M Knorr, of counsel, instructed
    by Simpson Miller Solicitors, on behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  Z
    Malik, of Counsel, instructed by the Government  Legal  Department,  on
    behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field  House,  London  on  25
    September 2020.

    AND UPON the Respondent agreeing on 10 September 2020 to  withdraw  and
    reconsider her decisions dated 12 December 2019 and  17  February  2020
    refusing the Article 8 TCR but submitting to the Upper Tribunal through
    her Counsel that a new Take Charge Request is required in order to make
    a fresh decision;

    AND UPON consideration of the interim order in MA v  SSHD  JR/3831/2019
    and the final order in R (BAA) v SSHD  (Dublin  III:  judicial  review;
    SoS's duties) [2020] UKUT 00227 (IAC) and the Applicant's  right  to  a
    remedy under EU law and the ECHR;

    AND UPON the Respondent confirming acceptance of  the  family  link  as
    claimed between the Applicant and his uncle;

    It is ordered that:

          1. The Respondent request a family assessment  within  2  working
             days;

          2. The Respondent make a new decision on the Take Charge  Request
             within 3 working days of receipt of the family assessment  and
             communicate that decision to the French  authorities  and  the
             Applicant via his solicitor;

          3. The parties to propose directions for the outstanding  matters
             in the claim within 28 days of a decision on the TCR;

          4. The Respondent will pay the Applicant's  reasonable  costs  to
             date;

          5. Future costs reserved.






     S Kebede
      Signed:      [pic]


                                      Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede




     Dated:               25 September 2020


      [pic]


      Sent / Handed to the Applicant, Respondent and any interested party /
      the Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors
      on (date): 01/10/2020


      Solicitors:
      Ref No:
      Home Office Ref:



