

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/1642/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                     The Queen on the application of KF
                    (a child by his litigation friend MN)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms C Kilroy  QC  and  Mr  J  Kirk,  of  Counsel,
instructed by Simpson Millar Solicitors, on behalf of the applicant  and  Mr
G Lewis, of Counsel, instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the  respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,  London  on  9
September 2019.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

Background

   1. The applicant is a male national of Afghanistan born in  August  2002.
      He is the nephew of MN, a British citizen of Afghan origin who arrived
      in the UK in September 2001 and  made  an  asylum  claim.  MN  visited
      Afghanistan around 2010 and spent time with the applicant who was,  at
      that  time,  receiving  medical  treatment  in  respect  of  a   heart
      condition.


   2. According to a 'Best Interests Assessment' (BIA) prepared by the Greek
      authorities the applicant left Afghanistan and travelled  to  Pakistan
      where he remained for 3 to 4 weeks before  moving  to  Iran  and  then
      Turkey. He claims he was kidnapped by smugglers at the border  between
      Iran and Turkey, held  for  3  months  and  beaten  every  day  (in  a
      psychiatric assessment dated 6 August 2019 the applicant  described  a
      period of "detention" in Turkey when he  was  held  by  "agents").  He
      managed to escape and made his way to Istanbul. Following his  arrival
      in Turkey the applicant's mother contacted MN asking him to  help  the
      applicant. MN contacted the applicant and met him in  Turkey  in  2017
      and maintained regular contact thereafter. The applicant  remained  in
      Turkey for one year and three months working in a bakery shop. The BIA
      referred to the applicant's  "vulnerability  (because  of  his  health
      issues  -  the  applicant  had  a  heart  condition  and  successfully
      underwent surgery 8 years  previously)  and  lack  of  any  supportive
      environment in Greece." The general lack of a  well-developed  support
      system for unaccompanied minors in Greece would, according to the BIA,
      "have a very negative effect on the child's health and future." In its
      conclusions the BIA referred to conversations the assessor had with MN
      and with the applicant's parents, who expressed their trust in MN  and
      were supportive of the applicant's reunification with him.


   3. On or around 20 July 2018 the applicant registered his asylum claim in
      Greece. On 11 October 2018 Greece made a Take Charge Request (TCR)  to
      the UK pursuant to Council Regulation (EU) No 604/2013  (Dublin  III).
      The  TCR  asserted  that  the  applicant  was  MN's  nephew.  It   was
      accompanied by the BIA, untranslated Afghan ID documents  relating  to
      the applicant, his father, his mother and  MN,  and  the  untranslated
      marriage certificate of the applicant's parents.

   4. The TCR was logged by the European Intake Unit  (EIU)  on  19  October
      2018. On the same day the respondent informed MN  in  writing  of  the
      applicant's application and directed him to  complete  and  return  an
      enclosed form entitled "Consent to care for a child wishing  to  enter
      the United Kingdom." The EIU received MN's  Home  Office  file  on  23
      October 2018 and MN's completed form was received on 1 November 2018.

   5. On 3 December 2018 an EIU caseworker noted  that,  during  his  asylum
      application, MN  did  not  identify  the  applicant's  mother  as  his
      sibling. According to a General Case Information Database (GCID)  note
      "the MS [Member State] has not provided any further evidence  to  show
      the link between the claimed uncle and the  minors  [sic]  mother."  A
      'rejection letter' and 'hold letter' were sent to a Senior Case Worker
      for approval.


   6. On 6 December 2018 a Senior Caseworker advised that a new  version  of
      the EIU 'consent' form be sent to MN  before  rejecting  the  TCR.  MN
      never received this second 'consent'  form.  In  a  witness  statement
      dated 19 July 2019 Ahmed Ibrahim, the Dublin III Operational  Lead  of
      the EIU, stated that there was no available evidence that it was  sent
      to MN.

   7. On 12 December 2018 (although the letter was dated  3  December  2018)
      the respondent sent a 'holding letter' to Greece indicating  that  the
      UK was


           ... currently investigating the requested take  charge  request.
           Once  the  UK  has  arrived  at  a  decision  it  shall   inform
           yourselves. The UK  wishes  to  remind  you  that  in  the  best
           interest of the children, we request that you  do  not  transfer
           the minor.

The refusal of the TCR

   8. The respondent purportedly refused the TCR on 24  December  2018.  The
      decision read, in material part,

           The UK has attempted to substantiate the  family  link  and  has
           consulted the minor's uncle's Home  Office  submissions.  Having
           examined the information provided within the Home Office records
           the UK has not been able to identify any evidence  supporting  a
           familial link. In his previous  submissions  the  claimed  uncle
           mentions his siblings and gives their  names.  However  on  that
           occasion he did not give the name of the minor [sic]  mother  as
           one of his siblings.


           The UK has also considered all the information within  the  Take
           Charge Request, including; a supporting letter from the UK-based
           Uncle  and  his  written  consent,  and  copies  of   supporting
           documents including,

               . BIA for the Minor
               . mothers ID card (NOT Translated)
               . Uncle Id [sic] card (NOT Translated)
               . Father Id [sic] card (NOT Translated)
               . Minors ID (NOT Translated)
               . Medical Documents

           However, we have been unable to find any evidence to support the
           claim that the above named  minor  is  related  to  his  claimed
           Uncle.

   9. On 11 January 2019 Greece requested that the UK re-examine the TCR and
      provided further evidence in support  of  the  relationship  including
      photographs of the applicant with MN and English translations  of  the
      identity documents. The applicant's previous solicitors sent  chase-up
      letters  inquiring  about  the   progress   of   the   reconsideration
      application.


  10. A Pre-Action-Protocol Letter was issued  by  the  applicant's  current
      solicitors on 1 March 2019. This  challenged  the  lawfulness  of  the
      decision of 24 December 2018 and the respondent's ongoing  refusal  to
      accept the TCR. The solicitors arranged for a DNA test and the results
      received on 20 March 2019 indicated that it  was  "125.08  times  more
      likely" that MN was the applicant's biological  uncle  as  opposed  to
      being unrelated. This was not however served on the  respondent  prior
      to the issue of proceedings on 22 March 2019.

  11. On 25 March 2019 a caseworker concluded that the applicant and MN were
      related as claimed, and a senior caseworker agreed. An email was  then
      sent to MN's Local Authority to undertake a  "family  assessment".  On
      either 8 or 10 April 2019 the local authority issued a positive family
      assessment and, on 10 April 2019 the respondent carried  out  security
      checks and informed the Greek authorities that it  was  now  satisfied
      that the claimed family link was established and  that  the  UK  would
      accept the  applicant's  transfer.  The  respondent  asked  the  Greek
      authorities to advise of the arrangements to transfer the applicant to
      the UK at least 3 working days in advance of the transfer. In both her
      Acknowledgment of Service and Supplementary Summary Grounds of Defence
      the respondent contended that the challenge was now academic.


  12. On 15 May 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  granted  permission  to
      proceed with the JR observing, inter alia, that "the claim for damages
      seems to me to be an obstacle to the  conclusion  that  the  claim  is
      academic."


  13. In amended judicial review grounds dated 5 July 2019, and in light  of
      the  respondent's  acceptance  of  the  family  link   and   purported
      acceptance of the TCR, the  applicant  sought  declarations  that  the
      respondent breached her obligations under EU law (Dublin III  and  the
      Charter of Fundamental Rights - CFR) and under  Article  8  ECHR,  and
      damages for the said breaches. In Detailed Grounds of Defence dated 19
      July 2019 the respondent  maintained,  in  reliance  on  the  recently
      promulgated  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  R(FA,  AT,  TT)   v   SSHD
      (JR/5523/2018, JR/5405/2018,  JR/5406/2018)  (FA),  that  it  was  not
      necessary to grant any declaration in relation to the late response to
      the initial TCR or in respect of the time taken for the respondent  to
      accept the re-examination request as any  such  declaration  would  be
      academic  given  that  all  that  remained  was  for  Greece  to  make
      arrangements to transfer the applicant and Greece had up to 10 October
      2019 to do so. Any unlawfulness in  respect  of  the  decision  of  24
      December 2018 was equally academic following the decision of 10  April
      2019. Given that the overall time-frame had not been exceeded  damages
      were not required to give just satisfaction, even if the Tribunal were
      to find some failings.


  14. At the commencement of the hearing on 9 September 2019 I was  informed
      by Ms Kilroy that the applicant's transfer to the UK had been set  for
      17 September 2019. I proceed on the basis that transfer did  occur  on
      that date.


Relevant legislative framework

The Dublin III Regulation


  15. Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  604/2013  sets  out  the  criteria  and
      mechanisms for determining which EU Member State  is  responsible  for
      examining a third country national's asylum application. The  criteria
      establish a hierarchy for  determining  responsibility.  If  a  Member
      State where an asylum application is  lodged  considers  that  another
      Member State is responsible for determining the claim, the first State
      (the "requesting State") must ask the  second  State  (the  "requested
      State") to take charge of the applicant.

  16. Chapter II of the Dublin III Regulation deals with 'General Principles
      and Safeguards'. Article 3 states, so far as is relevant:


           1. Member States shall examine an application for  international
           protection by a third-country national [...] who applies on  the
           territory of any one of them. [...]  The  application  shall  be
           examined by a single Member State, which shall be the one  which
           the criteria set out in Chapter III indicate is responsible.

  17. Article 6 provides guarantees for minors:

           1.  The  best  interests  of  the  child  shall  be  a   primary
           consideration for Member States with respect to  all  procedures
           provided for in this Regulation.


           ....


           3. In assessing the best interests of the child,  Member  States
           shall  closely  cooperate  with  each  other   and   shall,   in
           particular, take due account of the following factors:


           (a) family reunification possibilities;
           (b) the minor's well-being and social development;
           (c) safety and  security  considerations,  in  particular  where
           there  is  a  risk  of  the  minor  being  a  victim  of   human
           trafficking;
           (d) the views of the minor, in accordance with his  or  her  age
           and maturity.

           4. For the purpose of applying Article 8, the Member State where
           the unaccompanied minor lodged an application for  international
           protection shall, as soon as possible, take  appropriate  action
           to identify the family members, siblings  or  relatives  of  the
           unaccompanied minor on the territory of  Member  States,  whilst
           protecting the best interests of the child.

           5. With  a  view  to  facilitating  the  appropriate  action  to
           identify the  family  members,  siblings  or  relatives  of  the
           unaccompanied minor living in the territory  of  another  Member
           State pursuant to paragraph 4 of this  Article,  the  Commission
           shall adopt implementing acts including a standard form for  the
           exchange of relevant information between  Member  States.  Those
           implementing acts  shall  be  adopted  in  accordance  with  the
           examination procedure referred to in Article 44(2).

  18. Article 7 explains that the hierarchical criteria for determining  the
      Member State responsible shall be applied in the order in  which  they
      are set out in the Chapter. Article 7 (3) states:

           In view of the  application  of  the  criteria  referred  to  in
           Articles  8,  10  and  16,  Member  States   shall   take   into
           consideration any available evidence regarding the presence,  on
           the territory of a Member State, of family members, relatives or
           any other family relations of the applicant, on  condition  that
           such evidence is produced before another  Member  State  accepts
           the request to take charge or take back  the  person  concerned,
           pursuant to Articles  22  and  25  respectively,  and  that  the
           previous  applications  for  international  protection  of   the
           applicant have not yet been the  subject  of  a  first  decision
           regarding the substance.

  19. Article 8(2), which is headed 'Minors', reads, in material part:

           Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor who has a relative
           who is legally present in another Member State and where  it  is
           established,  based  on  an  individual  examination,  that  the
           relative can take care of him or her, that  Member  State  shall
           unite the minor with his or her relative and shall be the Member
           State responsible, provided that it is in the best interests  of
           the minor.


      A relative includes an uncle (Article 2(h) Dublin III).

  20. The procedures relating to TCRs are contained in Articles 21  and  22.
      Article 21 states, in material part:

   1. Where a Member State  with  which  an  application  for  international
      protection has been lodged considers  that  another  Member  State  is
      responsible for examining the  application,  it  may,  as  quickly  as
      possible and in any event within three months of the date on which the
      application was lodged within the meaning of  Article  20(2),  request
      that other Member State to take charge of the applicant.


            ...


   3. In the cases referred to in  paragraph[s]  1  ...,  the  request  that
      charge be taken by another Member State shall be made using a standard
      form and including proof or circumstantial evidence  as  described  in
      the two lists mentioned in Article 22(3) and/or relevant elements from
      the applicant's statement, enabling the authorities of  the  requested
      Member State to check whether it is responsible on the  basis  of  the
      criteria laid down in this Regulation. ...

  21. Article 22 deals with the reply to a TCR. It reads, in material part:

              1. The  requested  Member  State  shall  make  the  necessary
              checks, and shall give a decision  on  the  request  to  take
              charge of an applicant within two months of  receipt  of  the
              request.

              2.  In  the  procedure  for  determining  the  Member   State
              responsible elements of  proof  and  circumstantial  evidence
              shall be used.

  22.  Article  22(3)  requires  the  Commission  to  establish  two  lists,
      indicating the relevant elements of proof and circumstantial  evidence
      in determining which Member State is responsible:


                 (a) Proof
                    i)  This  refers  to  formal  proof   which   determines
                       responsibility pursuant to this Regulation,  as  long
                       as it is not refuted by proof to the contrary;
                   ii) .....


                  (b) Circumstantial evidence:

                  (i) this refers to indicative elements which  while  being
                       refutable  may  be  sufficient,  in  certain   cases,
                       according to  the  evidentiary  value  attributed  to
                       them;
                  (ii)  their  evidentiary  value,  in   relation   to   the
                       responsibility  for  examining  the  application  for
                       international protection shall be assessed on a case-
                       by-case basis.

  23. Article 22(4) states,


                 The  requirement  of  proof  should  not  exceed  what   is
                 necessary for the proper application of this Regulation.


  24. Article 22(5) - (7) reads:


                 5. If there is no formal proof, the requested Member  State
                 shall acknowledge its responsibility if the  circumstantial
                 evidence is coherent, verifiable and sufficiently  detailed
                 to establish responsibility.


                 6. Where the requesting Member State has pleaded urgency in
                 accordance  with  the  provisions  of  Article  21(2),  the
                 requested Member State shall make every  effort  to  comply
                 with the time limit requested. In exceptional cases,  where
                 it can be demonstrated that the examination  of  a  request
                 for taking charge of an applicant is particularly  complex,
                 the requested Member State may give  its  reply  after  the
                 time limit requested, but in any event within one month. In
                 such situations the requested Member State must communicate
                 its decision to postpone a reply to the  requesting  Member
                 State within the time limit originally requested.


                 7. Failure to act within the two-month period mentioned  in
                 paragraph 1 and the one-month period mentioned in paragraph
                 6 shall be tantamount to accepting the request, and  entail
                 the obligation to take charge of the person, including  the
                 obligation to provide for proper arrangements for arrival.

  25. Art 29(1) falls under Section VI relating to 'Transfers' and is headed
      'Modalities and time limits'. It reads,


                 The transfer of the  applicant  or  of  another  person  as
                 referred to in Article 18(1)(c) or (d) from the  requesting
                 Member State to  the  Member  State  responsible  shall  be
                 carried out in accordance with  the  national  law  of  the
                 requesting Member State,  after  consultation  between  the
                 Member States concerned, as soon as  practically  possible,
                 and at the latest within six months of  acceptance  of  the
                 request by another Member State to take charge or  to  take
                 back the person concerned or of the final  decision  on  an
                 appeal or review where there  is  a  suspensive  effect  in
                 accordance with Article 27(3).

  26. If the transfer is not effected within 6 months of the acceptance then
      (subject to certain exceptions) responsibility for the asylum claim is
      transferred back to the transferring state (Art 29(2)).

The Implementing Regulations

  27. The Implementing Regulations (IRs) make  further  provision  generally
      for how the Dublin III Regulation framework is to  work  in  practice.
      These are  contained  in  Regulation  (EC)  No  1560/2003  (the  "2003
      Regulation"), which is amended by Regulation  (EU)  No  118/2014  (the
      "2014 Regulation").

  28. Article 3 of the 2003 Regulation, under the heading "Processing
      Requests for Taking Charge", provides:
           1. The arguments in law and in fact set out in the request shall
           be examined in the light of the provisions of Regulation (EC) No
           343/2003 and the lists  of  proof  and  circumstantial  evidence
           which are set out in Annex II to the present Regulation.
           2. Whatever the criteria and provisions of  Regulation  (EC)  No
           343/2003 that are relied on, the requested Member  State  shall,
           within the time allowed by Article 18(1) and (6) [now Arts 22(1)
           and (6) of Dublin III] of that  Regulation,  check  exhaustively
           and objectively, on the basis of  all  information  directly  or
           indirectly available  to  it,  whether  its  responsibility  for
           examining the application for  asylum  is  established.  If  the
           checks  by  the  requested  Member  State  reveal  that  it   is
           responsible  under  at  least  one  of  the  criteria  of   that
           Regulation, it shall acknowledge its responsibility.

  29. Article 5 of the 2003 Regulation provides for a negative  reply  to  a
      TCR and the possibility of the requesting State  requesting  that  the
      TCR be re-examined.


           1. Where, after checks are carried  out,  the  requested  Member
           State considers that the evidence submitted does  not  establish
           its  responsibility,  the  negative  reply  it  sends   to   the
           requesting Member State shall state full  and  detailed  reasons
           for its refusal.

           2. Where the requesting Member State feels that such  a  refusal
           is based on a misappraisal, or where it has additional  evidence
           to put forward, it may ask for its request  to  be  re-examined.
           This option must  be  exercised  within  three  weeks  following
           receipt of the negative reply. The requested Member State  shall
           endeavour  to  reply  within  two  weeks.  In  any  event,  this
           additional procedure shall not extend the time limits laid  down
           in Article 18(1) and (6) and Article 20(1)(b) of Regulation (EC)
           No 343/2003.


      The reference to Art 18(1) and (6) and  Art  20(1)(b)  should  now  be
      taken  to  refer  to  the  equivalent  articles  of  the  Dublin   III
      Regulation, i.e. Arts 22(1) and (6) and Art 23(2).

  30. Art 8(1) of the 2003 Regulation (Art 8(1) IR) obliges the Member State
      responsible for determining the asylum  claim  "to  allow  the  asylum
      seeker's transfer to take place as quickly as possible and  to  ensure
      that no obstacles are put in his way."


  31. Article 10 of the 2003 Regulation  (Art  10  IR),  under  the  heading
      'Transfer following an acceptance by default', reads,


   1. Where, pursuant to Article 18(7) or  Article  20(1)(c)  of  Regulation
      (EC) No 34/2003 as appropriate, the requested Member State  is  deemed
      to have accepted a request  to  take  charge  or  to  take  back,  the
      requesting Member State shall  initiate  the  consultation  needed  to
      organise the transfer.


   2. If asked to do so by the requesting Member  State,  the  Member  State
      responsible  must  confirm  in  writing,  without   delay,   that   it
      acknowledges its responsibility as a result of its  failure  to  reply
      within the time limit. The Member State  responsible  shall  take  the
      necessary steps to determine the asylum seeker's place of  arrival  as
      quickly as possible and, where applicable, agree with  the  requesting
      Member State the time of arrival and  the  practical  details  of  the
      handover to the competent authorities


      Art 18(7) of Dublin II now corresponds to Art 22(7) of Dublin III.


  32. Article 12 of the 2003 Regulation (Art 12 IR), as amended by the  2014
      Regulation, applies to unaccompanied  minors.  It  reads  in  material
      part,

           ...


           2. The fact that the duration of procedures for placing a  minor
           may lead to a failure to observe the time limits set in  Article
           18(1) and (6) and Article 19(4) of Regulation (EC)  No  343/2003
           shall not necessarily be an obstacle to continuing the procedure
           for determining the Member State responsible or carrying  out  a
           transfer.

The Charter of Fundamental Rights

  33. Recital 39 of Dublin III indicates that it respects and  observes  the
      "fundamental rights" and "principles" of, inter alia, the CFR. Article
      7 of the CFR relates to respect for private and family life.


           Everyone has the right to respect for his  or  her  private  and
           family life, home and communications.

  34. Article 47 of the CFR relates to the right to an effective remedy  and
      a fair trial.


           Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the law of  the
           Union are violated has the right to an effective remedy before a
           tribunal in compliance with the conditions  laid  down  in  this
           Article.


           Everyone is entitled to a  fair  and  public  hearing  within  a
           reasonable  time  by  an  independent  and  impartial   tribunal
           previously  established  by  law.  Everyone   shall   have   the
           possibility of being advised, defended and represented.


           Legal aid shall be made available to those who  lack  sufficient
           resources in so far as such aid is necessary to ensure effective
           access to justice.

The Human Rights Act 1998 and Article 8 ECHR

  35. Section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998 makes it  unlawful  for  any
      public authority to act in a manner  incompatible  with  a  Convention
      right. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:

           1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and  family
           life, his home and his correspondence.
           2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
           exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with  the
           law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
           national security, public safety or the economic  well-being  of
           the country, for the prevention of disorder or  crime,  for  the
           protection of health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the
           rights and freedoms of others.

The legal challenge

  36. I summarise the arguments advanced by each party, as detailed  in  the
      grounds, the skeleton arguments and the oral submissions.


  37. There is some agreement between the parties. The respondent  does  not
      now dispute that there was default acceptance of the TCR by  operation
      of law. This shift follows the handing down of FA  on  24  June  2019.
      Prior to this decision it was the respondent's position that a  breach
      of the 2-month time-limit in Art 22(1) Dublin III did not  necessarily
      trigger deemed acceptance and that  the  respondent  was  entitled  to
      reject a TCR after the  completion  of  the  2-month  long  stop  (see
      paragraph 16 of the Supplementary Summary Grounds of Defence, 8  April
      2019).  The  UK  therefore  became  responsible  for  determining  the
      applicant's asylum claim on 11 December 2018.


  38. The respondent accepts, on a fair reading  of  the  24  December  2018
      decision, that she  referred  only  to  having  checked  the  evidence
      provided with the TCR against Home Office records.  No  reference  was
      made to the evidence provided by MN in his completed form returned  on
      1 November 2018.


  39. The respondent additionally accepts that there was  a  divergence,  at
      the material time between the respondent's  guidance  and  operational
      practice in relation to engaging local authorities.

The applicant's submissions

  40. Ms Kilroy submits that the respondent failed to  properly  investigate
      the TCR within a reasonable time and, in any event, within the maximum
      two-month deadline established by Art 22(1) Dublin  III  (X  and  X  v
      Staatssecretaris  van  Veiligheid  en  Justitie  (Regulation  (EU)  No
      604/2013) Joined Cases C-47/17 and C-48/17). The  respondent  breached
      her  obligations  under   Dublin   III   by   failing   to   recognise
      responsibility by way of default acceptance under Art 22(7) Dublin III
      and by failing to provide for proper arrangements for the  applicant's
      arrival. The respondent was dutybound to  facilitate  the  applicant's
      transfer "as soon as practically possible" (Art 29(1) Dublin III)  and
      "to allow the asylum seeker's transfer to take  place  as  quickly  as
      possible and to ensure that no obstacles are put in his way" (Art 8(1)
      IR). The respondent's subsequent rejection of the TCR was unlawful  as
      responsibility  for  considering  the  applicant's  asylum  claim  had
      already passed to the UK. The respondent acted unlawfully by issuing a
      'holding letter' on 12 December 2018 and by purporting to  refuse  the
      TCR on 24 December 2018 given that the UK was already responsible. The
      purported refusal was, in any event, procedurally unfair.  The  delays
      in not acknowledging the family relationship until 25 March  2019  and
      in not acknowledging responsibility for determining the  asylum  claim
      until 10 April 2019 were also unlawful.

  41. Ms Kilroy identifies an 8 day delay between receipt of the TCR and the
      logging of the applicant's case on the EIU's file and the request  for
      MN's Home Office file, a delay of 1 month and 2 days  between  receipt
      of MN's completed form on 1 November 2018 and consideration of the TCR
      on 3 December 2018 (which was 8 days before the  expiry  of  the  two-
      month deadline), and a delay in  responding  to  the  TCR  before  the
      expiry of the long-stop deadline on 11 December 2018. There  was  said
      to be a 4-month delay between the expiry of the Art 22(1)  Dublin  III
      deadline and the eventual purported acceptance of the TCR on 10  April
      2019.


  42. Ms Kilroy strongly resisted the respondent's reliance on  Art  10  IR.
      Although this provision was set out in the Detailed Grounds of Defence
      under the general heading "the law" it had not been relied on  by  the
      respondent  in  the  section  containing  her  submissions.   Specific
      reliance on Art 10 IR first appeared in Mr Lewis's  skeleton  argument
      dated 2 September 2019. It was unfair for the respondent to now  raise
      Art 10 IR and such reliance was, in any event, inconsistent  with  the
      argument advanced by the respondent in FA. There was no 'election'  by
      Greece not to proceed by way of default acceptance as  the  respondent
      actively instructed Greece not to organise a  transfer  based  on  the
      applicant's 'best interests'. The applicant should not be placed in  a
      worse position because of the respondent's own  unlawful  reliance  on
      Art 12(2) IR and her instruction to Greece in  the  'holding  letter'.
      Even if Greece had initiated consultations pursuant to Art 10  IR  the
      respondent, consistent with her view of Art  12(2)  IR  at  the  time,
      would have rejected an assertion of default acceptance. Although there
      was a reconciliation procedure (Art 37 Dublin III) in the event  of  a
      disagreement between Member States Ms Kilroy  was  not  aware  of  the
      procedure ever being used and, in any event, it would  have  left  the
      applicant  without  any  effective  remedy  against  the  respondent's
      unlawful conduct. The only place  the  applicant  could  realistically
      challenge the respondent's conduct was in the UK. The fact that Greece
      had  not  initiated  consultations  was  not  enough  to  relieve  the
      respondent  of  her  liability  for  the  delay  in  transferring  the
      applicant that amounted to a breach of Dublin III and/or Art 8 ECHR.

  43. Ms Kilroy submitted that the facts of the cases considered in FA  were
      materially different to those in the present case, which most  closely
      resembled those in R  (on  the  application  of  FwF  &  FrF)  v  SSHD
      JR/1626/2019 (FwF), handed down on 16 August 2019. In  FA  the  family
      relationships had been accepted prior to the expiry of the  Art  22(1)
      Dublin III time limit and the Tribunal was only concerned with  delays
      in formal acceptance of the TCRs. The purported initial  rejection  of
      the TCR in the present case was caused by a breach of the respondent's
      investigative duty and occurred after the expiry of the two-month time
      limit. In FA there had been no cessation of activity and  arrangements
      for transfer continued to be made and were ultimately  made  within  6
      months of default acceptance. The Upper Tribunal in FA found that  the
      overall delays were not unreasonable and that was  why  there  was  no
      breach of either Art 8 ECHR or Dublin III. FA did not suggest that the
      unlawful refusal of a TCR that delayed family reunification could  not
      breach Dublin III and/or Art 8 ECHR. Nor  was  it  authority  for  the
      proposition that all unlawfulness taking  place  within  the  longstop
      timescales did not matter. Ms Kilroy submitted that the UK  could  not
      'borrow time' from Greece's six-month transfer  window,  or  from  any
      other Dublin III stage, in order  to  comply  with  its  investigative
      obligations  or  to  fix  its  own  unlawfulness  and  supported  this
      submission by reference to FwF (at [106]). In this case the maximum 8-
      month timeframe (2 months for responding to the TCR and then 6  months
      for transferring the applicant)  expired  on  11  June  2019  and  the
      applicant remained in Greece.

  44. Ms Kilroy  submitted,  further  or  alternatively,  that  the  initial
      failure to accept responsibility and the  24  December  2018  decision
      were unlawful because the respondent breached her  investigative  duty
      and acted in a procedurally unfair manner:


     1) by refusing the TCR without first giving the  applicant  or  MN  an
        opportunity  to  address   the   respondent's   specific   concerns
        (including a failure to send a new undertaking letter to MN);


     2) by confining her investigation to consideration of MN's Home Office
        file and failing to make further enquiries, including a failure  to
        investigate or facilitate DNA testing and a  failure  to  translate
        the ID documents or to inform the applicant or MN  that  they  were
        not translated so  as  to  give  them  an  opportunity  to  provide
        translations or DNA evidence.  Dublin  III  did  not  require  that
        documents provided by the requesting State be  translated  and  the
        respondent's investigative obligation to  take  "reasonable  steps"
        required  her  to   translate   documents   provided   by   a   UAM
        (Unaccompanied Asylum-seeking Minor) or,  at  the  very  least,  to
        raise the matter with the requesting State or the applicant  or  MN
        in good time and prior to  any  refusal  in  order  to  afford  the
        applicant opportunity to obtain translations;


     3) by failing to engage with the Local Authority following receipt  of
        the TCR and prior to refusing it, given that  the  Local  Authority
        could have obtained evidence relevant to the family link; and


     4) by reaching the irrational and unreasoned conclusion that  she  was
        "unable to find any evidence" to support the claimed relationship.


  45. The respondent's unlawful conduct  delayed  family  reunification  and
      warranted relief through a declaration of unlawfulness and damages for
      breaches of Article 8 ECHR and/or Dublin III. If  the  respondent  had
      not acted unlawfully the applicant would most likely have entered  the
      UK on an earlier date. Ms Kilroy submitted that the  applicant  had  a
      right to an effective remedy under Dublin III  and  the  CFR  and  the
      Tribunal was required to determine whether his fundamental rights  had
      been breached. There was family life between the applicant and MN. The
      facts of Entry Clearance Officer, Sierra Leone v Kopoi [2017] EWCA Civ
      1511, relied on by the respondent, were not remotely  similar  to  the
      facts of the present case. There had been  an  interference  with  the
      family life between the applicant and MN due to the unlawful delay. Ms
      Kilroy sought to distinguish  the  decision  in  R(Mambakasa)  v  SSHD
      [2003] EWHC 319 (Admin) on the basis that the unlawful refusal in  the
      present case caused the delay and the facts of  that  case  were  very
      different.


  46.  The applicant was left in limbo in Greece in circumstances  that  did
      not meet his developmental and emotional needs causing an interference
      with his private  life.  He  was  suffering  from  post-traumatic  and
      depressive  symptoms  which  caused  him  functional  impairment   and
      significant psychological distress. The delay in reunification  was  a
      major contributory and exacerbating feature to his  current  low  mood
      and distress and increased his vulnerability  to  further  psychiatric
      symptoms. It was likely  that  the  applicant's  mental  health  would
      deteriorate the longer he remained in his current position  and  there
      was also the possibility that self-harm and/or suicidal thoughts would
      emerge. The failure by the respondent  to  acknowledge  responsibility
      for the TCR and to  start  making  arrangements  for  the  applicant's
      arrival constituted an interference with his Art 7 CFR and Art 8  ECHR
      rights. This interference was neither in accordance with  the  law  in
      light of the breach of Dublin III, nor was it justified  as  necessary
      or  proportionate.  Any  reliance  by  the  respondent   on   resource
      constraints was misplaced given the requirement in  Art  35(1)  Dublin
      III to ensure that resources were placed to comply with the Art  22(1)
      deadline.


  47. There was a  public  interest  in  determining  whether  there  was  a
      breach/violation of Dublin III and/or Art 8 ECHR and  this  should  be
      reflected in the form of declaratory  relief  (applying  R(First  Stop
      Wholesale Ltd) v Revenue and Customs Commissioners  [2012]  EWHC  1106
      (Admin)). The applicant was also entitled to damages for breach of his
      EU law rights and his Article 8 ECHR rights.

The respondent's submissions

  48. Mr Lewis submitted that FA  left  little  scope  for  pursuing  claims
      seeking only declarations and damages for alleged breaches  of  Dublin
      III, and the issue of seriousness was  relevant  in  respect  of  both
      forms of relief sought. No purpose  would  be  served  by  granting  a
      declaration that the decision of 24 December 2018 was unlawful as  the
      TCR was ultimately accepted and the applicant is to arrive in the  UK.
      Any declaration would be academic.

  49. Mr Lewis identified the two core propositions established in FA:


        i) a failure to make a decision  on  a  TCR  within  the  2  months
           required by Dublin III does not result  in  a  "breach"  of  the
           Regulation that needs to be the subject of a formal  declaration
           because the regulation itself (in Art 22(7))  provided  for  the
           consequence of that failure; and


       ii) when assessing whether a failure to comply with a time limit  in
           the Dublin III Regulation was sufficiently  serious  to  warrant
           relief (including damages), it was appropriate to have regard to
           whether the overarching time frame had been exceeded overall.


  50. Mr Lewis  invited  me  to  follow  FA  as  a  decision  of  coordinate
      jurisdiction unless there was a  powerful  reason  for  not  doing  so
      (Willers v Joyce (No 2) [2016] 3 WLR 534). Although there had been  no
      official reporting of the decision the  three  cases  were  linked  to
      enable the Tribunal to provide guidance and neither side appealed  the
      decision. I was invited not to follow the more  recent  case  of  FwF,
      decided by Judge Kamara. Judge Kamara's references to FA were  in  the
      context of FA being a live and undetermined case and no reference  was
      made to the judgement ultimately given in FA. The factual  differences
      between FA and the present case were minor and the Secretary of  State
      was in the process of seeking permission to appeal FwF.


  51. Between the expiry of the Art 22(1) Dublin III time limit and the  re-
      examination request on 11 January 2019 Greece did not seek to initiate
      the consultations needed to organise the applicant's transfer  to  the
      UK, as required by Art 10(1) IR. Greece elected  not  to  rely  on  or
      enforce the  default  provision  in  Art  22(7)  Dublin  III  and  the
      provisions of Art 10 IR and instead made a re-examination request with
      better evidence. The applicant  was  wrong  to  submit  that  the  re-
      examination request was irrelevant to this case  as  Art  10  IR  made
      clear that it was for Greece  to  decide  whether  to  give  practical
      effect to the  default  provision.  The  respondent  was  required  to
      respond to the  re-examination  request  and  the  applicant  has  not
      suggested that the eventual acceptance of the TCR was void in law.  In
      order for the current transfer to have legal  validity  the  six-month
      period had to run from 10 April 2019. It was not open to the  Tribunal
      to speculate as to how Greece might have responded had there  been  an
      earlier acceptance of the TCR and the Tribunal was not in  a  position
      to determine what was likely to have happened if Greece  had  informed
      the UK that there had been acceptance by default. The judgement in X &
      X contained no discussion of Art 10 IR,  the  CJEU  having  apparently
      heard no argument on it. The fact of Greece not applying Art 10 IR was
      the most operative  factor  in  any  delay  and  the  absence  of  any
      initiation of consultations  was  critical  to  the  exercise  of  the
      Tribunal's discretion. Mr Lewis submitted that this was not a case  in
      which  the  Tribunal  needed  to  reach  a  definitive  view  of   the
      interaction between Art 22(7) Dublin III and Art 10 IR or  what  would
      happen where there was default acceptance but  the  requesting  Member
      State placed the default acceptance to one side  and  instead  made  a
      request for reconsideration.

  52. My attention was drawn to Annex X of the Implementing Regulations  (as
      highlighted in X & X) which contained information for applicants under
      Dublin III and which indicated that, under normal  circumstances,  the
      entire duration of the Dublin III procedure can take up to 11  months.
      Even taking the aspirational period for responding to a re-examination
      request as 2 weeks (Art 5(2) IR), the total  period  allowed  for  all
      stages of the Dublin III procedure was some 11 months and 5  weeks,  a
      period broadly in the region of a year. A period of almost  13  months
      and 3 weeks was, in Mr Lewis's submission, not significantly in excess
      of the timeframe envisaged in Dublin III.

  53. Any challenge to the lawfulness of the decision of  24  December  2018
      was entirely academic  following  the  subsequent  acceptance  of  the
      family link. As there is no practical relief that can be  granted  the
      Tribunal should not determine  questions  that  have  become  academic
      between the parties, applying R v SSHD ex p Salem [1999] 1 AC 450  and
      R v SSHD ex p Goloshvili [2019] EWHC 614. It was not,  in  any  event,
      irrational for the respondent to  reject  the  TCR  as  MN  failed  to
      mention his sister when asked to identify his family members  as  part
      of his asylum claim. There was  nothing  in  Dublin  III  or  the  IRs
      suggesting that the requested Member State was required  to  translate
      documents sent to it in support of a TCR. It was for  Greece  to  make
      good its own TCR and ensure that it was in a fit state to be  assessed
      by the UK. In so far as the translations were  "indirectly  available"
      (Art 3(2) IR), it was not  reasonable  to  expect  the  respondent  to
      correct the  deficiencies  in  the  evidence  provided  by  Greece  by
      translating the documents.


  54. Although the decision  of  24  December  2018  only  referred  to  the
      respondent having checked the evidence provided with the  TCR  against
      Home Office records and failed to refer to the evidence provided by MN
      in his completed pro forma, this was not so much a failure  to  comply
      with the investigative duty as a failure  to  expressly  consider  the
      information that resulted from  compliance  with  that  duty.  It  was
      accepted that MN did not receive a second undertaking form  but  there
      was insufficient evidence  that  the  letter  was  not  sent.  A  fair
      conclusion was that there  was  probably  a  postal  failure.  It  was
      unnecessary for me to  reach  a  view  as  to  the  lawfulness  of  Mr
      Ibrahim's current endorsement of the use of  holding  letters  as  the
      letter in the present case was sent before FA was handed down.


  55. Whilst it was accepted that there was a  divergence  at  the  material
      time between the respondent's published policy "Dublin III  Regulation
      Version 1.0", 2 November 2017 and operational practice in relation  to
      engaging local authorities this did not result in a breach  of  Dublin
      III or Art 8 ECHR, as found in FA. There could  in  any  event  be  no
      practical consequences from a declaration as the  respondent  had  now
      modified her policy. Whilst it was accepted that  the  respondent  did
      not, before rejecting the initial TCR,  consider  the  possibility  of
      admitting the applicant to the UK to have his DNA tested,  there  were
      no restrictions on DNA testing in Greece.

  56. Mr Lewis submitted that there was no breach of either Article  8  ECHR
      or its equivalent in Art 7 CFR. ECO  v  Kopoi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1511
      indicated that Article 8 was only likely to be engaged by a refusal of
      entry clearance involving a relationship between husband and  wife  or
      other close life partners or a parent and minor child. There had  been
      no refusal of entry clearance, as there was in  Kopoi,  and  the  only
      complaint of 'delay' related to the period  of  just  under  3  months
      between the receipt of the TCR on 11 October 2018 and  its  acceptance
      following re-examination on 10 April 2019. A  delay  of  less  than  3
      months in the context of a relationship between a teenage child and an
      uncle, where there was no  evidence  of  the  child  being  previously
      unusually dependent on the uncle, was not enough to breach  Article  8
      ECHR (relying on Askar v UK,  Application  no.  26373/95,  16  October
      1995) and R(Mambakasa) v SSHD  [2003]  EWHC  319  (Admin),  upheld  in
      Anufrijeva [2004] Q.B. 1124). The  total  length  of  the  Dublin  III
      process  in  this  case  had  not  substantially  exceeded  the  total
      timeframe envisaged by the Dublin III framework.


  57. I was reminded that although it was  accepted  that  there  were  some
      errors of law in this case  there  was  no  automatic  entitlement  to
      damages. Damages would only be due if there were "serious breaches" of
      EU law and breaches of human rights.

Analysis

  58. Both parties rely on FA, a  decision  promulgated  by  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Frances on 24 June 2019. FA and two other claimants were  minors
      who had been the subject of TCRs  issued  by  France  under  Art  8(1)
      Dublin III. The UK accepted the family link.  'Holding  letters'  were
      issued in respect of two of the claimants. In each  case  the  2-month
      deadline in Art 22(1) Dublin III expired before a formal acceptance by
      the UK. Judge Frances found that, in all three cases,


   i) The Secretary of State failed  to  properly  investigate  safeguarding
      issues to assess whether it was in the claimants' best interests to be
      transferred to the UK [64];


  ii) the practice of sending 'holding  letters'  acknowledging  receipt  of
      TCRs but failing to give a formal response was not in accordance  with
      Dublin III [65];

 iii) Art 12(2) IR only applied in "extreme cases" where there was  a  "best
      interest reason" for not complying with the time limits.

  59. Although the Secretary of State failed to act in accordance  with  Art
      22(1)  Dublin  III  without  good  reason  the  claimants   were   all
      transferred within the 8-month period envisaged  by  that  Article  (2
      months for the Requested Member State to make a decision on  the  TCR)
      and  Art  29  Dublin  III  (6  months  to  effect  transfer  following
      acceptance). At [69] the Judge explained,


           However, no breach of Dublin III flows from this because of  the
           deeming provision in Article 22(7) and, on the  facts  of  these
           cases, the transfers all took place within 8 months of  the  TCR
           being received.... Therefore, even if the TCR had been  accepted
           immediately, the transfer took place within the  six-month  time
           limit. There was no challenge to the validity of the transfers.


  60. At [70] the Tribunal stated,


           In these cases, the UK failed to accept  the  TCR's  within  two
           months and therefore responsibility automatically transferred to
           the  UK  along  with  the  obligation  to  provide  for   proper
           arrangements for arrival. At this  stage  it  was  open  to  the
           French authorities  to  notify  the  applicants  of  the  deemed
           acceptance and the UK's obligations.


  61. And at [72] the Tribunal stated,


           I accept, as Miss Giovannetti does, that the process could  have
           been  quicker,  if  the  Respondent  had  contacted  the   local
           authorities sooner and had followed up any lack of response, but
           any delay was not unreasonable in the circumstances.  There  was
           no provision in Article 22 that the TCR is accepted as  soon  as
           possible  and,  given  the  deeming  provision,  the   timetable
           continued regardless of any delay. Any delay in  requesting  the
           file or contacting the  local  authority  did  not  prevent  the
           process from continuing and, in all three cases, a transfer  was
           effected within a reasonable time. The  failure  to  accept  the
           TCRs had not prevented the arrangements that  should  have  been
           made in the transfer period from taking place  within  the  time
           limit provided in Article 29.


  62. At [73] the Tribunal found that the transfers  were  made  within  the
      overall time limit envisaged by Dublin III. Although the Secretary  of
      State's delay in accepting the TCR's was unlawful, "on the  particular
      facts of these  three  cases,  there  was  no  unreasonable  delay  in
      transferring the Applicants to the UK. There was no breach  of  Dublin
      III" [75].


  63. It was central to Judge Frances' decision that there was no  provision
      for 'holding letters' in  Dublin  III,  that  Article  12(2)  IR  only
      applied in "extreme cases", and that by operation of Art 22(7)  Dublin
      III responsibility was automatically transferred to the UK "...  along
      with the obligation to provide for proper  arrangements  for  arrival"
      [69]. The delays in each of the  cases  did  not  however  breach  the
      longstop period limited for transfer under Dublin III.

  64. The respondent now accepts there was default acceptance of the TCR  on
      11 December 2018 in the present case by operation of law.  She  argues
      however that  Greece  elected  not  to  pursue  the  path  of  default
      acceptance and instead requested reconsideration under  Art  5(2)  IR.
      Greece failed to comply with its mandatory obligation under Art 10  IR
      to initiate consultations to organise the applicant's transfer and any
      delay in transferring him was attributable to the actions of the Greek
      authorities.   The   respondent   submits    that,    following    the
      reconsideration request the 6-month time period for transfer commenced
      on 10 April 2019 when she formally accepted the TCR.


  65. The provisions of Art 10 IR were set out in the respondent's  Detailed
      Grounds of Defence but did not form part of  her  actual  submissions.
      Particularised reliance on Art 10 IR in respect of whether  the  delay
      in accepting the TCR breached Dublin III first appeared in Mr  Lewis's
      skeleton argument received by the Upper Tribunal on 3 September  2019.
      It is not appropriate for the respondent to place significant reliance
      on a legislative provision where this  provision  did  not  previously
      form part of her submissions. The applicant has a right to  know  what
      case  the  respondent  is  advancing  and  to  be   given   sufficient
      opportunity to engage with the arguments upon which she relies  before
      the substantive hearing. Although  the  Detailed  Grounds  of  Defence
      (paragraphs 28 and 29) did  highlight  and  comment  on  the  relevant
      wording of Art 10 IR, it was not clear how this related to the  issues
      in contention. Art 10 IR  is  however  a  relevant  provision  in  the
      application of the Dublin III framework  and,  despite  being  put  on
      short notice, Ms Kilroy was still able to make oral submissions on Art
      10 IR and, following the hearing, produced a  note  arguing  that  the
      respondent's reliance on Art 10 should not  be  entertained  but  also
      making substantive submissions in response. I am satisfied that Art 10
      IR is relevant in this judicial review and that the applicant has,  by
      reference to the additional note, been given a sufficient  opportunity
      to respond to the respondent's submissions.


  66. According to Mr Lewis there has been no judicial consideration of  Art
      10 IR. Art 10 IR was referred to by Counsel for the Secretary of State
      in FA (at [45]) but it  did  not  form  any  part  of  the  Tribunal's
      reasoning. There is nothing on the face of  the  decision  to  suggest
      that France initiated consultations under Art 10 IR but the  Secretary
      of  State's  belated  (and  unnecessary)  formal  acceptance  had  the
      practical consequence of enabling transfer of the  claimants.  I  note
      the absence of any time limit contained  in  Art  10  IR  to  initiate
      consultations, although the overall structure of Dublin  III  and  the
      IRs aim to facilitate a rapid transfer, especially when  dealing  with
      UAMs.

  67. Art 10(1) IR obliged Greece to "initiate the consultations  needed  to
      organise the transfer" following an acceptance by default.  Art  10(2)
      IR obliged the UK to confirm  in  writing  that  it  acknowledged  its
      responsibility as a result of its failure to reply to the  TCR  within
      the time limit, but this obligation only arose if the UK was asked  by
      Greece. There is no evidence before me that Greece formally  initiated
      consultations under Art 10. Instead Greece requested that the  TCR  be
      re-examined and provided further evidence, most notably the translated
      ID documents. This was unnecessary given the default  acceptance.  The
      respondent  however  contends  that,  through  its   actions,   Greece
      'elected' not to pursue or enforce the default acceptance and that the
      default acceptance essentially  fell  by  the  wayside  following  the
      request for reconsideration. For the following reasons I do  not  find
      that the failure by Greece to initiate consultations under Art  10  IR
      and its request for re-examination of  the  TCR  renders  the  default
      acceptance otiose.


  68. It is unclear  whether  Greece  appreciated  there  had  been  default
      acceptance of the TCR. Mr Lewis indicated at the end  of  the  hearing
      that there was no further correspondence between Greece and the UK  to
      disclose pursuant to  the  respondent's  duty  of  candour.  There  is
      however no mechanism by which any misapprehension by Greece  can  have
      the legal effect of cancelling or obviating the operation of Art 22(7)
      Dublin III. Art 10 IR itself does not provide that, if  Greece  failed
      to  initiate  consultations   responsibility   for   determining   the
      applicant's asylum claim would somehow  revert  to  it,  or  that  any
      subsequent application for reconsideration would enable the Requesting
      State and the  Requested  State  to  disregard  the  fact  of  default
      acceptance. It remained  open  to  Greece  to  initiate  consultations
      within the time limits prescribed in Art 29 Dublin III. Nor  is  there
      any mechanism in Art 10 IR  or  Dublin  III  by  which  the  purported
      reconsideration request could revert  responsibility  for  considering
      the applicant's asylum claim back to Greece. I additionally note  that
      an automatic transfer of responsibility requires no  reaction  by  the
      relevant Member States (Shiri v Bundesamt Fur Fremdenwesen Und Asyl, C-
      201/16, [2018] 2 C.M.L.R.3).


  69. The legal consequences flowing from the default acceptance  cannot  be
      disregarded by the failure by Greece to initiate consultations  or  by
      requesting reconsideration. As there was default acceptance of the TCR
      the formal rejection on 24 December 2018 had no legal effect. As there
      was no rejection of the TCR that was capable of being the subject of a
      request for reconsideration there was no basis for Greece  to  make  a
      reconsideration request. It  must  also  follow  that  the  subsequent
      acceptance was also otiose.


  70. In light of  the  above  assessment  default  acceptance  of  the  TCR
      occurred on 11 December 2018. The respondent cannot then point to  the
      purported acceptance of the TCR on 10 April 2019 as commencing the six-
      month time limit in Art 29 Dublin III. Greece should have  transferred
      the applicant by 11 June 2019. This did not occur. There has therefore
      been a breach of the longstop time limits of Dublin III. I  appreciate
      that this calls into question the lawful  basis  for  the  applicant's
      transfer on 17 September 2019 given the consequences of the expiry  of
      the 6-month time limit in Art 29 Dublin III. Ms Kilroy, in her further
      written note, contended that it was not  open  to  the  respondent  to
      resist the applicant's actual transfer by relying on her own  default.
      It is not however necessary for me to  determine  whether  the  actual
      transfer had a lawful basis.


  71. The breach of the Dublin III time limits materially distinguishes  the
      present case from FA where there was no breach of  the  longstop  time
      limits. Even if one takes  the  overall  time  limits,  including  the
      initial 3-month period in which Greece has to make  the  TCR  and  the
      three-week period for lodging a reconsideration request under Art 5 IR
      (which, on the facts of this case, I find do not apply), and a  period
      of 2 to 5 weeks, as suggested by Mr Lewis, for the UK  to  respond  to
      the reconsideration request (again, periods that do not apply  in  the
      present case), the overall time limit in Dublin III  would  have  been
      breached. It was central to the Upper Tribunal's decision in  FA  that
      no breach of Dublin III occurred, "because of the deeming provision in
      Article 22(7) and, on the facts of these cases, the transfers all took
      place within 8 months of the TCR being received." That simply  is  not
      the case on the facts before me.


  72. Mr Lewis relied on the  general  information  provided  to  applicants
      under Dublin III  relating  to  the  duration  of  the  procedure  and
      submitted that it was  broadly  in  the  region  of  a  year.  As  the
      applicant lodged his asylum claim in Greece on or around 20 July  2018
      and given that he was due to be transferred on 17 September  2019,  it
      has taken almost 14 months to bring about his transfer. Even if I  was
      to accept the overall period as being broadly a year  (which,  on  the
      facts of the present case, I do not), there has been a further  period
      of approximately 2 months during which the applicant has remained in a
      Greek refugee camp due to the delay in his transfer. Mr Lewis  submits
      that this additional period is not  significantly  in  excess  of  the
      indicative timeframe envisaged by Dublin III. One  must  however  take
      into account, when  determining  both  whether  to  grant  declaratory
      relief and any award of any damages for a breach of EU law and/or  the
      ECHR, not only the length  of  any  delay  but  also  the  applicant's
      particular circumstances including his age, his state  of  health  and
      the conditions in which he has lived during any  period  caused  as  a
      result of delay attributed to a breach of Dublin III. I have,  in  any
      event, found that the breach of the Dublin III  time  limits,  on  the
      facts of this particular case amounted to a delay of 3  months  and  6
      days (the period between 11 June 2019, when the applicant should  have
      been transferred, and 17 September 2019).

Consequences of Greece's failure to initiate consultations under Art 10(1)
IR

  73. Greece should have appreciated that there had been default  acceptance
      and it should have initiated consultations pursuant to Art  10(1)  IR.
      It did not. It was potentially open to the applicant following default
      acceptance to ask Greece to initiate these consultations and to  mount
      a legal challenge in the Greek Courts if the Greek authorities  failed
      to respond or refused to initiate  consultations.  Ms  Kilroy  however
      submits that even if this was done it would have made no difference as
      the respondent did not, at that stage, accept that default  acceptance
      had occurred.


  74. Mr Lewis contends that it is inappropriate to  speculate  as  to  what
      might have happened had Greece initiated consultations pursuant to Art
      10(1) IR. Whilst there is always  some  degree  of  speculation  I  am
      assisted by the respondent's clearly  stated  position  at  the  time.
      Until promulgation of FA the respondent believed she was not bound  by
      the two-month time limit in Art 22(1)  Dublin  III.  This  is  readily
      apparent from paragraph 16 of the  Supplementary  Summary  Grounds  of
      Defence. It was the respondent's position that Art 12(2)  IR  modified
      the application of Art 22 Dublin III in the context  of  unaccompanied
      children (see paragraph 18 of the  Supplementary  Summary  Grounds  of
      Defence). This position was maintained until after promulgation of  FA
      in June 2019. FA rejected this proposition and found the  respondent's
      reliance on Art 12(2) IR unlawful. Had consultations been initiated  I
      find it more likely than not that  the  UK  would  have  rejected  any
      assertion by Greece that there had been default acceptance.


  75. Following a rejection by the UK it would have been open to  Greece  to
      resolve the dispute through  the  reconciliation  process  in  Art  37
      Dublin III. Under the  reconciliation  procedure  the  chairman  of  a
      committee established under Art 44  Dublin  III  would  appoint  three
      members representing Member States not connected with the matter  and,
      after receiving arguments from the parties, would propose  a  solution
      within one month. No provision is made within Art 37 for  time  limits
      in respect of the appointment of the committee or in  respect  of  the
      length of time for parties to make their submissions. Any decision  to
      use the reconciliation procedure appears to  be  one  for  the  Member
      States themselves. It is not apparent that there is any basis  for  an
      individual to compel a Member State to  use  the  procedure.  No  time
      limits are set for the initiation of the reconciliation procedure, and
      the Member States are "... to take the utmost account of the  solution
      proposed" (Art 37(2)). There is therefore no obligation on  the  State
      parties to adopt the solution proposed. In light  of  the  forgoing  I
      find, on the facts of this particular case, that the  applicant  would
      not have an effective remedy (with reference to Art 47 CFR and Art  27
      Dublin III) in the enforcement of  the  allocation  of  responsibility
      under Art 22(7) Dublin III even if Greece used the Art 37  Dublin  III
      procedure.


  76. Although Greece should have initiated the consultations in  Art  10(1)
      IR, given the respondent's stated position at  the  material  time  in
      respect of the time limit in Art 22(1) Dublin III,  I  find  that  the
      failure by Greece to  comply  with  its  duty  was  not  in  itself  a
      principal cause of the delay that constituted a breach of  the  Dublin
      III time limits. The respondent's unlawful reliance on Art 12(2) IR is
      more likely than not to have resulted in a rejection of any attempt by
      Greece to initiate consultations under Art 10(1) IR, and  consequently
      the breach of the Dublin III time limits.

The decision of 24 December 2018 and the subsequent delay in accepting the
family relationship

  77. Although default acceptance occurred on 11 December 2018, and  the  UK
      could no longer accept or reject the TCR, the practical opportunity to
      facilitate  the  applicant's  transfer  presented  itself   when   the
      respondent did make a decision on the TCR.


  78. The TCR was made on 11 October 2018, it was logged 8 days later on  19
      October 2018 and an "undertaking" form was sent to MN  and  a  request
      made for MN's Home Office file. MN's Home Office file was received  on
      23 October 2018 and MN's completed undertaking form was received on  1
      November 2018. There was a subsequent unexplained delay of  just  over
      one month until a caseworker decided to reject the TCR on  3  December
      2018 and sent a draft 'holding letter'  to  a  Senior  Caseworker  for
      approval. MN had not mentioned the applicant's mother as a sibling  in
      either his asylum interview or his asylum  statement.  The  respondent
      was rationally entitled to attach weight to this omission. The  length
      of one month was  however  excessive  given  the  strict  time  limits
      imposed by Dublin III and the fact that the  applicant  was  a  minor.
      MN's file should have been considered earlier and  the  omission  upon
      which the respondent relied in purportedly rejecting  the  TCR  should
      have been identified earlier.


  79. The respondent accepts that she referred only to  having  checked  the
      evidence provided  with  the  TCR  against  Home  Office  records.  No
      reference was made to the evidence provided by  MN  in  his  completed
      form returned on 1 November 2018.


  80. On 6 December 2018, 5 days before  the  expiry  of  the  2-month  time
      limit, the caseworker was  advised  to  send  a  new  version  of  the
      undertaking form to  MN.  The  respondent  accepts  that  this  second
      undertaking form was not received by MN but maintains  that  this  was
      most likely due to a postal problem. I have considered  the  statement
      of  Mr  Ahmed  Ibrahim.  The  decision-maker  advised  him  that   the
      undertaking form was sent and he accepted that in good faith  but  the
      evidence  available  did  not  include  a  record  that   the   second
      undertaking letter was sent. Ms Kilroy  makes  the  valid  point  that
      there was no evidence from  the  caseworker  concerned  regarding  the
      sending of the second undertaking form. Nor do the GCID records record
      the sending of the second undertaking form, and there is no  reference
      to the decision-maker awaiting its return. In the circumstances I find
      it more likely than not that  the  second  undertaking  form  was  not
      actually sent. This would have been in breach of a new policy dated 30
      November 2018 requiring further "undertaking" forms to be sent  to  UK
      relatives to afford them the chance to provide further information  to
      substantiate a claimed family link. The new  policy  came  into  being
      following the decision in R (on the application of MS) (a child by his
      litigation friend MAS) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      (Dublin III; duty to investigate) [2019] UKUT 00009  (IAC).  At  [123]
      and [124] the Tribunal stated,

        123.     Third, it was not suggested before us that in  reaching  a
        decision in respect of TCR, the Secretary of State was not required
        to act lawfully according to public law principles (see  R(RSM  and
        ZAM) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 18, especially per Singh LJ at  [171]).
        The Tameside duty on a decision-maker "to acquaint himself with the
        relevant information" to enable him to reach an  informed  decision
        self-evidently  provides  a  basis  for  the  duty.  Finally,   the
        respondent's obligation to act fairly may require investigation and
        permit an individual to know the  'gist'  of  what  is  being  said
        against him or her and to make representations and/or  evidence  on
        issues central to the decision to be taken (see, e.g. R v SSHD,  ex
        parte Doody [1994] 1  AC  531  per  Lord  Mustill  at  p.560).  The
        obligation is succinctly stated by Lord Phillips  MR  (as  he  then
        was) in R(Q and others) v SSHD [2004] QB 36 at [99]:
         "The second defect is not  unconnected  with  the  first  and  was
         identified by the Judge in [2003] EWHC 195  (Admin)  at  [20].  He
         stressed that it was important that the applicant should be  given
         a reasonable opportunity to deal with and to  explain  any  matter
         which was to be relied  on  against  him.  We  agree.  Before  the
         decision maker concludes that the applicant  is  not  telling  the
         truth he must be given the opportunity of meeting any concerns or,
         as Lord Mustill put it in R v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department, Ex p Doody, [1994] 1 AC 531,560, he should be informed
         of the gist of the case against him. We should add  that  we  also
         agree with the Judge that at the very least the applicant must  be
         given the chance to rebut a suggestion  of  incredibility  and  to
         explain himself if he can. As the Judge put  it  [2003]  EWHC  195
         (Admin) at [20]: "All that may be needed is  a  warning  that  the
         account is too vague or  is  incredible  having  regard  to  known
         practices at ports or it was not reasonable to rely on  advice  or
         to obey instructions." The fact  that  the  burden  rests  on  the
         applicant makes such a warning more, not less, necessary."
         124.     None of this is, in our judgment, inconsistent  with  the
         Dublin III Regulation and the regime for reaching decisions  based
         upon the criteria  for  determining  responsibility.  Rather  than
         adversely affecting the integrity of that system, in our judgment,
         it is patently focused on enhancing or maintaining  the  integrity
         of the system in reaching lawful and correct decisions.

  81. Neither the applicant nor MN  were  informed  of  'the  gist'  of  the
      respondent's belief that the family  relationship  was  not  made  out
      before the purported decision was made to reject the TCR. It would not
      have imposed an onerous burden on the respondent to have  informed  MN
      and the applicant. It would have given both an opportunity to  explain
      why no reference was made to the applicant's mother during MN's asylum
      claim and would have  given  them  the  opportunity,  if  informed  in
      sufficient time, of obtaining further evidence prior to the  purported
      rejection.


  82. A  related  matter  concerns  the  untranslated  Afghan  ID  documents
      provided by Greece with the TCR. I acknowledge that neither Dublin III
      nor the IRs specify which Member State should undertake  translations.
      I do however see merit in the respondent's argument that it is for the
      Requesting Member State to make good its own TCR and ensure it is in a
      proper state to be assessed by the Requested Member State.  I  do  not
      consider that  the  investigative  duty  to  take  "reasonable  steps"
      extends to translating documents accompanying the TCR. Whilst  the  ID
      documents in this case were  relatively  short  there  is  always  the
      possibility that many untranslated documents may be provided. It would
      pose an unduly onerous burden to expect the Requested Member State  to
      make its own translations. The investigative duty and  the  principles
      of common law fairness, considered in MS (at [123], [137] and  [159]),
      and in Citizens UK, R (On the Application Of) v Secretary of State for
      the Home Department [2018] EWCA  Civ  1812  (at  [68]  to  [102])  did
      however require the respondent to inform MN and the applicant that the
      ID documents were not translated. The respondent was unarguably  aware
      that the TCR was accompanied by a  small  number  of  untranslated  ID
      documents and a  marriage  certificate  relating  to  the  applicant's
      parents. The BIA specifically identified the birth certificates of the
      applicant's mother and MN. It would have been a straightforward matter
      for the respondent to have informed the applicant and MN that these ID
      documents  were  untranslated.  This  would  have  given  MN  and  the
      applicant an opportunity to have the documents translated. Given  that
      the eventual acceptance of the family  relationship  appears  to  have
      been based on the translated documents, I find it more likely than not
      that  if  MN  or  the  applicant  were  informed  in  sufficient  time
      translations could have been provided and that  the  respondent  would
      not have purportedly rejected the TCR.


  83. The respondent accepts that, prior to the purported rejection  of  the
      TCR she did not consider the possibility of admitting the applicant to
      the UK to have his DNA tested. The  respondent  properly  notes  that,
      unlike the situation in France (considered in MS), there were no  such
      restrictions on DNA testing in Greece. As acknowledged by Ms Kilroy in
      her  skeleton  argument,  DNA  testing  could  be   obtained   without
      difficulty in Greece and consideration of the applicant's admission to
      the UK was unlikely to be  necessary.  It  was  however  open  to  the
      applicant to have obtained DNA evidence if he had been made  aware  in
      sufficient time prior to the purported rejection of the TCR  that  the
      respondent did not  accept  the  claimed  familial  relationship.  The
      applicant was deprived of the  opportunity  of  potentially  providing
      such evidence by the  respondent's  delay  in  considering  MN's  Home
      Office file and the failure to inform the applicant and  MN  that  the
      relationship was doubted.


  84. The respondent accepted that there was a divergence, at  the  material
      time between her guidance and  operational  practice  in  relation  to
      engaging  local  authorities.  The  relevant  guidance   (Dublin   III
      Regulation Version 1.0) required the local authority where MN  resided
      to be notified of the TCR and for there  to  be  engagement  with  the
      Local  Authority's  children's  social  care  teams  "throughout   the
      process, seeking their advice in every case." Mr Lewis submitted that,
      as was the case in FA, not acting in  accordance  with  the  published
      guidance did not result in a breach of Dublin III or a breach of Art 8
      ECHR. In FA however there was no breach  of  Dublin  III  because  the
      actual  transfer  occurred  within  the  8-month   time   limit.   The
      information that was eventually contained  in  the  Local  Authority's
      assessment indicated that social workers spoke to both MN and his wife
      and that  both  would  be  jointly  responsible  for  caring  for  the
      applicant, as they did their own children. It was noted  that  MN  and
      his wife have supported the applicant in the last year and that MN had
      travelled  to  Turkey  to  see  him.  No  safeguarding  concerns  were
      identified. Both MN and his wife indicated that they could support the
      applicant emotionally. Had the respondent complied  with  her  written
      policy and engaged with the  Local  Authority  the  Local  Authority's
      findings  may  have  been  of  relevance  in  determining  the  family
      relationship.


  85. For the reasons I  have  given  above  I  find,  in  addition  to  the
      respondent's concessions, that she failed in her investigative duty to
      inform  MN  and  the  applicant  of  her  concerns  with  the   family
      relationship and to give  them  an  adequate  opportunity  to  provide
      further evidence, and that she unreasonably delayed  consideration  of
      MN's Home Office file until 3 December 2018, just 8 days prior to  the
      expiry of the 2 month deadline. This unreasonable delay is, in all the
      circumstances,  unlawful,  as  is  the  respondent's  breach  of   her
      investigative duty. Had this unlawfulness not occurred  the  applicant
      is more likely than not to have been able to obtain  translations  for
      the ID documents that ultimately proved decisive  for  the  respondent
      prior to the decision of 24 December 2018, and it is more likely  than
      not that the respondent would not have purportedly rejected the TCR.


  86. Following the 11 January 2019  request  to  reconsider  the  purported
      rejection,  which  was  accompanied  by  the  translated   Afghan   ID
      documents, it took the respondent a further 2 months and  2  weeks  to
      accept that the applicant was related to MN. During this  time  Wesley
      Gryk Solicitors emailed the respondent  on  1  February  2019  and  21
      February 2019 seeking confirmation that the documents  sent  with  the
      reconsideration request had been received and asking for an indication
      of when a decision would be made.  A  Pre-Action-Protocol  Letter  was
      sent by the applicant's current legal representatives on 1 March  2019
      and the judicial review was lodged on 22 March 2019. Under Art 5(2) IR
      the respondent was only  required  to  "endeavour  to  reply"  to  the
      purported re-examination request within 2 weeks. As held in X & X,  it
      was not the purpose of the provision to create a legal  obligation  to
      reply to a re-examination request.  In  the  present  case  there  had
      however already been  default  acceptance  by  operation  of  law.  No
      explanation has been provided for the further delay of 2 months and  2
      weeks. Given that the applicant was a minor I find that  this  further
      delay was unreasonable.


  87. In FA the Tribunal found that the "failure to accept the TCRs had  not
      prevented the arrangements that should have been made in the  transfer
      period from taking place within the time  limit  provided  in  Article
      29." On the facts of the present case the unlawful purported rejection
      of the TCR did prevent the arrangements that should have been made  in
      the transfer period from taking place within the time  limit  provided
      in Article 29, as did the unreasonable delay in finally accepting  the
      family relationship.


  88. Judge Francis found that the "key date" in the minds of the  claimants
      in FA was the date of transfer and that all transfers had taken  place
      within 8 months of receipt of the TCR. That has not  occurred  in  the
      present case. In my judgement the respondent's unlawful conduct caused
      a delay of 3 months and 6 days that constituted a breach of Dublin III
      that distinguishes the present case from FA.

FwF

  89. In FwF Judge Kamara rejected the Secretary of  State's  argument  that
      there had been no breach of Dublin III because  the  overall  11-month
      time limit had not yet been exhausted. The Upper Tribunal judge  found
      that each  Member  State  was  responsible  for  compliance  with  the
      particular timescales imposed on them under the regulations  and  that
      there was no provision for a Member State to use the entire time frame
      for its own  purposes.  This  is  potentially  inconsistent  with  the
      decision in FA.


  90. In FwF France made a TCR on 15 November  2018  and  the  Secretary  of
      State purportedly refused the TCRs  on  28  January  2019.  There  had
      however been default acceptance on 15 January 2019. On 23  March  2019
      the Secretary of State asked France to send new TCRs  and  these  were
      received on 25  March  2019.  The  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the
      relationships on  22  May  2019  and,  on  3  June  2019,  the  French
      authorities were informed that the TCRs were accepted.


  91. As default acceptance occurred on 15 January 2019, France had until 15
      July 2019 to transfer the claimants. The hearing was on 12  June  2019
      and the decision was handed down on 16 August 2019. It is not apparent
      from the decision in FwF whether the  applicant's  transfer  had  been
      processed by 15 July 2019. I note the submission made by  Counsel  for
      the SSHD that, if the French authorities complied with  the  Sandhurst
      Treaty, the claimants would be transferred by 24 June 2019.


  92. To the extent that there is any difference in reasoning between FA and
      FwF, it is not necessary for me to resolve the difference in light  of
      my reasons for distinguishing FA from the present case.


Article 8 ECHR and Art 7 CFR

  93. There is no general obligation on Member States to allow non-nationals
      into their country to reunite with their  family  (Sen  v  Netherlands
      (2001) 36 EHRR 7). A state  may  however  owe  a  positive  Article  8
      obligation  to  admit  individuals  to  its   territory   for   family
      reunification, although  the  extent  of  that  obligation  will  vary
      according to the particular circumstances of the persons involved  and
      the general interest (Secretary of State for the Home Department v ZAT
      & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 810).

  94. The biological relationship between the applicant and MN is no  longer
      disputed. Although the applicant has only physically  met  MN  on  two
      occasions his physical isolation from his immediate  family  since  he
      left Afghanistan, his vulnerability as a  minor  in  a  Greek  Refugee
      camp, and the regular communication and financial  and  moral  support
      provided by MN,  as evidenced in MN's statement of 23 March 2019,  the
      translated Messenger extracts, the Local Authority check list and  the
      BIA, is sufficient to establish an Article 8 family life relationship.
      The same applies in respect of Art 7 CFR.

  95. The respondent relies on Entry Clearance Officer, Sierra Leone v Kopoi
      [2017] EWCA Civ 1511 but the facts of that case are markedly different
      from the present case. Kopoi concerned a citizen of Sierra  Leone  who
      wished to visit members of  her  extended  family  in  the  UK  for  a
      temporary period, not a minor seeking to join and be  supported  by  a
      family member 'in loco parentis'  for  an  indeterminate  period.  The
      dynamics of the family relationships in Kopoi are wholly different, as
      is the nature of the interference with those family relationships.

  96. I have found that the respondent's  unlawful  conduct  delayed  family
      reunification by 3 months and 6 days  in  excess  of  the  Dublin  III
      longstop time limits. But for the respondent's unlawful conduct,  this
      delay would not have occurred. As a result of the delay the  applicant
      was unable to establish a direct 'in loco parentis' relationship  with
      MN at an earlier opportunity and remained physically isolated from any
      family member. By the time this decision is handed down the  applicant
      will however have been  reunited  with  his  uncle.  The  respondent's
      unlawful conduct did not prevent the  applicant  from  being  reunited
      with MN, although it did postpone the reunification.

  97. When assessing whether the period of unlawful  delay  amounted  to  an
      interference with Article 8 ECHR and Article 7 CFR I take into account
      the applicant's age (he was 16 years and 4 months old at the  date  of
      default acceptance, and 17 years old when actually transferred to  the
      UK) , the fact that he and MN only physically met briefly in 2010  and
      2017, that the applicant was not previously unusually dependent on his
      uncle and that the applicant was at all times able to maintain contact
      with MN and his immediate family in Afghanistan through social  media.
      I note that he had lived for one year and 3 months in  Turkey  without
      any physically close family support. Although MN visited the applicant
      once in Turkey, he does not appear to have visited him in Greece.

  98. I have additionally considered  the  psychiatric  assessment  dated  6
      August 2019 undertaken by Dr S Fairweather. Dr Fairweather found  that
      the  applicant  was  suffering  from  impairing   post-traumatic   and
      depressive symptoms but that he did not  fulfil  the  full  diagnostic
      criteria for either psychiatric disorder. The applicant's  "...delayed
      reunification is  currently  a  major  contributory  and  exacerbating
      feature to his current low mood and distress." The applicant lived  in
      a container he shared with other young boys, he  was  paid  E15  every
      fortnight, he played football and he attended school. He had  about  8
      or 9 friends and  was  able  to  maintain  his  own  personal  hygiene
      (although he possibly suffered from scabies). He was in  contact  with
      his  family  and  his  uncle  by  telephone  and  social  media.   The
      psychiatrist noted that the applicant remained in an environment  that
      met his basic needs for shelter and food and in which he received some
      education and social contact, but it did not meet his other needs  and
      he  felt  under  threat.  Dr  Fairweather  found  the  applicant   was
      struggling with the impact of the delay in being transferred to the UK
      and it was very  likely  that  the  applicant's  mental  health  would
      deteriorate further the longer he remained in the situation, with  the
      emergence of full psychiatric disorder. Dr Fairweather explained,

           There is no doubt the delay [in being  transferred  to  the  UK]
           will have been detrimental to [the applicant]. His most pressing
           need is social  stability  in  an  environment  that  meets  his
           developmental needs, which his current situation does not.  This
           delay will have contributed to and exacerbated his mental health
           leading to his low mood. What is more challenging to  understand
           is whether [the applicant's] prolonged transfer process has  led
           to  the  expression  of  identifiable  post-traumatic   symptoms
           specifically (as a result of his traumatic experiences prior  to
           his arrival in Greece) and whether  a  prompt  transfer  process
           with early resettlement in the UK  with  his  uncle  could  have
           moderated against the symptoms are emerging. There  is  research
           evidence that indicates that post-migration resettlement-related
           stressors are the most important correlates of mental health  in
           humanitarian migrants, accounting for both direct  and  indirect
           associations. [The applicant] did not give me a detailed  enough
           account of his mental health over time to determine  whether  he
           already had the symptoms pre-TCR  application  or  whether  they
           emerged consequently as he remained in a situation  of  extended
           limbo and threat. Given his limited ability  to  articulate  his
           state and everything he has been through over time,  which  will
           also affect his memory for such information, it is probable this
           will not be possible to determine accurately.

  99. In Dr Fairweather's opinion the refusal of the TCR had  a  detrimental
      impact but the  degree  of  impact  was  difficult  to  determine.  In
      assessing the consequences  of  the  ongoing  separation  from  MN  Dr
      Fairweather  considered  that  the  applicant's  mental  health  would
      deteriorate the longer he remained in his situation and she  spoke  of
      the "potential impact" on the applicant's daily  functioning  and  the
      "possibility" that self-harm or suicidal thoughts  may  emerge.  There
      was no evidence that, by the date of the applicant's transfer  to  the
      UK, he was unable to care for himself, or that there  were  any  self-
      harm issues, or that a full psychiatric disorder had emerged.

 100. Mr Lewis relied on R(Mambakasa) v SSHD  [2003]  EWHC  319  (Admin)  in
      submitting that any delay in reuniting the applicant with MN  did  not
      result in a breach of Article 8 or Art 7 CFR.  Mambakasa  was  a  case
      involving the unlawful delay in the issue  of  the  claimant's  status
      letter that ultimately delayed his reunification with his family whose
      entry clearance was dependent upon the issuance of the status  letter.
      The delay was caused by several serious  administrative  failings  but
      there was no other decision  obstructing  the  achievement  of  family
      reunification. Mr Justice Richards (as he  was  then)  considered  the
      decision in Askar v United Kingdom (application no 26373/95,  decision
      of 16 October 1995), where the European  Commission  of  Human  Rights
      rejected at the admissibility stage an application by a Somali refugee
      who applied in July 1990 for family reunion with family members living
      in refugee camps in Ethiopia and in Somalia but whose application  was
      refused  in  November  1992.  In  an  extract  from  Askar  [101]  the
      Commission noted that Mr Askar had not seen his family members for  at
      least 6 years and that the nature of his ties with some of his  family
      members had not been specified. It was not apparent that the delay had
      any prejudicial effect on the eventual  determination  of  the  family
      members' application or that the passage of time prevented the  proper
      and fair examination of the merits of their case. At [102] Richards  J
      stated,

           102. I accept that the present case is on all fours with  Askar.
           Indeed, if anything the reasoning in Askar applies all the  more
           strongly to it. The delay in this case plainly did not prejudice
           the eventual determination of the family's applications: whereas
           in Askar the application was still pending at the  time  of  the
           Commission's decision, in this case the applications  are  known
           to have  succeeded.  The  period  of  delay  in  this  case  was
           substantially shorter than in Askar: it is true that I have held
           that the delay in  issuing  the  claimant's  status  letter  was
           unreasonable and that there was no equivalent finding in  Askar;
           but the very basis of the  complaint  was  that  the  delay  was
           excessive in that case too. The time for which the claimant  and
           the members of his family had been apart was somewhat shorter in
           this case than in Askar, but not  materially  so.  I  reject  Mr
           Nicol's suggestion that the Commission's decision in  Askar  was
           influenced by doubt as to whether real family life existed.  The
           Commission may have had such doubts in relation to some  of  the
           family members, but there is nothing to show that that  was  the
           case in relation to all the family  members,  and  the  decision
           proceeded on the express basis that there was  no  violation  of
           Article  8  even  if  the  relationships  did  fall  within  the
           protection of that article. The determinative  point  must  have
           been the lack of prejudice to the eventual determination of  the
           claims.

 101. At [109] to [111] Richards J stated,

           109. In relation to such matters I think it better to go back to
           the language of Article 8(1) and to the interests that it  seeks
           to protect, and to ask  myself  in  simple  terms  whether  what
           happened in this case can fairly be said to have involved a lack
           of effective respect for the claimant's family life.


           110. My answer to that question is  'no'.  There  were  numerous
           administrative failings; everything took  much  longer  than  it
           should have done; and some, but far from all, of the  delay  was
           the responsibility of the authorities. But in January  2001,  at
           the very beginning of the period on which the case has  focused,
           the Presenting Officer showed himself to be sympathetic  to  the
           claimant's wish to be reunited with  his  family  and  requested
           details with a  view  to  speeding  things  up  once  the  IAT's
           determination was promulgated. The general picture thereafter is
           not of people obstructing the applications by  the  claimant  or
           his family (the September 2001 visit to the British  Embassy  in
           Kinshasa being the low point in  that  respect)  but  of  people
           trying, albeit often inadequately, to provide responses  and  to
           move things along when the matter came to their attention.  Then
           at the end of the period, in November  2002,  a  discretion  was
           exercised in the family's favour so as  to  enable  them  to  be
           reunited without further delay. Looking at  what  happened  over
           the period as a whole, in my judgment it  did  not  involve  any
           lack of respect for the claimant's family life.


           111. I should spell out that, although I have found  earlier  in
           this judgment that there was unlawful delay in the issue of  the
           claimant's status letter, that does not lead automatically to  a
           finding of breach of Article 8. The issues are not the same  and
           the application of Article 8 must be  analysed  separately.  The
           fact  that,  as  a  matter  of  domestic  law  apart  from   the
           Convention, damages are not available  for  the  unlawful  delay
           (though  an  ex  gratia  payment  of   compensation   might   be
           appropriate) is not a good reason for seeking to accommodate the
           case within the scope of Article 8.

   Richards J was upheld on this point in Anufrijeva  v  London  Borough  of
   Southwark [2003] EWCA Civ 1406.

 102. In the present case the  respondent's  conduct,  at  least  until  her
      acceptance of the family relationship on 25 March 2019, did constitute
      an intentional (in the sense that she purposely refused to accept  the
      applicant's transfer) and unlawful obstruction to the  achievement  of
      family reunification.  It  was  not  simply  a  matter  of  inadequate
      attempts to try and 'move things along.' In Mambakasa the focus was on
      the impact on the Article 8 rights of the claimant and not his  family
      members outside the UK, and, although there was medical evidence  that
      the delay was having a prejudicial effect on the  claimant,  this  did
      not form any part of  Richards' J  reasoning  in  respect  of  whether
      there was a breach of Article 8. Nor was Mambakasa  a  case  involving
      strict time limits such as those  within  the  Dublin  III  framework.
      Mambakasa does however indicate that the length of any delay  will  be
      of particular relevance in  determining  whether  there  has  been  an
      interference with Article 8.

 103. I additionally note that in ZAT the Court of Appeal stated, "Delay  to
      family reunification may in itself  be  an  interference  with  rights
      under ECHR Article 8: see  Tanda-Muzinga  v  France  (Application  No.
      2260/10) 10 July 2014, although it should be noted that in  that  case
      the delay was of three years." Once again, the length of delay  was  a
      significant factor in determining  whether  delay  of  itself  can  be
      sufficient to constitute an interference with Article 8.

 104. Having taken account of the findings in the  psychiatric  report,  and
      having taken into account the quality and nature of the Article 8 ECHR
      and Article 7 CFR relationship between the applicant and MN, including
      their limited physical  contact  and  their  ability  to  continue  to
      communicate with each other during the period of the delay in much the
      same way as they did since  the  applicant  reached  both  Turkey  and
      Greece, and noting the relatively short period of the  delay  and  the
      applicant's circumstances in the Refugee camp, I am not satisfied that
      there has been an interference in the applicant's  private  life  (his
      moral and physical integrity) and his family  life  relationship  with
      MN. Whilst the applicant lost the opportunity to  have  been  reunited
      with his uncle sooner the relationship that had been  established  was
      able to continue until his transfer,  and  the  unlawfulness  did  not
      prevent his eventual transfer. During the  period  of  the  delay  the
      applicant had accommodation and attended school, he had the support of
      friends in the refugee camp and his basic needs of  food  and  shelter
      were being met. While the delay has impacted upon  his  mental  health
      there is some uncertainty as to whether  his  existing  symptoms  were
      caused by the delay or whether they  pre-existed.  The  applicant  has
      been aware since 10 April 2019 that he will be joining his  uncle  and
      there is no evidence that his ability to function daily  has  actually
      been affected, or that he has actually self-harmed.

 105. Having found that the respondent's unlawful conduct did not constitute
      an interference with the applicant's Article  8  ECHR  rights  or  his
      Article 7 CFR rights,  it  follows  that  there  is  no  scope  for  a
      declaration that Article 8 ECHR or Article 7 CFR have been breached or
      for the award of damages. I note that in FwF the Upper Tribunal  found
      there had been a breach of Article 8 and  Article  7  CFR.  That  case
      concerned a relationship between orphaned siblings which, on its face,
      constituted a stronger family relationship than in the  present  case,
      and the applicants in FwF were suffering from  complex  PTSD  and  one
      additionally  suffered  from  a  Major  Depressive  Disorder  and  had
      expressed suicidal ideation after learning of the refusal of the TCRs.
      I find that these facts are sufficient to distinguish the present case
      from FwF.

Conclusion

 106. For the reasons given above I will issue a declaration in  a  separate
      order that the respondent's unlawful reliance on Art 12(2) IR and  her
      unlawful conduct in relation to the decision of 24 December  2018  and
      her unlawful delay thereafter in  accepting  the  family  relationship
      gave rise to a breach of Dublin III.


 107. For the reasons given above I decline to make a declaration in respect
      of Article 8 ECHR and Article 7 CFR.


 108. The parties are to provide written  submissions  on  the  question  of
      quantum of damages in accordance with the order issued in  respect  of
      this decision.





                       D.Blum
            Signed:


                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




        Dated:         8 October 2019










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/1642/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                     The Queen on the application of KF
                    (a child by his litigation friend MN)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


                                    ORDER

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms C Kilroy  QC  and  Mr  J  Kirk,  of  Counsel,
instructed by Simpson Millar Solicitors, on behalf of the applicant  and  Mr
G Lewis, of Counsel, instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the  respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,  London  on  9
September 2019.

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

   1. The judicial review application is granted.


   2. It is declared that the  respondent's  unlawful  reliance  on  Article
      12(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1560/2003 (as amended by  Regulation  (EU)
      No 118/2014) and her unlawful conduct in relation to the  decision  of
      24 December 2018 and her unlawful delay thereafter  in  accepting  the
      family relationship gave rise  to  a  breach  of  Regulation  (EU)  No
      604/2013 (Dublin III).


   3. The parties are to provide written  submissions  on  the  question  of
      quantum of damages for the breach of Dublin III,  if  not  agreed,  as
      follows:


     a) The applicant shall file submissions by 18 October 2019;


     b) The respondent shall file submissions by 28 October 2019;


     c) The applicant shall file any submissions in  reply  by  4  November
        2019.


   4. Costs are reserved pending the Upper Tribunal's decision on damages.


   5. Any application for permission to appeal in these proceedings  may  be
      made at the hearing when the decision on damages is handed down, which
      disposes of all remaining issues in these proceedings.





                       D.Blum
            Signed:


                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




        Dated:    8 October 2019










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------


