
                                    [pic]


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                                JR/1743/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                                                  2 May 2019

                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                 sEMAL rANI
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before


                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE pitt

                               - - - - - - - -

Mr A Badar, instructed by Connaughts Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE pitt:

 1. This application is brought against the Respondent's decision dated  22
    December 2017 which rejected Article 8  ECHR  submissions  because  the
    Applicant had not paid a fee or used a prescribed application form.

 2. The background to this matter is that Mrs Rani,  a  citizen  of  India,
    born on 13 November 1982, came to the UK on 20 January 2011 with  leave
    to enter as a student. After a number of extensions of that  leave,  an
    application made on 20 February 2015 was refused on 28 August 2015.  An
    administrative review decision  dated  21  September  2015  upheld  the
    refusal of leave. Mrs Rani has not had leave since 21  September  2015,
    therefore.

 3. On 7 October 2015 she applied for leave to remain on family and private
    life grounds. She  paid  a  fee  for  that  application  and  used  the
    prescribed application form. The application was  refused  on  11  June
    2015.

 4. On 23 May 2017, further submissions relying  on  Article  8  ECHR  were
    made. In the decision under challenge, the respondent said this:

         "You have asked us to consider further submissions in relation  to
         your earlier application.

         Further submissions following an earlier application on the  basis
         of ECHR Article 8 family or private life reasons must be  submitted
         by way of a valid application on the specified form, the FLR(FP).

         ...

         The circumstances in which  the  requirement  to  submit  a  valid
         application will not be applied are set out in paragraph  276AO  of
         the Immigration Rules and in paragraph GEN.1.9 of  Appendix  FM  of
         those Rules.

         You have not submitted a valid application and  you  do  not  fall
         into any of the exceptions described in those Rules.  Your  request
         to consider further submissions is therefore rejected."




 5. The Applicant then sent a pre-action protocol letter to the  Respondent
    on 5 January 2018  maintaining  that  "in  order  for  a  human  rights
    application to be valid, it does not need to be on a  form  or  have  a
    payment. The Applicant will rely on the case of Ahsan v  The  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009."

 6. In a letter dated 22 January 2018, the Respondent indicated that he was
    not in a position to provide a  response  to  the  pre-action  protocol
    letter until 14 February 2018. However, no response was forthcoming  by
    that date and on 8 March 2018 the Applicant  issued  this  application.
    The ground of challenge was, essentially, that  set  out  in  the  pre-
    action protocol letter, as above.

 7. Permission to apply for judicial review was granted by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Grubb in a decision issued on 19 July 2019. His decision stated:

         "The claim raises an important point. Do the  Rules  preclude  the
         respondent from having to consider what, on its face, is an  Art  8
         claim without a paid application unless an exception in para  276AO
         (and Gen 1.9 of Appendix FM) applies? It is arguable, on the  basis
         of the grounds, that even if para 276ADE does not apply, an  Art  8
         claim  cannot  be  summarily  dismissed  simply  because   a   paid
         application is not made. There is some support that  it  cannot  in
         what is said in the case of Ahsan."

 8. On 10 September 2018, the Respondent offered to compromise  the  claim.
    The Respondent offered to reconsider the decision of 22  December  2017
    within three months and, upon the Applicant agreeing, she would be able
    to withdraw her claim, the Respondent paying the Applicant's reasonable
    costs.

 9. The parties were not able to  reach  a  settlement,  however,  in  part
    because the Applicant was not clear as to whether  the  Respondent  was
    proposing to  reconsider  whether  to  reject  or  accept  the  further
    submissions or make a decision on the merits.

10. As the parties did  not  reach  an  agreement  as  to  settlement,  the
    application proceeded to a  hearing  before  Mr  Justice  Davis  on  10
    October 2018.  At that  hearing,  the  Respondent  clarified  that  the
    agreement to "reconsider" the Applicant's substantive  Article  8  ECHR
    submissions would comprise a decision  on  the  merits,  not  merely  a
    reconsideration of whether the submissions could  be  accepted  without
    payment of a fee and completion of an application form.

11. In light of that clarification, Mr Justice Davis considered whether the
    application should be dismissed as academic but concluded,  as  in  his
    order dated 10 October 2018, that where the issue might be relevance to
    other applicants that it should be adjourned to a  further  hearing  to
    allow for service of amended grounds and amended  detailed  grounds  of
    defence.

12. At the hearing before us,  the  parties  both  provided  draft  consent
    orders indicating their positions  on  the  correct  disposal  of  this
    matter. Their positions in those draft orders were so close it was  not
    wholly clear why formal consent to a settlement had not  been  reached.
    In any event, having heard  the  submissions  of  the  parties  on  the
    correct disposal of this matter, we find as follows.

13. The application is academic and is therefore dismissed. The application
    is academic because the Respondent has agreed (as set out in  paragraph
    2 of Mr Malik's skeleton argument)  to  reconsider  his  letter  of  22
    December 2017, to consider the Applicant's submissions made in  writing
    on 23 May 2017 within three months, absent special circumstances and to
    pay the Applicant's reasonable costs, to be assessed if not agreed.

14. The application is also academic as the Respondent  has  clarified  (as
    set out in paragraph 4 of his skeleton argument) that the Applicant  is
    not  required  to  make  an  application  on  a  specified   form   for
    consideration of her submissions, is not required to pay  any  fee  for
    consideration of her submissions and the Respondent proposes to make  a
    decision on the Applicant's submissions on the merits.

15. For all of those reasons we find that the application is  academic  and
    should be dismissed.

                                  ~~~0~~~~



                                                                      UTIJR6




                                                                JR/1743/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                 sEMAL rANI
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE pitt



            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Mr  A  Badar,  of   Counsel,   instructed   by
Connaughts Solicitors, on behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  Z  Malik,  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 2 May 2019

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

(1)  The application for judicial review is dismissed for  the  reasons  set
    out in the attached judgment.

Order


(2)  We therefore make an Order that  the  judicial  review  application  be
      dismissed.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

(3)  No application for permission having been made,  we  refuse  permission
    pursuant to rule 44(4B)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 for the reason that there is no arguable error of law in the
    Tribunal's decision or other reason why permission should be granted.

Costs

(4)  The Respondent shall pay the Applicant's reasonable  costs  up  to  and
    including 10 October 2018, to be assessed if not agreed. No  order  for
    costs thereafter.

Signed:
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt





Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).




