
                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/1481/2019







                               Upper Tribunal

                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



             The Queen on the application of Vakhtang Kulumbegov
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



       Before Mr Justice Pepperall sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge.


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all documents lodged by the parties and  having  heard  Mr
Kulumbegov  (in  person)  and  Mr  Staker  instructed  by  Government  Legal
Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,
London on Thursday 28 November 2019.

Upon the Respondent agreeing to reconsider the decision  dated  19  November
2018

And upon the Respondent agreeing that the Applicant has  30  days  from  the
date this order is sealed to be issued a new Certificate of  Sponsorship  by
Temenos UK Limited

And  upon  the  Respondent  agreeing  that  the  Applicant  may  amend   his
application for Tier 2 ICT leave to remain to reflect  the  new  Certificate
of Sponsorship issued by [pic]Temenos UK Limited

And upon the Respondent agreeing to reconsider the Applicant's  Tier  2  ICT
application within 3 months (absent special  circumstances)  of  receipt  of
the Applicant's letter containing the details  of  the  new  Certificate  of
Sponsorship

And upon the Respondent agreeing that if Temenos UK Limited is  not  willing
to  sign  a  new  Certificate  of  Sponsorship,  his  application  will   be
considered on the basis of a leave outside the rules application

And upon the Respondent agreeing not to refuse the application on the  basis
that the Applicant was an overstayer between 20 December 2018 and  the  date
that the new decision is made

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal because any appeal  has
no real prospect of success and there is no other compelling reason  for  an
appeal to be heard:

      1) While the claim is  properly  arguable,  on  8  November  2019  the
         Respondent agreed to reconsider the decision, pay  the  Applicant's
         costs  and  give  appropriate  assurances  to   ensure   that   the
         Applicant's position is not prejudiced. The claim  was,  from  that
         date, academic.

      2) In refusing judicial review, I applied well-established  principles
         that Tribunal should not ordinarily entertain an academic claim.



Costs

 1) The Respondent do pay  the  Applicant's  reasonable  costs  up  to  and
    including 8 November 2019,  such  costs  to  be  assessed  by  detailed
    assessment on the standard basis if not agreed.

 2) The Applicant do pay the Respondent's costs after 8 November 2019, such
    costs summarily assessed in the sum of E3,447.


         Signed-
                  Mr Justice Pepperall




         Dated:   28 November 2019
[pic]

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
[pic]

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL




                                                                JR/1481/2019

                                                                Field House,
                                                     Breams Buildings London
                                                                    EC4A IWR

                                                            28 November 2019




                                   BEFORE


        MR JUSTICE PEPPERALL: SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE[pic]


                                   Between


                             Vakhtang Kulumbegov

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Kulumbegov (in person).

Christopher Staker, instructed by Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Mr Justice Pepperall

 1. By these judicial review proceedings,  Vakhtang  Kulumbegov  challenges
    the lawfulness of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department's
    decision of 19 September 2018  refusing  his  application  for  further
    Leave to Remain  and  his  subsequent  decision  of  20  December  2018
    upholding such refusal.

 2. Mr Kulumbegov was born on 5 June 1983 and is a citizen of  the  Russian
    Federation. He entered the United Kingdom  in  March  2010  with  entry
    clearance as a visitor and then,  from  30  May  2010  [pic]with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 2 (Intra-Company Transfer) migrant in order to work
    for his sponsor, Temenos UK Limited as a  Senior  Business  Consultant.
    His Leave to Remain was subsequently extended in 2011, 2013  and  2015.
    The last such extension was granted until 22 May 2018.

 3. On 15 May  2016,  Mr  Kulumbegov  was  convicted  by  the  East  Dorset
    Magistrates' Court of an offence of assault by beating. The offence was
    committed against his wife after Mr Kulumbegov discovered that she  was
    seeing another man. The magistrates imposed a community sentence  order
    requiring Mr Kulumbegov to undertake  150  hours  of  unpaid  work.  Mr
    Kulumbegov appealed against both his conviction  and  sentence.  On  11
    July 2016, the Crown Court at Bournemouth dismissed the appeal  against
    conviction but reduced the hours under the community sentence order  to
    100 hours. Mr Kulumbegov properly reported his conviction to  the  Home
    Office.

 4. The details of the allegation of assault were  briefly  set  out  in  a
    statement of PC Phillip Robbins dated 6 November  2015.  The  complaint
    was that Mr Kulumbegov had caused his wife two areas of bruising in the
    course of grabbing and pushing her. One was the size of a 50p  coin  on
    her right hand; the  other,  on  her  right  upper  arm,  was  smaller.
    Although there were no further visible injuries, Ms [V] also complained
    that Mr Kulumbegov had kicked her leaving her with a  sore  bottom  and
    pulled her hair causing again some soreness.

 5. Mr Kulumbegov maintains his denial of any assault. Indeed, he  defended
    case before the criminal courts on the basis that Ms [V] was injured as
    he attempted to prevent her from taking her own life. He  realistically
    accepts that he cannot go behind the conviction. Plainly the  Secretary
    of State was entitled to take the conviction  at  face  value,  and  Mr
    Kulumbegov does not argue otherwise.

 6. On 5 May 2018, Mr Kulumbegov applied for a  further  extension  of  his
    Leave to Remain. This application was again supported by  his  sponsor,
    Temenos UK Limited. By that time, he was earning �45,000 per annum.  By
    his decision of 19 November 2018, the Secretary  of  State  refused  Mr
    Kulumbegov's application. Brief reasons were given for the decision:


         "You have applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as Tier
         2 (Intra-Company Transfer: Long Term) but the Secretary of State is
         satisfied it would be undesirable to permit you to  remain  in  the
         United Kingdom in the light of your conduct[pic]


         The Home Office has reviewed the facts known about your case and it
         has been concluded that, following your conviction for  battery  on
         15 June 2016, your removal on the grounds of your conduct would  be
         conducive to the public good.


         This type of offence is an important consideration,  together  with
         the need to protect the public from serious crime and its effects.


         In light of this the Secretary of State has deemed that refusal  is
         appropriate under paragraph 322(5) and is not prepared to  exercise
         discretion in your favour.


         Therefore, you do not satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration
         Rules for this category and it has  been  decided  to  refuse  your
         application  for  Leave  to  Remain  as  a  Tier  2  (Intra-Company
         Transfer: Long Term) under paragraph 322  (5)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules."

 7. Mr Kulumbegov sought administrative review of this  refusal.  Following
    such review, the Secretary of State upheld the original  refusal  by  a
    further decision dated 20 December 2018.

 8. By this  claim,  Mr  Kulumbegov  challenges  the  lawfulness  of  these
    decisions. He argues that the Secretary of State was  not  entitled  to
    conclude that his conviction was a serious crime. He  points  out  that
    this was a summary-only offence that was not punished by  any  term  of
    imprisonment. He argues that the conviction was spent by the time  that
    the Secretary of State came to decide  his  application  for  Leave  to
    Remain. Further, he argues  that  no  reasonable  decision-maker  could
    properly conclude, on the basis of a  single  spent  conviction  for  a
    summary-only offence that did not attract a sentence  of  imprisonment,
    that Leave to Remain should be refused on the grounds of character.  He
    further points to the failure to follow the Secretary  of  State's  own
    guidance as to the proper approach to minor convictions. Permission  to
    bring this claim was given  on  the  papers  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Rimington on 13 May 2019.

 9. In his realistic submissions on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State,
    Christopher Staker accepts that the decision letter does not,  contrary
    to  Home  Office  guidance,  evidence  proper  consideration  of   five
    important factors, namely the  type  of  offence,  the  length  of  the
    sentence, the judge's sentencing remarks, the immigration  history  and
    any pattern of offending. Such concession was rightly made.  While  any
    offence of domestic violence is serious, it was important  to  consider
    this case properly upon its facts.

10. Paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules sets out the  grounds  on  which
    the Secretary of State might refuse leave to remain. Subparagraph  (1C)
    provides:


         "where the person is seeking indefinite leave to enter or remain:


           i) they have been convicted of an offence for  which  they  have
              been sentenced to imprisonment for at least 4 years; or


          ii) they have been convicted of an offence for  which  they  have
              been sentenced to imprisonment for at  least  12  months  but
              less than 4 years, unless a period of  15  years  has  passed
              since the end of the sentence; or


         iii) they have been convicted of an offence for  which  they  have
              been sentenced to  imprisonment  for  less  than  12  months,
              unless a period of 7 years has passed since the  end  of  the
              sentence; or


          iv) they have, within the 24 months prior to the  date  on  which
              the application is decided, been convicted of or admitted  an
              offence for which they have received a noncustodial  sentence
              or other out of court disposal  that  is  recorded  on  their
              criminal record."

11. Of course, in this case, Mr Kulumbegov was not within subparagraph (1C)
    since he had neither been sentenced to a term of imprisonment nor had a
    community sentence order been made  in  the  24  months  prior  to  the
    decision upon his application for leave. Among the further  grounds  on
    which the Secretary of State should normally refuse  leave  to  remain,
    sub-paragraph (5) provides:


         "the undesirability of permitting the person concerned to remain in
         the  United  Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct   (including
         convictions which do not fall within paragraph 322(1C)),  character
         or associations or the fact that he represents a threat to national
         security."

12. The Home Office guidance as to the proper consideration of cases  under
    paragraph 322(5) provides:


         "The main types of cases you need to  consider  for  refusal  under
         paragraph 322(5) or referral to other teams are those that  involve
         criminality, a threat to national security, war  crimes  or  travel
         bans.


         A person does not need to have been convicted of a criminal offence
         for this provision to apply. When deciding whether to refuse  under
         this category, the key thing to consider is if  there  is  reliable
         evidence to support a decision that the  person's  behaviour  calls
         into  question  their  character  and/or   conduct   and/or   their
         associations to the extent that it is undesirable to allow them  to
         enter or remain in the UK. This may include cases where  a  migrant
         has entered, attempted to enter or facilitated a sham  marriage  to
         evade immigration control. If you are  not  sure  the  evidence  to
         support your decision is reliable, then speak to your line  manager
         or senior caseworker [pic]


         "Before you refuse leave to remain under paragraph 322(5)[pic]  you
         must first refer your decision to your senior caseworker.


         You must:


            . Give specific reasons to refuse under  this  paragraph  [pic]
              Not  include  vague  generalisations  about   a   person'   s
              character, conduct or associations


            . Only refer to  the  specific  reason  you  are  refusing  the
              application


            . Not refer to a threat to national security  in  your  refusal
              notice


         When a case falls into  one  of  the  above  categories,  you  must
         consider it in line with the guidance in this  section,  regardless
         of whether the application is  valid  or  not.  However,  when  you
         consider such a case, you must only take into  account  information
         which is new and was not known to the Home Office at  the  time  of
         any previous decision. You must  not  take  action  on  information
         which was known to the Home Office at  the  time  of  the  previous
         decision, unless advised to by a senior caseworker."

13. Further guidance is given in  respect  of  criminal  behaviour  falling
    below the Criminal Casework threshold:


         "When an applicant has been convicted of a criminal  offence  which
         does not meet the CC threshold,  you  may  still  refuse  leave  to
         remain under paragraph 322(5). For example, the applicant has corm-
         lit ted an offence which by its nature or  circumstances,  suggests
         that it is not conducive to the public good to  let  the  applicant
         remain in the UK. Such offences may include (but  are  not  limited
         to):


           . Offences which involve violence


           . Sexual offences


           . Offences against children


           . Serious drug offences


         When you have such an application, you must refer  the  case  to  a
         senior caseworker. The senior caseworker will then  decide  whether
         the case is to be refused under paragraph 322(5). Each case must be
         considered  on  its  own  merits.  However,  you  should  take  the
         following into account for all cases:


            . Type of offence


            . Length of sentence


            . The judge's sentencing remarks


            . Immigration history


            . Any pattern of re-offending


         If you refuse an application on these grounds,  you  must  get  the
         certificate of conviction from the sentencing crown court. You must
         also get the judge's sentencing remarks from the appropriate  court
         reporting company."

14.  Specific  guidance  is  then  given  as  to  cases  involving   single
    convictions:


         "It is unlikely a person  will  be  refused  under  the  character,
         conduct or  associations  grounds  for  a  single  conviction  that
         results in a  non-custodial  sentence  outside  the  relevant  time
         frame.


         However, the greater the  number  of  cautions  warnings,  absolute
         and/or conditional  discharges  and  admonishments  on  a  person's
         record, the more likely  it  is  that  the  character  and  conduct
         provisions are applicable."

15. Finally, guidance is given as to  cases  involving  community  sentence
    orders:


         [pic] if an applicant has multiple community sentences, or  one  or
         more community sentences alongside other  non-custodial  sentences,
         particularly over a short period of time, you must consider whether
         you can refuse under  the  persistent  offender  and/or  character,
         conduct and associations category.[pic]

16. This case concerns a single conviction for a summary-only offence where
    the court, both at first instance and on appeal, did  not  consider  it
    necessary to impose a custodial  sentence.  There  was  no  pattern  of
    offending and Mr Kulumbegov was otherwise  a  hardworking  professional
    man. There is accordingly a proper basis for arguing that the  decision
    in this case was irrational and that the Secretary of State  failed  to
    follow his own guidance. Further, as conceded, the  decision  does  not
    properly evidence the consideration of all relevant factors as required
    by the guidance.

17. The Secretary of State has, however, acknowledged  that  the  decisions
    cannot stand. Indeed, on 19 July 2019, the Secretary of State  made  an
    open offer to reconsider her predecessor's decision of 19 November 2018
    and invited Mr Kulumbegov to withdraw his claim  upon  terms  that  the
    Secretary of State would pay his costs.  Such  offer  was  refused.  Mr
    Kulumbegov pointed out that he had  lost  his  job  by  reason  of  the
    original decision and that Temenos was no longer willing to sponsor his
    application. Accordingly, on 8 November 2019, the  Secretary  of  State
    made an improved offer by which she agreed,  first,  to  accept  a  new
    certificate of sponsorship and to allow  Mr  Kulumbegov  to  amend  his
    application to  reflect  such  new  certificate.  On  that  basis,  the
    Secretary of State agreed to reconsider the Tier 2 application. Failing
    any new certificate of sponsorship, she offered to  agree  to  consider
    the application for leave outside the Immigration Rules.  Further,  she
    agreed not to refuse the application on the basis  that  Mr  Kulumbegov
    has been an overstayer since 20 December 2018.

18. Mr Kulumbegov has refused the improved offer. By his own  draft  order,
    he seeks orders quashing the decision of 19 November 2018, a  mandatory
    order compelling the Home Secretary to grant Indefinite Leave to Remain
    outside of the Immigration Rules, an order that the  Respondent  should
    consider his  case  on  a  priority  basis  and  damages  for  loss  of
    employment, humiliation, loss of reputation, distress  and  obstructing
    and hindering the right to a fair trial. He also seeks further  damages
    under EU law and the Human Right  Act  1998,  together  with  exemplary
    damages and an order that the Respondent bears the  responsibility  for
    covering his loss of earnings until he finds a new job.

19. I am satisfied that if Mr Kulumbegov succeeded on this claim, he  would
    be entitled to an order quashing the decision of 19 November  2018.  He
    would not, however, be entitled to  a  mandatory  order  requiring  the
    Secretary of State to grant him Indefinite Leave to Remain. Equally, in
    my judgment, he would not be  entitled  to  damages  for  any  unlawful
    administrative actions of the  Secretary  of  State  -  see  R  (Quark)
    Fishing Ltd v Secretary of State for Foreign and  Commonwealth  Affairs
    [2007] UKHL 57,  at  [96].  Damages  are  potentially  recoverable  for
    breaches of the Human Right Act 1998 or under EU  law.  The  basis  for
    such claims has not, however, been established before  me  and  in  any
    event [pic] a damages claim would be better brought by a Part  7  claim
    in the High or County Court.

20. Accordingly, I am satisfied that while Mr Kulumbegov might well have  a
    claim with merit, it is unnecessary  for  me  formally  to  decide  his
    claim. Mr Kulumbegov's claim is academic and he  could  not  reasonably
    expect to gain any greater advantage from  pressing  the  matter  to  a
    hearing. As Mr Staker put it, the Secretary of  State  will  reconsider
    his case whatever order I make today.

21. I accept that this case  is  of  great  importance  to  Mr  Kulumbegov.
    Further, I accept the disastrous personal consequences of the Secretary
    of State' s decision in his case and his obvious anger at  the  way  in
    which he has been treated. These are not, however, proper  reasons  for
    this Tribunal entertaining an academic  claim  that  does  not,  in  my
    judgment, have any greater ramification beyond its own facts.

22. Indeed in R (Zoolife International Ltd v. Secretary of  State  for  the
    Environment, Food & Rural Affairs [2007] EWHC 2995 (Admin),  Silber  J,
    said at [36]:


         "... academic issues cannot and should not be determined by  courts
         unless there  are  exceptional  circumstances  such  as  where  two
         conditions are satisfied in the type of application now before  the
         court. The first condition is ... that 'a large number  of  similar
         cases exist or anticipated' or at least other similar  cases  exist
         or are anticipated, and the second condition is that  the  decision
         in the academic case will not be  fact  sensitive.  If  the  courts
         entertained academic disputes in the type of application now before
         the court but which did not satisfy each of these  two  conditions,
         the consequence would be a regrettable waste of valuable court time
         and the incurring by one or more parties of unnecessary costs."

23. Silber J added, at [13]:


         "These points are particularly potent at the present time where the
         administrative court is completely overrun with immigration, asylum
         and other cases and where it would be contrary  to  the  overriding
         objectives of the CPR for an academic case to be pursued ..."

24. There are no proper grounds in the present  case  for  entertaining  an
    academic  challenge  when  Mr  Kulumbegov  has  already  been   offered
    everything that he could realistically hope to  achieve  through  these
    judicial review proceedings. Accordingly, I dismiss  Mr  Kulumbegov'  s
    claim. The recitals to my order will - as volunteered by  Mr  Staker  -
    record the Secretary of State's concessions as to her intended approach
    to the reconsideration of Mr Kulumbegov's case.  Further,  I  award  Mr
    Kulumbegov his costs up until 8 November 2019; again, as conceded by Mr
    Staker. I shall, however, hear the parties as to the costs  since  that
    date.

                                 [pic]

