

                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/1265/2020

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                     The Queen on the application of MA
                   (a child by his litigation friend ASM)
                         [Anonymity Direction Made]

                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

     This decision follows a remote hearing in respect of  which  there  has
     been no objection by the parties. The form of  remote  hearing  was  by
     video (V), the platform was Skype for Business. A face to face  hearing
     was not held because it was not practicable and  all  issues  could  be
     determined in a remote hearing.

     Having considered all documents lodged and having  heard  the  parties'
     respective representatives, Ms M Knorr of Counsel, instructed by Wilson
     Solicitors LLP, on behalf of the applicant and Ms H Masood, of Counsel,
     instructed by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on  behalf  of  the
     respondent, at a remote hearing at Field  House,  London  on  1  and  2
     October 2020.

Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

    Background

    1. The applicant challenges four decisions of the respondent made under
       the provisions of the Council  Regulation  (EU)  No  604/2013  ("the
       Dublin III Regulation" or "Dublin III" or "DIII"):

    1) The decision on 27 January 2020 to refuse a request by  Greece  that
       the United Kingdom (UK) should take charge of his asylum claim;

    2) The decision on 13 March 2020 to refuse the  request  again,  having
       been asked by Greece to reconsider her earlier refusal;

    3) The decision on 27 April 2020 to refuse the request  a  third  time,
       having been asked by Greece to reconsider the previous refusal;

    4) The decision on 2 June 2020 to refuse the request a fourth time,  in
       response to a third reconsideration request from Greece.

    2. I summarise the applicant's account based  on  the  information  and
       evidence that was available to the  respondent  when  her  decisions
       under challenge were made. The  applicant  is  a  male  national  of
       Somalia born in 2006. He is the second  cousin  of  ASM,  a  British
       citizen of Somali origin who arrived in  the  UK  in  2006  and  was
       granted refugee status. ASM works as an Uber driver and lives  in  a
       property with one bedroom and a separate living room.

    3. The applicant's mother left him when he was approximately  one  year
       old. His father remarried and fathered children with his  new  wife.
       Although he lived with his father and his father's new family for  a
       short time the applicant mostly lived with H, his father's cousin. H
       has several children, all of whom are older than the applicant.

    4. From a young age the applicant has suffered from a medical condition
       that eventually required him to undergo an end  colostomy  in  2014.
       The edge of his colon was brought through his abdominal wall to form
       an opening through which his faeces drain.  The  applicant  requires
       the use of colostomy bags but these  were  difficult  to  obtain  in
       Somalia and he often made do using a cloth which was unhygienic  and
       smelled foul. As a result  of  his  medical  condition  he  suffered
       neglect, social exclusion, bullying and physical and  mental  abuse,
       and did not  attend  school.  As  H's  children  did  not  want  the
       applicant to sleep in their rooms because of his physical condition,
       he slept outside most of the time.

    5. The applicant and ASM maintain that their  respective  mothers  were
       first cousins. ASM's own mother  informed  him  of  the  applicant's
       circumstances in 2008. ASM began to send  money  to  his  mother  in
       Somalia intending that it be given to the applicant's father to help
       support the applicant. After the applicant's end colostomy operation
       in 2014 ASM started to send him colostomy bags or money to  buy  the
       bags. The applicant and ASM used to speak to each other regularly.

       6. ASM first met the applicant in 2014 in  Somalia.  ASM  wanted  to
          help the applicant because the applicant  was  a  member  of  his
          family and because he was a sick child who wasn't being  properly
          cared for by adults. The applicant stayed with ASM in  his  hotel
          for a week. ASM arranged for the applicant to  have  a  wash  and
          have his hair cut and bought him clothes and shoes and  food  and
          gave him money. ASM and the applicant "became close" during  that
          week. ASM told the applicant that he  loved  him  and  wanted  to
          change his life. They were both very sad when ASM returned to the
          UK. They would speak to each other once a week or  fortnight  and
          would message each other.

       7. ASM became aware that doctors in India may be able to perform  an
          operation on the applicant that was not available in Somalia. ASM
          raised funds and saved money to enable the applicant to travel to
          India for the operation. In May 2018 ASM travelled to Somalia and
          then travelled with the applicant to India. The applicant and ASM
          stayed in a hotel  and  ASM  took  care  of  the  applicant.  ASM
          collected and administered medication  to  the  applicant,  dealt
          with the applicant's  dressings,  bought  him  food,  washed  his
          clothes, played with him, and accompanied him  to  hospital.  The
          applicant and ASM returned  to  Somalia  in  July  2018  and  the
          applicant returned to the UK on 19 July 2018. The  operation  did
          not make much difference to the applicant's  daily  life  and  he
          required further treatment following an infection.

    8. ASM raised further funds and saved more of his own money to take the
       applicant to Turkey for a further operation in 2019. Although it was
       originally intended for the applicant's father and  AF,  H's  oldest
       son to accompany the applicant to  Turkey,  the  applicant's  father
       died in May 2019. In June 2019 ASM returned to Somalia and, together
       with AF, they all travelled to Turkey on 9  July  2019.  Doctors  in
       Turkey advised that the applicant needed to strengthen the  relevant
       muscles in his body  before  any  further  operation  and  that  the
       applicant's infection also needed to first be treated. ASM paid  for
       the doctors, the accommodation and food. ASM had to return to the UK
       after spending around a month in Turkey. ASM  returned  to  continue
       working to support himself and the applicant and AF. ASM paid  their
       rent and left  them  money  for  expenses.  The  applicant  and  ASM
       maintained frequent contact.

    9. Unbeknown to ASM the applicant and AF entered Greece on 7  September
       2019. The applicant did not want to return to Somalia because of the
       way he was treated and because H was no longer willing to  care  for
       him. ASM continued to  send  money  to  the  applicant  and  AF.  AF
       remained  in  a  refugee  camp  in  Chios  but  the  applicant   was
       accommodated by the Greek authorities in a hostel  for  children  in
       Athens. ASM purchased a mobile phone  for  the  applicant  and  they
       speak to each other frequently. ASM continues to financially support
       the applicant. ASM is in communication with the staff at the  hostel
       and discusses the applicant's behaviour and progress. ASM  has  been
       unable to visit the applicant because of the coronavirus.

   10. According to ASM's statements the applicant can't  communicate  with
       other children or his carers  in  the  hostel  because  of  language
       difficulties, and he is depressed because he is lonely  and  feeling
       anxious because of his situation. The applicant requires  a  private
       space to change his colostomy  bag  which  he  does  not  have.  The
       applicant also needs to insert a metal device every  night  to  make
       sure that his bottom does not close up and has little privacy to  do
       that. ASM  provides  the  applicant  with  financial  and  practical
       support, advice, love and attention, and wants to be responsible for
       the applicant and take care of him.  ASM  loves  the  applicant  and
       wants to change his life, and if the applicant came to  the  UK  ASM
       would look after him like his own  child.  The  applicant  maintains
       that ASM is the only family member  with  whom  he  has  a  positive
       loving relationship and who is willing to accommodate and take  care
       of him. The applicant regards ASM as a father figure.

   11. The applicant currently resides in a hostel in Athens  accommodating
       unaccompanied asylum-seeking children. He has no family  members  in
       Greece. He maintains that he has no family members  in  Somalia  who
       would be prepared to support him.

   12. ASM states that the  Home  Office  have  never  written  to  him  or
       telephoned him concerning the applicant.

   13. According to a psychiatric report obtained after  the  date  of  the
       last challenged decision the applicant is suffering  from  PTSD  and
       Major Depressive Disorder as a consequence of his history  of  abuse
       and neglect. In her written submissions provided after  the  hearing
       the respondent expressed her concerns with the  psychiatric  report,
       particularly the diagnosis of PTSD and major Depressive Disorder.  A
       report by an Independent Social Worker (ISW),  also  obtained  after
       the date of the last challenged decision, supports  the  applicant's
       account of his relationship with ASM.

    The Take Charge Request

   14. On 3 October 2019 the  applicant  registered  his  asylum  claim  in
       Greece. On 26 November  2019  he  started  residing  at  the  Athens
       hostel. On 24 December 2019 Greece made a Take Charge Request  (TCR)
       to the UK pursuant to Article 17(2) ("Article 17(2)") of Dublin III.
       The TCR was accompanied by, inter alia, a psychosocial report  dated
       23 December 2019 prepared by  Othon  Christofilis,  a  psychologist,
       medical notes relating to the applicant's  treatment  in  India  and
       photographs of the applicant and ASM together.

   14. On 3 January 2020 the respondent  emailed  the  local  authority  in
       which ASM resides. The letter stated,

            "The Home Office is  NOT  requesting  completion  of  a  Family
            Assessment at this time.

            However should you hold any evidence to assist in verifying the
            claimed family link or possess any other information  that  you
            believe should be considered when assessing  this  application,
            please do forward this within 14 days. ...

            The European Intake Unit will contact you further should it  be
            satisfied that the claimed family link has  been  demonstrated.
            At this point we will request completion of a Family Assessment
            on the UK relative which will assist with  the  best  interests
            consideration and the decision on this application."

   15. On the same date the respondent maintains  that  she  wrote  to  ASM
       asking him to complete a pro forma providing more information  about
       the claimed family relationship and his ability and  willingness  to
       care for the applicant.

   16. The respondent now concedes that her decision refusing the  TCR  and
       her refusal of the 1st request to re-examine the TCR were  unlawful.
       I do not therefore need to  dwell  on  these  decisions,  but  their
       framing is relevant to the issues that remain in contention.

    The refusal of the TCR, 27 January 2020

   17. The decision listed the documents that accompanied the TCR, referred
       to Article 8 DIII, and then stated,

                You have maintained that the above is eligible for  transfer
                to the UK under article 17(2). And it is stated  within  the
                Take charge request [sic], that the best  interests  of  the
                minor would be to join his claimed cousin in the UK,  as  he
                is the only close family he has.  However  no  evidence  has
                been provided which would support the assertion  that  their
                relationship would have the strength to compare to that of a
                sibling relationship.

                When considering all of the information available it is  not
                accepted that  this  amounts  to  exceptional  circumstances
                which  would  require  the  SSHD  to  show   discretion   in
                overlooking the failure to meet the eligibility criteria  in
                articles 8-11.

   18. This decision is flawed because the requirement  to  show  that  the
       family relationship for the purposes of Article 17(2) would have  to
       have the strength to compare with that of siblings is not  supported
       in Dublin III or any published Guidance (R(on the application of BAA
       and Another) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  (Dublin
       III: judicial review; SoS's duties) [2020] UKUT 00227 (IAC) ("BAA"),
       at [113]).

    The refusal of the first reconsideration request, 13 March 2020

   20. On 12 February 2020 Greece requested that the UK re-examine the  TCR
       pursuant to Article 5(2)  of  the  Implementing  Regulation  (EC  No
       1560/2003) ("IR") and provided further evidence in  the  form  of  a
       short statement from ASM dated 7 February 2020  and  a  letter  from
       Tzortzi Eleni, 'Scientific Supervisor'.

   21. The respondent refused the reconsideration request.  She  noted  her
       failure to comply with the two-week  deadline  outlined  in  Article
       5(2)IR  but  cited  the  judgment  of  the  CJEU  in  X  and   X   v
       Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid  en  Justitie  (Regulation  (EU)  No
       604/2013) (Joined Cases C-47/17 and C-48/17, [2019] 2 CMLR 100)  ("X
       and X") and maintained that the expiry of the time limit meant  that
       Greece was responsible for the applicant's asylum claim  "unless  it
       still has the possibility to make a further take charge or  takeback
       request."

   22. The respondent does not defend this decision. She accepts  that  she
       ought to have taken  the  opportunity  to  cure  the  defective  1st
       decision and did not do so.

    The refusal of the second reconsideration request, 27 April 2020

   23. On 2 April 2020 Greece sent a 2nd re-examination request enclosing a
       detailed 'Best Interests Assessment' ("BIA") dated 28 February  2020
       and a legal submission from an NGO, 'Safe  Passage',  responding  to
       the respondent's previous reliance on the X and X judgement.

   24. Following a Pre-Action-Protocol Letter  issued  by  the  applicant's
       solicitors on 9 April 2020 and challenging the first two  decisions,
       a claim for judicial review was sent to the Upper Tribunal  and  the
       respondent on 23 April 2020. This was accompanied by, inter alia,  a
       witness statement from ASM dated 23 April 2020, a witness  statement
       from Othon Christofilis (psychologist) dated 22 April  2020,  and  a
       witness statement from Anastasia Solopova, an Assistant Solicitor at
       Wilson Solicitors LLP, dated 23 April 2020. This claim was issued by
       the Upper Tribunal on 24 April 2020.

   25. On 27 April 2020 the respondent refused Greece's 2nd  re-examination
       request. This is the principal decision that is under  challenge  in
       these proceedings. The  respondent  maintained  that  the  secondary
       examination request was invalid but she nonetheless  considered  the
       evidence provided to her and reassessed her earlier  decisions.  The
       respondent stated,

                It is noted that the applicant  claims  that  [ASM]  is  his
                cousin, and [ASM] does not mention  either  the  applicant's
                mother or  father  as  being  his  relative.  Unfortunately,
                having considered all the  evidence  available,  he  is  not
                considered to fall  under  the  category  of  'relative'  as
                defined by article 8.

   26. The respondent referred to the 'best interests of the child' being a
       primary consideration in any decision, but that it was not the  only
       consideration and  that  it  would  not  automatically  lead  to  an
       individual being transferred.

                As such whilst the accompanying documentation which  support
                the reunification has been considered it is noted that it is
                based on the assumption that the two parties were related as
                claimed  and  involved  no  scrutiny  or  evidence  of   the
                relationship between the two parties.  As  such  it  is  not
                considered that, in relation to the investigations into  the
                familial link between the two parties that these reports add
                any substantial evidential value. As  the  receiving  member
                state, it is the duty of the UK to ensure that  the  parties
                are related as claimed and  for  the  reasons  listed  above
                unfortunately it has not been possible to verify the  family
                link with the evidence provided to date.

   27. The respondent additionally stated,

                When considering the evidence submitted in relation  to  the
                applicant's medical conditions it is important to note  that
                the starting point must be that this evidence suggests  that
                the cause of these conditions are historic. The evidence has
                not established a clear causal link between the  applicant's
                conditions and his separation from the UK sponsor.

                It is not clear from the reports how his conditions are  not
                being adequately treated or why the  UK  health  system  and
                specifically the UK sponsor would be in a better position to
                provide the care needs of the applicant.

   28. Even if  it  was  accepted  that  they  were  "first  cousins",  the
       respondent was not willing  to  exercise  her  discretion  based  on
       family considerations as she  was  not  satisfied,  citing  Kugathas
       [2003] EWCA Civ 31 ("Kugathas"), that  the  applicant  and  ASM  had
       established a family life together in the sense  of  a  relationship
       involving more than the normal emotional ties between relatives.

                It  is  noted  that  the  reports  and  the  best  interests
                assessment also allude to the close relationship between the
                applicant and the UK sponsor. However  it  is  not  accepted
                that the applicant and the  UK  sponsor  share  family  life
                within the meaning of Article 8 ECHR/Article 7  of  the  CFR
                (even if  they  are  related  is  claimed),  or  that  their
                relationship in the circumstances of the case are  otherwise
                such  as  to  justify  an  exercise  of  discretion  in  the
                applicant's favour under Article 17(2).

   29. Having cited from paragraph 24 of Kugathas, the respondent stated,

                Whilst it is accepted there may be some degree of  emotional
                ties, and natural concern and affection between a  minor  in
                his adult cousin, it is not accepted that there is  evidence
                in this case of elements of dependency involving  more  than
                the normal emotional ties.

   30. The respondent noted that ASM had lived in the  UK  since  2006  and
       that the BIA indicated that ASM and the applicant met  for  the  1st
       time in 2014, when the applicant was 8 years old, and that "the ties
       built in this period are not likely to have been  significant  given
       the age of the applicant." Having referred to the assertions in  the
       BIA that ASM and the applicant spoke on the phone and via Skype, the
       respondent maintained that there was no evidence  of  dependency  on
       ASM during this period involving more than the normal emotional ties
       between family members. Whilst it noted that ASM collected donations
       and took the applicant for an operation in India in  2018,  and  the
       claim that ASM travelled to Somalia in May 2019 and  then  with  the
       applicant to Turkey to  have  another  operation  was  acknowledged,
       there was said to be no evidence in relation to this operation.  The
       respondent again rejected the existence of any dependency  involving
       more than normal  emotional  ties,  "even  when  considered  in  the
       context of the issues described in the medical report."

   31. The respondent finally stated,

                Given it is not accepted that there is family  life  between
                the two parties the rejection of  the  take  charge  request
                does not result in a breach of the applicant's Article 7 CFR
                and Article 8 ECHR rights.

    The refusal of the third reconsideration request, 2 June 2020

   32. On 18 May 2020 Greece issued a third  reconsideration  request.  The
       request did not contain any new evidence but  took  issue  with  the
       respondent's claim that the earlier  request  was  invalid  and  the
       respondent's use of the term "relative" with reference to Article  8
       DIII. Greece stated that the decision of 27 April 2020 was the first
       time the respondent disputed the establishment of the  family  link.
       This was said to be contrary to the  Implementing  Regulation  which
       requires full and detailed reasons for a refusal. Greece  maintained
       that although the family link had not been proven  by  documentation
       enough evidence had been provided to  enable  the  UK  to  make  any
       further investigations for the purposes of establishing  the  family
       link. The reconsideration request stated,

                We do not claim that the boy's survival is at risk in Greece
                or that the Greek health system is unable to provide medical
                treatment. What we do claim is that the  medical  issues  of
                the boy are serious and affect his  everyday  life  in  many
                ways. In this respect having an adult person  looking  after
                him is indeed in his  best  interest.  Everyday  social  and
                psychological support cannot be provided by the Greek Health
                Services and this is what the  14-year-old  boy  desperately
                needs.

   33. Greece outlined ASM's involvement in the trip to India in  2018  and
       the trip to Turkey in 2019 and maintained that  this  evidenced  far
       more than normal emotional ties. Greece continued to  believe  there
       were strong humanitarian reasons for accepting  the  reconsideration
       request.

   34. On 2 June 2020 the respondent reiterated her view  that  the  Dublin
       III  Regulation  made  no  provision  for  multiple   re-examination
       requests and stated that she now considered Greece to be responsible
       for examining the applicant's asylum claim.

    The grant of permission to proceed with the judicial review challenge

   35. On 22 June 2020 the applicant's solicitors applied  to  amend  their
       grounds to include challenges to the decisions of 27 April 2020  and
       2 June 2020.

   36. In a decision dated 14 July 2020, although sent to the parties on 23
       July 2020, Mr Justice Lane, President of the Upper  Tribunal  (IAC),
       granted permission to proceed with the JR in  respect  of  all  four
       decisions. He observed,

                "The challenges to the impugned decisions are  arguable;  in
                particular, as regards the asserted duties of  investigation
                and advance notification of concerns,  and  as  regards  the
                respondent's engagement with the evidence  from  Greece  and
                with the relevant local authority in the United Kingdom."

    The applicant's submissions

   37. I summarise the applicant's submissions, as set out  in  Ms  Knorr's
       detailed skeleton argument and her oral submissions. The submissions
       can be split into two  parts.  The  first  part  contends  that  the
       respondent's decisions (but  with  almost  exclusive  focus  on  the
       decision of 27 April 2020) disclose traditional  public  law  errors
       and breach the Dublin III Regulation in respect of its  requirements
       as  to  the  best  interests  of  children  and  its   investigative
       obligations.

   38. Firstly, the respondent  misdirected  herself  and  failed  to  give
       lawful reasons when considering  and  rejecting  the  familial  link
       between the applicant and ASM as she asked herself whether they were
       "relatives" which has a specific definition in Dublin  III  relevant
       to the Article 8(2) DIII criteria. The  respondent  therefore  asked
       herself the wrong question.

   39. Secondly, the respondent failed to adopt  the  correct  approach  to
       evidence and proof pursuant to Article 22 DIII and the  respondent's
       own policy confirming that the relevant standard  was  that  of  the
       "balance of probabilities".  Whilst  acknowledging  that   'List  B'
       (concerning  'circumstantial  evidence'   in   Annex   II   of   the
       Implementing  Regulation  No  118/2014  necessary  for   proving   a
       relationship) strictly related to the Chapter III  criteria  in  the
       Dublin III Regulation, there was no  logical  reason  why  the  same
       approach should not be applied when assessing  the  family  link  in
       Article 17(2). The respondent failed to grapple with the evidence of
       the family link and acted unreasonably and unlawfully  in  attaching
       little or no weight to the views  of  the  Greek  professionals  who
       accepted the relationship and who were in regular communication with
       the applicant and ASM. There was said to be no basis  for  rejecting
       the evidence of the claimed relationship.

   40. Thirdly, if the respondent had concerns with the familial link,  she
       was obliged to put this to the applicant and/or ASM as a  matter  of
       fairness prior to rejecting that family link (Balajigari [2019] EWCA
       Civ 673 ("Balajigari")).

   41. Fourthly, the respondent was obliged to request  a  local  authority
       assessment prior to taking a decision on the TCR as this could  have
       provided further evidence supporting the family link and which  was,
       in any event,  relevant  to  the  assessment  of  the  existence  of
       humanitarian grounds. That the  respondent  wrote  to  the  relevant
       local authority specifically telling it not to do an assessment  was
       no answer  to  the  complaint.  Nor  was  there  any  force  in  the
       respondent's contention that an assessment could not  possibly  cast
       any light on the relationship or upon the existence of  humanitarian
       grounds. Neither the  challenged  decisions  nor  the  General  Case
       Information Database ("GCID") Case  Record  Sheets,  nor  any  other
       disclosure, revealed that there had been any  consideration  that  a
       local authority assessment was unnecessary based on materiality. The
       local authority would conduct its own checks, including the proposed
       residence, and these would be relevant to the general best interests
       assessment and in determining the existence of humanitarian grounds.
       The respondent additionally failed to contact ASM and  send  him  an
       undertaking form as required by her  own  guidance,  and  failed  to
       telephone him, contrary to her own guidance.

   42. Fifthly, the respondent failed to properly  assess  the  applicant's
       best interests or to conduct a lawful best  interests  investigation
       of her own, failed to comply with the obligation to treat  his  best
       interests as a primary consideration (Article 6 DIII), breached  his
       "right to such  protection  and  care  as  is  necessary  for  their
       wellbeing" (Article 24(1) CFR), and failed to properly  engage  with
       the evidence provided by the Greek authorities and the applicant and
       ASM concerning these matters. There was a failure to identify  where
       the applicant's best interests lay, and no actual reasons were given
       as to why his best interests were outweighed on the particular facts
       of this case. To the extent that the respondent was only willing  to
       accept the TCR on humanitarian grounds if she was  satisfied  as  to
       the existence of 'family life' for the purposes of Article  8  ECHR,
       this approach was  unlawful.  There  was  no  requirement  that  the
       discretion under Article 17(2) could only be  exercised  if  'family
       life', in the Article 8 ECHR sense, was  established.  'Humanitarian
       grounds' were not confined to situations where the right  to  family
       life was engaged and the respondent was  required  to  exercise  her
       discretion rationally and lawfully even where the  right  to  family
       life was not  engaged.  The  respondent's  approach  constituted  an
       unlawful fetter on her discretion.

   43. Sixthly, the respondent took into account irrelevant  considerations
       such as  the  cause  of  the  applicant's  medical  condition  being
       "historic" whilst failing to engage with the points  made  by  Greek
       professionals that the applicant's need for love  and  care  from  a
       family member was enhanced by his condition and the  discrimination,
       isolation and abuse he suffered. The  decision  unreasonably  stated
       that the evidence failed to explain how the  applicant's  conditions
       were not being adequately treated or why ASM would be in a  position
       to provide for the  care  needs  of  the  applicant,  despite  these
       matters being clearly addressed by the evidence.

   44. Seventhly, the  respondent's  Article  8  ECHR  and  Article  7  CFR
       assessment was unlawful as  she  entirely  failed  to  consider  the
       applicant's private life relationship with ASM.

   45. The second  part  of  the  grounds  contend  that  the  respondent's
       decisions are incompatible with  fundamental  rights,  specifically,
       (i) the applicant's rights as a child (Article 6 DIII and Article 24
       CFR); (ii) his right to family life  and  the  principle  of  family
       unity (recital 39 DIII, Article 6(3) DIII, Article 7 CFR and Article
       8 ECHR; and/or (iii) his right and that of ASM to their private life
       relationship (Article 7 CFR and Article 8 ECHR)). Ms Knorr  contends
       that the Tribunal must assess for  itself  whether  the  applicant's
       rights under the  Dublin  III  Regulation  or  the  ECHR  have  been
       infringed, if necessary, taking account of  evidence  that  was  not
       before the decision-maker.

   46. Ms Knorr invites the Tribunal  to  find,  applying  the  balance  of
       probabilities threshold, that the relationship between the applicant
       and ASM is as claimed.

   47. She invited the Tribunal  to  find  that  there  was  "exceptionally
       strong" evidence of the applicant's best interests and that  it  was
       "very strongly" in his best interests for the TCR  to  be  accepted.
       The  post-decisions  evidence  from  the  ISW  and  the   Consultant
       Psychiatrist rendered the evidence relating to the applicant's  best
       interests "overwhelming", having regard both to his physical  health
       needs and his mental health  problems.  The  respondent  offered  no
       justification for the interference in the  relationship,  which  was
       disproportionate. Having regard  to  the  aims  of  the  Dublin  III
       Regulation and the serious harm  being  caused  by  separation,  the
       factors  in  favour  of  unification   would   require   a   weighty
       justification to be outweighed.

   48. Family life exists between the applicant and ASM even  though  their
       relationship is that of extended family members. In support Ms Knorr
       relies on several decisions including Re A [2018] EWHC  3625  (Fam),
       R(Ahmadi) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 1721, R(X) v SSHD [2006] EWHC  1208
       (Admin), and  Kugathas.  Taking  account  of  the  applicant's  best
       interests, his traumatic history, his young  age,  his  pre-existing
       ties with ASM and ASM's declared intentions of caring  support,  the
       evidence  demonstrates  dependency  involving   more   than   normal
       emotional ties.  The  applicant  needs  a  safe  and  secure  family
       environment where he is emotionally supported in order to  have  any
       prospect of recovering from the trauma he experienced  as  a  child.
       When assessing the relationship between the applicant  and  ASM  the
       respondent's singular focus was on the amount  of  time  they  spent
       together in the past and the lack of extensive  cohabitation.  There
       was no evaluation of the strength of the relationship or  levels  of
       dependency. If I was not persuaded that family life  existed  I  was
       invited to find that  the  applicant  and  ASM  share  private  life
       (applying R(HN & MN) v SSHD (JR/4719/2018) ("HN & MN")) and that, in
       view of the quality of the relationship and the very serious  impact
       on the applicant's life if he is not reunited, the  interference  in
       the private life relationship would be disproportionate.

   49. Ms Knorr submitted that there is no 'exceptionality' threshold  when
       applying Article 8 ECHR in the context of the Dublin III  Regulation
       and that the Courts and Tribunals  had  already  rejected  arguments
       that this threshold applies to Article  8  ECHR  claims  within  the
       framework of the Dublin III system (BAA and R(MS) v SSHD [2019] EWCA
       Civ 1340 ("MS/CA").

    The respondent's submissions

   50. Ms Masood adopted and expanded upon the skeleton  argument  prepared
       by Mr G Lewis. The respondent's exercise of discretion under Article
       17(2) on "humanitarian grounds" was a quintessential matter for  her
       and she lawfully explained why she was  unwilling  to  exercise  her
       discretion in the applicant's favour as she did  not  consider  that
       the applicant had a history of family life with ASM  and  there  was
       not a strong enough case to reunite them  on  humanitarian  grounds.
       The lack of a history of family life between the applicant  and  ASM
       meant that the case did not engage the right to respect  for  family
       life under Article 8 ECHR.

   51. As the obligation to examine an asylum  claim  under  Article  17(2)
       only arose if the UK decided to exercise its discretion  and  become
       responsible, the other provisions of the Dublin III  Regulation  and
       the Implementing Regulations relating to 'responsibility' were  only
       relevant to the extent that those provisions  did  not  concern  the
       mechanisms for establishing pre-existing responsibility. Given  that
       Articles 3  and  5  of  the  Implementing  Regulations  ("IR")  were
       concerned with a  claim  concerning  pre-existing  'responsibility',
       they had no bearing on the discretion conferred by Article 17(2).

   52. There was no requirement,  either  by  reference  to  principles  of
       fairness or the respondent's investigative duties, to  contact  ASM.
       In any event, because his  account  of  his  relationship  with  the
       applicant was set out in the BIA and  in  ASM's  statement,  it  was
       difficult to see how contact with ASM could have made  any  material
       difference. The respondent nevertheless did send ASM an  undertaking
       form on 3 January 2020 and on the same  day  wrote  to  ASM's  local
       authority. Neither ASM nor the local authority responded.  A  signed
       statement from Isabella Goddard of the European Intake Unit ("EIU"),
       dated 5 October 2020, indicated that she had attempted to  telephone
       ASM on or around 17 January 2020, but the call rang through. Due  to
       an oversight on her part Ms Goddard failed to make a record  of  the
       telephone call in the GCID. The respondent's  letter  to  the  local
       authority followed her policy requirement to "notify" it of the  TCR
       "as soon as possible" after it was made and it was then a matter  of
       judgement  for  the  respondent  when,  if  at  all,  to  request  a
       safeguarding assessment. Insofar as the Tribunal in BAA  interpreted
       this policy to mean that the respondent was required immediately  to
       request a safeguarding assessment, it was incorrect. The  respondent
       reserved her position on this point. BAA nevertheless indicated that
       there may be circumstances in  which  a  lawful  decision  could  be
       reached without obtaining a local authority assessment, including if
       the respondent was satisfied that the assessment could not  possibly
       cast any relevant light on whether the alleged  family  relationship
       existed or upon the alleged humanitarian  grounds.  Any  failure  to
       follow  the  relevant  policy  could  not  have  made  any  material
       difference as all the relevant information was  already  before  the
       respondent.

   53. Fairness  did  not  require  a  'minded-to'  letter,  such  as  that
       considered in Balajigari, to be issued in response  to  a  TCR.  The
       respondent did not have a "specific concern"  that  was  capable  of
       being addressed through further evidence as the evidence of the very
       limited time that the applicant and ASM spent together  had  already
       been provided with the TCR and could not  be  improved.  No  purpose
       would be served determining  whether  the  respondent  was  lawfully
       entitled to reject the family link because the respondent proceeded,
       in the alternative, on the assumption that they were  related.  Nor,
       for the same reasons, did the Tribunal need to adjudicate on whether
       the respondent should have given the applicant, ASM and/or the local
       authority a further opportunity to  provide  more  evidence  of  the
       claimed family link.

   54. On a fair reading of the decision, the respondent considered all the
       evidence concerning the applicant's best interests and accepted that
       his best interests were a primary  consideration.  She  acknowledged
       the  evidence  from  medical  and  social  care  professionals   who
       concluded that  the  applicant's  transfer  would  be  in  his  best
       interests but, as part of her assessment of whether  to  accept  the
       TCR "through the lens of Article 7 CFR and/or Article 8 ECHR, taking
       account of the best interests of the child" (BAA at  [27]),  it  was
       permissible and necessary to assess  the  strength  of  the  claimed
       family life between the  applicant  and  ASM.  The  statements  that
       accompanied the judicial review application were not listed  in  the
       decision of 27 April 2020 and were not served on the  EIU,  although
       Ms Masood understood that entries in the GCID  were  sequential  and
       that anyone inputting information in respect of an individual  would
       be aware of the other  entries  in  the  GCID.  The  respondent  was
       entitled to conclude that  there  was  no  history  of  family  life
       between the applicant and ASM in the sense of a family  relationship
       going beyond normal emotional  ties  (Kugathas).  Whilst  the  "best
       interests" considerations were an important  aspect  they  were  not
       determinative of the broader assessment of  "family  considerations"
       required by Article 17(2).

   55.  The  respondent  did  not  reject  the  evidence  from  the   Greek
       professionals but she did not consider that  evidence  determinative
       of whether the TCR should be accepted given the  absence  of  family
       life between the applicant and ASM. The challenge to her  assessment
       did not raise issues of law but  were  concerned  instead  with  the
       merits of the respondent's decision. As part of that  assessment  it
       was not irrelevant or  otherwise  irrational  to  observe  that  the
       applicant's separation from ASM was  not  a  cause  of  his  medical
       condition. Nor was it irrational to observe that it was "not  clear"
       from the professional evidence why Greece was not in a  position  to
       manage the  applicant's  use  of  colostomy  bags,  or  why  it  was
       necessary for the applicant to be reunited with ASM for this  to  be
       achieved. Although the psychosocial report dated  23  December  2019
       indicated that the applicant was shy and introverted, no other issue
       was raised about his psychological state and there  was  nothing  in
       the report to indicate that the applicant had serious  psychological
       issues.

   56. In respect of the fundamental  rights  challenge,  the  respondent's
       pleaded case was to put the applicant to proof  in  respect  of  the
       relationship. The relationship between the applicant and ASM did not
       engage Article 8 ECHR.  The  respondent  acknowledged  the  evidence
       suggesting there was a close relationship between the applicant  and
       ASM but she was entitled to conclude,  given  that  they  were  only
       second cousins and given their relationship history, that there  was
       no Article 8 ECHR family life. Whilst ASM's  acts  of  kindness  and
       support to the  applicant,  taken  at  the  highest,  were  "plainly
       laudable", they were insufficient in  a  legal  sense  to  establish
       family life which generally involved cohabiting dependants (citing S
       v United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196, as referred to by  Sedley  LJ  in
       Kugathas). The importance of cohabitation, as a normal ingredient of
       family life, was reinforced by the European Court of Human Rights in
       Paradiso and Campanelli v Italy (2017) 65 EHRR 2  ("Paradiso").  The
       evidence before the respondent, and now the Tribunal, did  not  show
       that the applicant and ASM had established a "family life"  together
       capable of making out humanitarian grounds for  their  reunion.  Nor
       did the evidence point to any arguable interference with the private
       lives of the applicant and ASM within the meaning of Article 8 ECHR.
       The applicant's reliance on HN & MN, which found that the rights  of
       two minors to respect for their private lives  was  engaged  by  the
       Secretary of State's refusal  to  accept  Take  Charge  requests  to
       enable them to be reunited with their maternal  uncle,  was  clearly
       distinguishable given that the Tribunal in  that  case  was  dealing
       with significantly  closer  family  relationships  and  a  mandatory
       responsibility criterion under the Dublin III Regulation. The  right
       to respect for private life could not possibly extend to  the  right
       to enter a foreign state to establish a social relationship with any
       relative, no matter how distant (SSHD v Abbas [2017] EWCA  Civ  1393
       ("Abbas")), and the applicant could not point to any  case  where  a
       court found a positive obligation on a state to admit someone to its
       territory of the purposes of establishing or continuing private life
       relationships.

   57. With reliance on R (FTH) v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 494 ("FTH"), applied
       in R (AM (a child)) v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  1815  ("R  (AM)"),  the
       respondent's obligations under Article 8 ECHR  to  an  unaccompanied
       child were limited to the kind of "very  exceptional  circumstances"
       described in ZT (Syria) v SSHD [2016] 1  WLR  4894  ("ZT  (Syria)").
       Although FTH concerned a challenge to a refusal to reunify  a  minor
       and his family relation outside the Dublin III system, the Court  of
       Appeal was clear that "where the Dublin III procedure (including the
       enforcement procedures available through the French judicial system)
       was  available"  to  an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  child,   the
       Secretary of State's independent obligations under  Article  8  ECHR
       would only have arisen if "for some reason, it could be  shown  that
       there was a deficiency in the [Dublin] system". A "very  exceptional
       circumstances" test was appropriate where the respondent  was  being
       asked to exercise  her  discretion  to  do  something  she  was  not
       normally required to do.

   58. The respondent accepts that the 4th  decision  of  2  June  2020  is
       largely parasitic on his challenge to the  3rd  decision  and  that,
       pursuant to X  and  X,  the  respondent  was  lawfully  entitled  to
       conclude that  Greece  was  not  entitled  to  make  more  than  one
       reconsideration  application.  It  was  however   agreed   by   both
       representatives that, if I found that the 3rd decision was unlawful,
       it would not be  necessary  for  me  to  consider  the  respondent's
       reliance on X and X, which I  understand  is  to  be  considered  in
       another case. Ms Masood accepted that if the April 2020 decision was
       unlawful, then the June 2020 decision fell away.

    Relevant legislative framework

    The Dublin III Regulation

   59. Council Regulation (EU)  No  604/2013  sets  out  the  criteria  and
       mechanisms for determining which EU Member State is responsible  for
       examining  a  third  country  national's  asylum  application.   The
       criteria establish a hierarchy for determining responsibility. If  a
       Member State where an asylum application is  lodged  considers  that
       another Member State is responsible for determining the  claim,  the
       first State (the "requesting State") must ask the second State  (the
       "requested State") to take charge of the applicant.

   60. Recital (13) identifies the  relevance  of  the  best  interests  of
       children:

                In accordance with the 1989 United Nations Convention on the
                Rights of the Child and  with  the  Charter  of  Fundamental
                Rights of the European Union,  the  best  interests  of  the
                child should be a primary  consideration  of  Member  States
                when  applying  this  Regulation.  In  assessing  the   best
                interests of the child, Member States should, in particular,
                take due  account  of  the  minor's  well-being  and  social
                development, safety  and  security  considerations  and  the
                views of the minor in accordance with his  or  her  age  and
                maturity, including his  or  her  background.  In  addition,
                specific  procedural  guarantees  for  unaccompanied  minors
                should  be  laid  down  on  account  of   their   particular
                vulnerability.

   61. Recital (14) reads:

                In  accordance  with  the  European   Convention   for   the
                Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and with
                the Charter of Fundamental Rights  of  the  European  Union,
                respect for family life should be a primary consideration of
                Member States when applying this Regulation.

   62. Recital (39) indicates that the Dublin III Regulation  respects  and
       observes the "fundamental rights" and "principles" of,  inter  alia,
       the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (CFR):

                In  particular,  this  Regulation  seeks  to   ensure   full
                observance of the right to asylum guaranteed by  Article  18
                of the Charter  as  well  as  the  rights  recognised  under
                Articles 1, 4, 7, 24 and 47 thereof. This Regulation  should
                therefore be applied accordingly.

   63. Chapter  II  of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  deals  with  'General
       Principles and Safeguards'. Article 2(h) defines 'relative'  as  the
       applicant's adult aunt or uncle or grandparent. Article 3 states, so
       far as is relevant:

                1.  Member  States  shall   examine   an   application   for
                international protection by a third-country  national  [...]
                who applies on the territory of any one of them.  [...]  The
                application shall be examined  by  a  single  Member  State,
                which shall be the one which the criteria set out in Chapter
                III indicate is responsible.

   64. Article 6 provides guarantees for minors:

                1.     The best interests of the child shall  be  a  primary
                consideration  for  Member  States  with  respect   to   all
                procedures provided for in this Regulation.

                ....

             3. In assessing the best interests of the child, Member  States
                shall closely  cooperate  with  each  other  and  shall,  in
                particular, take due account of the following factors:

             a) family reunification possibilities;

             b) the minor's well-being and social development;

             c) safety and  security  considerations,  in  particular  where
                there is a risk  of  the  minor  being  a  victim  of  human
                trafficking;

             d) the views of the minor, in accordance with his  or  her  age
                and maturity.

             4. For the purpose of applying  Article  8,  the  Member  State
                where the unaccompanied  minor  lodged  an  application  for
                international protection shall, as soon  as  possible,  take
                appropriate action to identify the family members,  siblings
                or relatives of the unaccompanied minor on the territory  of
                Member States, whilst protecting the best interests  of  the
                child.

             5. With a  view  to  facilitating  the  appropriate  action  to
                identify the family members, siblings or  relatives  of  the
                unaccompanied minor  living  in  the  territory  of  another
                Member State pursuant to paragraph 4 of  this  Article,  the
                Commission  shall  adopt  implementing  acts   including   a
                standard form  for  the  exchange  of  relevant  information
                between Member States.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be
                adopted  in  accordance  with  the   examination   procedure
                referred to in Article 44(2).

   65. Article 8(4) reads,

                In the absence of a family member, a sibling or  a  relative
                as referred to in paragraphs  1  and  2,  the  Member  State
                responsible shall be that where the unaccompanied minor  has
                lodged his or her application for international  protection,
                provided that it is in the best interests of the minor.

   66. Article 17 is located within Chapter IV, which is headed  'dependent
       persons and discretionary clauses'.  Article  17  enables  a  Member
       State to accept responsibility for an asylum claim even where it  is
       not responsible under the criteria of the Regulation. Article 17 (2)
       reads, so far as material,

                The Member State in which an application  for  international
                protection is made and which is carrying out the process  of
                determining the Member  State  responsible,  or  the  Member
                State responsible, may, at any time before a first  decision
                regarding the substance is  taken,  request  another  Member
                State to take charge of  an  applicant  in  order  to  bring
                together any family relations, on humanitarian grounds based
                in particular on family  or  cultural  considerations,  even
                where that other Member State is not responsible  under  the
                criteria laid down in Articles 8 to 11 and 16.  The  persons
                concerned must express their consent in writing.

                The request to take charge shall contain all the material in
                the possession of the requesting Member State to  allow  the
                requested  Member  State  to  assess  the   situation.   The
                requested Member State shall carry out any necessary  checks
                to examine the humanitarian grounds cited, and  shall  reply
                to the requesting Member State within two months of  receipt
                of the request using the 'DubliNet' electronic communication
                network set up  under  Article  18  of  Regulation  (EC)  No
                1560/2003. A reply refusing  the  request  shall  state  the
                reasons on which the refusal is based.

   67. Article 27 deals with remedies. It reads, so far as material:

                The applicant or another person as referred  to  in  Article
                18(1)(c) or (d) shall have the right to an effective remedy,
                in the form of an appeal or a review, in fact  and  in  law,
                against a transfer decision, before a court or tribunal.

    The Charter of Fundamental Rights

   68. Recital 39 of Dublin III indicates that it respects and observes the
       "fundamental rights" and  "principles"  of,  inter  alia,  the  CFR.
       Article 7 of the CFR relates to respect for private and family life.



                Everyone has the right to respect for his or her private and
                family life, home and communications.

   69. Article 24 CFR is headed 'the rights of the child'.

             1. Children shall have the right to such protection and care as
                is necessary for their well-being. They  may  express  their
                views freely. Such views shall be taken  into  consideration
                on matters which concern them in accordance with  their  age
                and maturity.

             2. In all actions relating to children, whether taken by public
                authorities  or  private  institutions,  the  child's   best
                interests must be a primary consideration.

             3. Every child shall have the right to maintain  on  a  regular
                basis a personal relationship and direct contact  with  both
                his or her parents, unless that is contrary to  his  or  her
                interests.

   70. Article 47 of the CFR relates to the right to  an  effective  remedy
       and a fair trial.

                Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by the law  of
                the Union are violated has the right to an effective  remedy
                before a tribunal in compliance  with  the  conditions  laid
                down in this Article.

                Everyone is entitled to a fair and public hearing  within  a
                reasonable time by an  independent  and  impartial  tribunal
                previously established  by  law.  Everyone  shall  have  the
                possibility of being advised, defended and represented.

                Legal  aid  shall  be  made  available  to  those  who  lack
                sufficient resources in so far as such aid is  necessary  to
                ensure effective access to justice.

    The Human Rights Act 1998 and Article 8 ECHR

       71. Section 6(1) of the Human Rights Act 1998 makes it unlawful  for
          any public authority to act  in  a  manner  incompatible  with  a
          Convention right. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:

             1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
                life, his home and his correspondence.

             2. There shall be no interference by a  public  authority  with
                the exercise of this right except such as is  in  accordance
                with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the
                interests  of  national  security,  public  safety  or   the
                economic well-being of the country, for  the  prevention  of
                disorder or crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,
                or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

    Relevant decisions

   72. A large number of cases were cited by the parties. I have considered
       all the cases relied  on  by  the  parties  and  refer  to  them  as
       appropriate in this decision. It is  however  appropriate,  at  this
       stage, to mention a few of  the  most  relevant  cases.  R  (on  the
       application of HA & Others)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department (Dublin III; Articles 9 and 17.2) [2018] UKUT 00297 (IAC)
       ("HA") concerned a refusal to accept a TCR made by  Greece  pursuant
       to Article 17(2). Its facts were "highly unusual, if not unique" (at
       [2]) and concerned a stateless  Bidoon  from  Kuwait  married  to  a
       British citizen and who was seeking asylum in Greece with her child,
       who also appeared to be a  British  citizen.  Headnote  (2)  of  the
       decision, which reflects [27] and [32] of the decision, reads,

                (2) Article 17.2 of Dublin III does  not  set  any  specific
                criteria, but the Dublin Regulations themselves and the  CFR
                provided the general parameters within which decisions  must
                be taken, albeit that the  general  provisions  set  out  in
                articles 21 and 22 do not apply. There is, we accept, a wide
                discretion available to the respondent  under  the  article,
                but it is not untrammelled, it  is  for  the  respondent  to
                consider an application made under article 17.2 through  the
                lens of article 7 CFR and/or article 8 ECHR, taking  account
                also of the best interests of  a  child.  That  approach  is
                consistent with the normative provisions in article 16  that
                where there are issues of dependency within  a  family  life
                context, the family should be brought together.

   73. R (on the application of BAA and Another) v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department (Dublin  III:  judicial  review;  SoS's  duties)
       [2020] UKUT 00227 (IAC) ("BAA"), a recent decision authored  by  the
       President of the Upper Tribunal, deals with issues similar to  those
       that arise in the present challenge. The applicant ("A1") was  a  17
       years old Syrian unaccompanied minor  child  residing  in  the  same
       hostel in Greece as the current  applicant.  A1  claimed  asylum  in
       Greece and a TCR was issued by the  Greek  authorities  pursuant  to
       Article 17(2) because he had a cousin,  A2,  in  the  UK.  The  SSHD
       refused the application and  refused  to  subsequent  re-examination
       requests. The headnote, which reflects [66] of the decision, reads,

             1)  Article  17(2)  of  Regulation  604/2013  of  the  European
                Parliament and of  the  Council  ("Dublin  III")  confers  a
                discretion on a Member State to examine an  application  for
                international protection "in order  to  bring  together  any
                family relations, on humanitarian grounds, based  on  family
                or cultural  considerations".  Although  the  discretion  is
                wide, it is not untrammelled: R (HA & others)  (Dublin  III;
                Articles 9 and 17.2) [2018] UKUT 297 (IAC). As in  the  case
                of any other discretionary power of the Secretary  of  State
                in the immigration field, Article 17(2) must be exercised in
                an individual's favour, where to do otherwise  would  breach
                the individual's  human  rights  (or  those  of  some  other
                person), contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.



             2)  The  Secretary  of  State's  Article  17(2)  decisions  are
                susceptible to "ordinary" or "conventional" judicial  review
                principles, of the  kind  described  by  Beatson  LJ  in  ZT
                (Syria) v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR 4894 as "propriety  of  purpose,
                relevancy of  considerations  and  the  longstop  Wednesbury
                unreasonableness category" (para 85).

             3) Where a judicial review challenge involves an allegation  of
                violation of an ECHR right, such as Article 8, it is now  an
                established principle of domestic United  Kingdom  law  that
                the court or tribunal must make its own  assessment  of  the
                lawfulness of the decision, in human rights  terms.  If,  in
                order to make that assessment, the court or  tribunal  needs
                to make findings of fact, it must do so.

             4) Nothing in paragraphs (1) to (3)  above  is  dependent  upon
                Article 27 (remedies) of Dublin III applying to the facts of
                the case. Nevertheless, what the Upper Tribunal  held  in  R
                (MS) (Dublin III; duty to investigate) [2019] UKUT  9  (IAC)
                regarding the scope of Article 27 is correct and nothing  in
                the Court of Appeal judgments in MS  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1340
                suggests otherwise. The reference to a  "transfer  decision"
                in Article 27 encompasses a refusal  to  take  charge  of  a
                Dublin III applicant. That includes a refusal to take charge
                under Article 17(2).

             5)  It  would  be  remarkable  if  the  Secretary  of   State's
                investigatory responsibilities were materially  narrower  in
                an Article 17(2) case which concerns an unaccompanied  minor
                and his or her best interests, than they would be in respect
                of any other take-charge request under Dublin III. Where the
                request under Article 17(2) raises issues  that  involve  an
                asserted family life within Article 8 ECHR/Article 7 of  the
                Charter of Fundamental Rights, then, in the normal course of
                events, the Secretary of State's degree of  engagement  with
                the relevant United Kingdom local  authority  should  be  no
                less than in the case  of  any  other  unaccompanied  minor,
                where the take-charge request is made  under  Article  8  of
                Dublin III on the basis that  the  relation  in  the  United
                Kingdom is a sibling or a "family member" or  "relative"  as
                defined.

             6) Even in Article 17(2) cases, the  principles  of  procedural
                fairness may  mean  that  the  Secretary  of  State  may  be
                required to provide an indication or gist to an applicant or
                his alleged United Kingdom relation, of matters  of  concern
                that may lead to a refusal to take charge of the  applicant:
                R v SSHD ex parte Fayed [1998] 1 WLR 763; R  (Balajigari)  v
                SSHD [2019] 1 WLR 4647. This is, however, an area where  one
                cannot lay down hard and fast rules. Even  where  Article  8
                ECHR is in play, there may be exceptions.  Furthermore,  the
                process must not become so elaborate as to defeat the aim of
                expeditious decision-making,  particularly  where  the  best
                interests of minors are concerned.

             7)  The  references  to  "exceptional  circumstances"  in   the
                Secretary of State's Dublin III Guidance (18 April 2019)  do
                not render the  Guidance  unlawful.  Those  working  in  the
                immigration field know that the use of "exceptional" in  the
                context of Article 8 ECHR is not to be  used  as  setting  a
                particular (high) threshold but, rather,  as  predictive  of
                the  outcome  of  the  application  of  the  principles   of
                proportionality to the facts of a particular  case.  Nothing
                in the Guidance suggests its author is  telling  caseworkers
                to do anything other than follow the  settled  law  on  this
                topic.

      74. The nature of the investigative duty in the context of a TCR  has
          been considered in R (on the application of MK, IK  (a  child  by
          his litigation friend MK) and  HK  (a  child  by  her  litigation
          friend MK) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  (Calais;
          Dublin Regulation - investigative duty)  IJR  [2016]  UKUT  00231
          (IAC) ("MK, IK") and in R (on the application of MS) (a child  by
          his  litigation  friend  MAS)  v  SSHD  (Dublin  III;   duty   to
          investigate) [2019] UKUT 00009 (IAC) ("MS/UT"). The  Tribunal  in
          MK, IK concluded that the investigative  and  evidence  gathering
          duties are "unavoidably factually  and  contextually  sensitive",
          that the "content and scope of such duties  will  vary  from  one
          context to another", and  that  the  principle  that  the  duties
          required was that "reasonable steps" were  taken  by  the  Member
          State (at [40]). In MS/UT the Tribunal confirmed that the  Member
          State was required  to  "act  reasonably"  and  take  "reasonable
          steps" in carrying out the investigative duty (headnote 2; and at
          [112] - [114] and [120] - [128]). Whilst  accepting  that  Dublin
          III imposed a duty of investigation,  the  Tribunal  quashed  the
          SSHD's decisions by reference to  domestic  law  principles  (see
          [63] to [66] in MS/CA).

    The admissibility and consideration of post-decision evidence

   75. The applicant sought to admit, pursuant to a consent order sealed by
       the Tribunal on 27 August 2020 (granting the applicant an  extension
       until  18  September  2020  to  make  any  application  to  rely  on
       additional evidence), further evidence consisting of a  report  from
       Dr Susan Walker, Consultant Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist, dated
       23 July 2020, a report from Peter Horrocks,  an  Independent  Social
       Worker ("ISW") dated 4 August 2020, a  witness  statement  from  the
       applicant dated 16 September 2020, a second witness  statement  from
       Othon Christofilis dated 16 September 2020,  a  2nd  statement  from
       Anastasia Solopova dated 18 September 2020,  Royal  Mail  track  and
       trace document, and a second witness statement from  ASM  signed  17
       September 2020. The reports from Dr  Walker  and  Mr  Horrocks  were
       provided to the respondent on 5 August 2020, although  not  pursuant
       to any application to admit further evidence.

   76. To the extent that the applicant seeks to adduce  the  new  evidence
       (primarily the report from Mr Horrocks, Dr Walker, the  2nd  witness
       statement of Mr Christofilis, the statement of the applicant and the
       2nd witness statement of ASM) to support his grounds relating to the
       infringement of fundamental rights (Article 8 ECHR; Article 7  CFR),
       the respondent relies on R(A) v Chief Constable of Kent [2013]  EWCA
       Civ 1706 ("R(A)") to support her contention that the Tribunal cannot
       not consider post-decision material when determining  whether  there
       has been a breach of the family and/or private life  rights  of  the
       applicant and/or ASM.

      77. R (A) concerned unsubstantiated allegations of mistreatment by  A
          in a care home  context  which  were  disclosed  in  an  Advanced
          Criminal Record Certificate ("ECRS"), and whether such disclosure
          breached  A's  Article  8   ECHR   private   life   rights.   The
          Administrative Court found that  the  disclosure  amounted  to  a
          disproportionate interference with A's private  life  rights  and
          prevented  her  from  obtaining  full-time  employment   in   her
          profession. The Chief Constable appealed to the Court  of  Appeal
          on the basis, inter alia, that  the  Administrative  Court  judge
          erred in relying on material which could not have been  available
          to the Chief Constable at the time the  disclosure  decision  was
          made or on the date of disclosure ([6], [20], [35(3)]). At [36] &
          [37] The Court of Appeal considered the intensity of review  that
          was to be applied when  dealing  with  human  rights  issues  and
          referred to, inter alia, Belfast City Council v Miss Behavin' Ltd
          [2007] UKHL 19, R (SB) v Governors of Denbigh High School  [2006]
          UKHL 15 and Huang [2007] UKHL 11. The Court considered the  issue
          of post-decision material at [67] to [92]. It was  common  ground
          between the parties that the need, in a judicial  review  context
          involving human rights, of an intense scrutiny including, in some
          cases, live evidence and cross-examination, did  not  change  the
          process to a "merits review" in  which  the  courts  will  always
          substitute their views for those of the relevant public authority
          [79]. At [80] Beatson LJ considered that this:

                ...  poses  a  serious  difficulty  of  principle  for   the
                contention that the  court  must  also  scrutinise  material
                which could not have been available to the decisionmaker  at
                the time of the decision. This  because,  if  the  court  is
                required to scrutinise such material, it is difficult to see
                how the process can characterised as one of the review of  a
                decision made by the public authority which has  been  given
                primary responsibility for a subject-matter,  often  because
                of its special knowledge and  expertise.  Considering  post-
                decision material would, in truth, turn the process into one
                of a determination on all  the  material  available  to  the
                court at the date of the  adjudication.  It  would  be  very
                similar to what Lord Neuberger in Re B (A Child)  (FC)  UKSC
                33 at 89. [2013] 3 All ER 929, [2013] 1  WLR  1911,  in  the
                context of the role of an appellate court, described  as  "a
                sort   of   half-way   house   role   between   review   and
                reconsideration", and which he deprecated.

   78. Once new evidence relevant to A's conduct had been published it  was
       open to A to seek a further ECRS which would take  account  of  that
       evidence [81]. At [82] and [83] Beatson  LJ  expressed  his  concern
       that if a court becomes too entangled  with  post-decision  evidence
       this would be detrimental for the process of  litigation  and  would
       mean the court sidestepping its primary role causing it  to  "become
       part of a rolling administrative decision-making process."  At  [84]
       Beatson LJ expressed his view that the appropriate  course  in  many
       cases was not to review the SSHD's decision  on  the  basis  of  new
       material and that the  matter  should  either  be  remitted  or  the
       claimant  should  make  a  further  application  deploying  the  new
       material. Having quoted from Lord Neuberger in Re B (A  Child)  (FC)
       [2013] UKSC 33, Beatson LJ concluded, at [90] and [91],

            90] The law as stated thus means  that,  in  the  present  case,
                unless  this  court  concludes  that  the  judge  erred   in
                principle   in   her   approach   to   the   assessment   of
                proportionality, it is not required to reconsider the  issue
                for  itself.  The  decision  in  Re  B  is,  however,   also
                instructive  in  determining  whether  a   reviewing   first
                instance court should consider post-decision material.  This
                is because requiring it, as the art  6  compliant  court  or
                tribunal which  considers  the  matter,  to  consider  post-
                decision material gives it the sort of "half-way house  role
                between review and  reconsideration"  which  Lord  Neuberger
                deprecated.

            91] For these reasons I consider that, in a case such  as  this,
                where the primary decision-maker is not under  a  continuing
                duty in relation to the matter in  the  way  that  the  Home
                Secretary is in the cases to which I referred at  77  -  78,
                the  reviewing  court  should  not  consider   post-decision
                material when conducting its assessment of whether  a  prima
                facie infringement of an ECHR right has  been  justified  as
                proportionate.

   79. R (A) had not been cited in BAA, and it does not appear to have been
       considered by the Supreme Court in Kiarie and Byndloss v SSHD [2017]
       UKSC 42. If R(A) has not been expressly overturned or overturned  by
       necessary implication it is binding on the Upper Tribunal. I  accept
       that a similar ISW report from Mr Horrocks was admitted on an agreed
       basis in BAA just 8 days before  the  substantive  hearing  in  that
       case, and that a requirement to act in  a  consistent  manner  is  a
       fundamental element of the rule of law, but no argument based  on  R
       (A) was advanced by the respondent in BAA and the fact that a  post-
       decision ISW report was admitted in another case is not, of  itself,
       a reason to admit a similar report in this  challenge  in  a  manner
       that would be contrary to the ratio of R (A). Ms Knorr  also  relies
       on the fact that in other Dublin III Regulation cases  new  evidence
       was considered (such as MS/UT, FwF v SSHD (JR/1626/20019), HN & MN v
       SSHD (JR/4719/2019) and KF v SSHD (JR/1642/2019), but  it  does  not
       appear that any  argument  based  on  R  (A)  was  raised  in  these
       decisions.

   80. R (A) is however distinguishable from the  present  judicial  review
       challenge. Firstly, unlike R (A), the respondent's decisions concern
       'transfer decisions' under Dublin III (BAA, at [28] & [29]) and  the
       applicant therefore has a right to an effective remedy, in the  form
       of an appeal or a review, "in fact and in law", in  respect  of  the
       transfer decisions  (Article  27  DIII,  read  in  conjunction  with
       Article 47 CFR). In MS/UT the Tribunal held, albeit in  the  context
       of a TCR issued under  the  Chapter  III  criteria,  that  it  could
       determine  for  itself  whether  the  relevant   criteria   applied,
       including whether the required relationship was established. In  the
       Court of Appeal the SSHD effectively conceded that,  if  Article  27
       applied, the domestic court conducting the Article 27 review of  the
       transfer decision should determine for itself  whether  there  is  a
       "sufficiently solid factual  basis"  for  it  (at  [13]  of  MS/CA).
       Although the instant case concerns an exercise of  discretion  under
       Article  17(2)  and  not  the  determination  of  the  criteria  for
       responsibility under Chapter  III  of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation,
       common to both is the need to establish a family link in order for a
       TCR to be accepted in the  context  of  the  family  reunion  of  an
       unaccompanied minor. In MS/UT the Tribunal held that  there  was  no
       insurmountable  procedural  obstacle  to  a  factual  inquiry  being
       undertaken that included post-decision evidence (at [195] to  [201])
       when determining the 'hard edged' fact of the claimed  relationship.
       Given that the respondent's discretion can only be  exercised  if  a
       family relationship exists, I find that this question does involve a
       'hard edged' question of fact that must be resolved by the  Tribunal
       by reference to all available evidence, including  that  post-dating
       the challenged decisions.

   81. I additionally note that, unlike R (A), the present case involves an
       obligation under Article 6 DIII to approach the  best  interests  of
       children as a primary  consideration,  as  well  as  the  rights  in
       Article 24 CFR to ensure  that  children  have  the  right  to  such
       protection and care as is necessary for their well-being,  and  that
       these obligations, considered in the context of Article 27 DIII, are
       relevant when determining whether the Tribunal  can  consider  post-
       decision evidence relating to the best interests of  children  (see,
       for example, X v Latvia (GC) (2014) 59 EHRR 3, at 112 - 117).

   82. I am further persuaded, on the particular facts of this  case,  that
       in the absence of any lawful decisions by the respondent (which will
       be considered later), there is a continuing duty on  the  respondent
       to make a lawful decision in response to the TCR (and in response to
       the requests for reconsideration of  the  refusal  of  a  TCR).  The
       respondent relies on MS/UT in support of her submission  that  there
       is no continuing duty to investigate or consider new material once a
       2nd rejection of a TCR has been made, but that finding  was  subject
       to an exception where a domestic court in the requested Member State
       quashes one of more of the decisions rejecting the  TCR  (MS/UT,  at
       [134]). Given that the respondent has accepted that  her  first  two
       decisions relating to the TCR were unlawful, there has not yet  been
       any lawful decision and the first two decisions  are  liable  to  be
       quashed. In any event, MS/UT held that a duty of  investigation  did
       not continue beyond the second rejection of a TCR  "subject  to  the
       requirements of fairness". At [137] the Tribunal stated,

                "We do not consider that the duty of investigation continues
                beyond the second rejection, subject to the requirements  of
                fairness. We  say  that  because  in  reaching  that  second
                adverse decision the requested State must  act  fairly:  the
                applicant must know the 'gist' of what is being said against
                him in respect of the application of the  criteria  relevant
                to  the  TCR  and  must  have   an   opportunity   to   make
                representations on the issues and material being  relied  on
                if  that  has  not  previously  been  the  case.  In   those
                circumstances,  fairness  requires   that   the   respondent
                consider any representations and  material  raised  (perhaps
                for the first time) to deal  with  a  matter  of  which  the
                individual was 'taken by surprise' in the  second  rejection
                decision. To that extent, the duty continues and may require
                the respondent as the  requested  State  to  reconsider  the
                rejection of the  TCR.  It  may  well  be  that  it  is  the
                implications of the  duty  to  act  fairly  which,  in  many
                instances, explains  why  new  (and  post-second)  rejection
                decisions are made. To the extent we are departing  from  MK
                on this issue, it is because we consider on the basis of the
                regime in the Dublin III Regulation the UT in MK  was  wrong
                and there is good reason to depart from it."

   83. Neither the first nor the second decisions made  by  the  respondent
       identified the respondent's rejection of  the  family  relationship,
       and the 4th decision did  not  engage  with  this  issue.  In  these
       circumstances, where the respondent had not previously provided  the
       applicant with the 'gist' of her decision rejecting the family link,
       there continued to be a duty of investigation.

   84. Furthermore, in Spahiu, R (on the application of) v SSHD [2018] EWCA
       Civ 2604 the Court of Appeal held, when considering at the issue  of
       'rolling review' at [63],

                "In short, there is no hard and fast rule. It  will  usually
                be better for all parties if judicial review proceedings are
                not treated as "rolling" or "evolving", and it is  generally
                simpler and more cost-effective for the reviewing  court  to
                avoid scrutinising post-decision material.  But  there  will
                also be a need to maintain a certain procedural  flexibility
                so as to do justice as between the parties."

   85. The need to maintain "a certain procedural flexibility so as  to  do
       justice as between the parties" was also referred to  in  R  (A)  at
       [83]. Procedural flexibility is relevant in the instant case because
       any decision to make a further TCR request cannot  be  made  by  the
       applicant but is entirely dependent on a third party (the requesting
       Member State, in this  case,  Greece).  This  is  a  further  factor
       relevant when determining whether the Tribunal should consider post-
       decision evidence relating to the breach of fundamental rights.

   86. I am mindful of the concern that Courts and Tribunals may become too
       entangled in the consideration of post-decision  evidence,  and  the
       danger  that  to  allow  consideration  of  post-decision   evidence
       generally may led to a persistent  avalanche  of  further  evidence.
       However, as pointed out in MS/UT (at [195]) whilst fact-finding in a
       judicial review, including by reference to  post-decision  evidence,
       is  rarely  undertaken,  it  is  not  unknown,  and  there  is   "no
       insurmountable procedure or obstacle  to  a  factual  enquiry  being
       undertaken in judicial review proceedings". Given that this case  is
       governed by Article 27 DIII, and for  the  reasons  given  above,  I
       consider  it  appropriate  to  admit   the   postdecision   evidence
       identified at paragraph 76 above.  In  the  event  however  that  my
       assessment of the admissibility of  the  post-decision  evidence  is
       wrong, I do not consider it necessary for me to have regard to  that
       evidence  in  order  to  justly  determine  this   judicial   review
       challenge. I therefore proceed without consideration of the evidence
       identified at paragraph 76 above.

   87. In respect of the 2nd statement  from  Anastasia  Solopova  and  the
       Royal Mail track and trace document (the document could not  confirm
       the  status  of  the  respondent's  delivery  of  the  Request   for
       Information Form to ASM), which the applicant seeks to introduce  to
       support his contention that the respondent failed to comply with her
       Dublin III Regulation Policy Guidance (v2, 18 April 2019; extant  at
       the date of the challenged decisions) and Article 8 ECHR  procedural
       safeguards,  the  respondent  contends  that  this  issue  has  been
       overtaken by events because the focus was now on the decision of  27
       April 2020 and, by that stage, there was  a  significant  amount  of
       evidence of the nature and strength of the relationship between  the
       applicant  and  ASM  and  the  applicant  and  ASM  had   sufficient
       opportunity  to  provide  evidence  of   their   relationship.   The
       respondent, in any event, contends that there was no breach  of  the
       procedural duty because Isabella Goddard, a  decision-maker  in  the
       EIU, did telephone  ASM  but  received  no  answer.  The  respondent
       herself seeks to introduce a post-decision statement from Ms Goddard
       dated 5 October 2020 (indeed, a post-hearing statement, there  being
       no mention during the hearing of  the  possibility  of  a  statement
       being obtained and served) in which Ms Goddard  maintains  not  only
       that a Request for Information Form was  sent  to  ASM  by  recorded
       delivery on 3 January 2020, but that on or around  17  January  2020
       she telephoned the number provided in  the  TCR  but  there  was  no
       answer and the call rang through. She  maintains  that,  due  to  an
       oversight on her part, she failed to record the  telephone  call  in
       the GCID database.

      88. I have decided to  admit  the  new  evidence  from  both  parties
          relating to the respondent's  communication  with  ASM.  The  2nd
          statement from Anastasia Solopova and the Royal  Mail  track  and
          trace document are clearly relevant when determining whether  the
          respondent complied with her own policy  to  contact  the  family
          relation in the  UK  and  such  evidence,  by  its  nature,  will
          sometimes post-date a challenged decision. I  do  not  accept  Ms
          Masood's submission that  matters  have  been  overtaken  by  the
          primary focus shifting to the decision  of  27  April  2020.  Any
          failure  to  comply  with  the  procedural  requirements  of  the
          respondent's Dublin III Regulation Policy Guidance  continued  to
          feed into and thereby inform the respondent's decision in respect
          of the decision of 27 April 2020. There has been  no  opportunity
          for the applicant to probe the evidence of Ms Goddard by  way  of
          oral cross-examination and it is surprising  that  this  evidence
          was only obtained after the conclusion of the hearing given  that
          the issue was raised  as  long  ago  as  the  Pre-Action-Protocol
          Letter sent on 9 April 2020. But these factors, and Ms  Goddard's
          ability to recall a telephone call made 9 months previously  that
          was not recorded in the GCID  database,  go  the  issue  of  what
          weight is attached to the evidence, not their admissibility.

    Discussion of the substantive issues

       89.  I approach the challenged decisions on the basis  that  Article
          17(2) contains a  wide  discretion,  but  that  the  exercise  of
          discretion must be considered through the lens of Article  7  CFR
          and/or Article 8 ECHR, taking account of the best interests of  a
          child (see BAA, at [25] to [27], [66(1)] and R(HA)). I adopt  the
          approach taken in BAA that Article 27 DIII (remedies) applies  to
          Article 17(2). It was not in dispute between the parties that the
          respondent's decisions were susceptible to challenge on  ordinary
          public law grounds (see BAA, at [30]).

    Whether the applicant and ASM are second cousins

   90. I will first consider the respondent's approach, in her decision  of
       27 April 2020,  to  the  claimed  family  relationship.  During  the
       hearing Ms Masood accepted that it was necessary  to  determine  the
       lawfulness of the respondent's  assessment  of  the  claimed  family
       relationship because the discretion under Article 17(2) can only  be
       exercised if the applicant was the family relation of ASM (see  also
       BAA, at [19]).

   91. With reference to the extract at paragraph 25, the respondent  noted
       that ASM did not mention either the applicant's mother or father  as
       being his relative and that, "having  considered  all  the  evidence
       available" the applicant  was  not  considered  to  fall  under  the
       category of 'relative' as defined in Article 8 DIII.

   92. It is unclear why there was any need to refer to Article 8 DIII. The
       term 'relative'  has  a  specific  meaning  within  the  Dublin  III
       Regulation (under the heading "Definitions", Article 2(h))  and  the
       applicant never suggested that his relationship  with  ASM  met  the
       definition of 'relative'. The respondent's reference  to  'relative'
       as define by Article 8 DIII  risks  tainting  the  entirety  of  her
       assessment of the familial relationship. On a  holistic  reading  of
       the decision however, particularly the earlier reference to "cousins
       passport"  and  "cousins  written  consent"  when  setting  out  the
       evidence that was considered on the first page of the decision,  and
       the  respondent's  subsequent  (inaccurate)   description   to   the
       applicant and ASM as  "first  cousins",  I  am  satisfied  that  the
       respondent did appreciate that the assessment was to  be  undertaken
       by reference to Article 17.2 and not Article 8 DIII and that she did
       not  limit  her  consideration  of  the  familial  relationship   by
       reference to Article 8 DIII.

   93. The respondent's inaccurate reference to the applicant and ASM being
       "first cousins" does however raise a  concern  that  she  failed  to
       adequately scrutinise the evidence  before  her.  Moreover,  to  the
       extent that the respondent concluded that the  relationship  between
       the applicant and ASM was not as claimed because ASM did not mention
       either the applicant's mother or father as being his  relative,  she
       took into account an irrelevant consideration or attached weight  to
       an irrelevant matter. This is  because  in  his  statement  dated  7
       February 2020 ASM clearly indicated that he and the  applicant  were
       related in blood "... as we cousin through mother's side. His mother
       name: [HAI] and my [AHI]." Moreover, the BIA provided by  the  Greek
       Authorities contained a letter from ASM in which  he  stated,  "[the
       applicant] and I are close in terms  of  family  as  we  are  second
       degree cousins through his mother."

   94. In his statement dated 23 April 2020 ASM again describes  in  detail
       his relationship with the applicant, naming the  applicant's  mother
       and his mother and asserting that  they  (the  mothers)  were  first
       cousins (at paragraph 5). No reference is made in the decision dated
       27 April 2020 to this statement. An issue arose during  the  hearing
       as to whether this statement was properly before the respondent when
       her decision was made. This statement (and those by Mr  Christofilis
       and Ms Solopova) accompanied the judicial review lodged on 24  April
       2020 and which was served on the respondent on  the  same  date.  It
       would  therefore  have  been  before  the  department  dealing  with
       litigation ('Litigation Operations (West London)', according to  the
       GCID records). It was not specifically served on the EIU.  The  GCID
       notes are however structured chronologically  and  anyone  inputting
       information relating to a particular individual will have  sight  of
       the earlier information. It should therefore have been  apparent  to
       the decision maker in the EIU reading the GCID notes  and  inputting
       information that a judicial review had been lodged (the GCID records
       clearly refer to the lodging of the judicial review) and  that  this
       may have contained documents or material or evidence relevant to the
       reconsideration of the TCR request. This is  particularly  so  given
       that at the bottom of the GCID sheet it is stated "I confirm that in
       making this decision I have considered all  evidence  submitted  and
       all evidence held by the Home Office:  YES".  It  should  have  been
       apparent to  the  respondent,  in  both  departments,  that  further
       evidence had been provided but she failed to consider  this  further
       evidence (a similar finding was made in HA, at [44]). At the hearing
       Ms Masood indicated that  even  now  the  E-Folders  (which  contain
       correspondence relevant to an application) did not appear to contain
       the statements accompanying the judicial review.  This  indicates  a
       failure by the respondent to transfer clearly material  evidence  to
       the relevant team. Even if the litigation team were somehow  unaware
       that a fresh decision was being taken, the  statements  should  have
       been forwarded to the EIU team as soon as possible to give  them  an
       opportunity to consider withdrawing  the  April  2020  decision  and
       remaking it in light of the new statements.  Instead  this  evidence
       was not considered. The  respondent  erred  in  law  by  failing  to
       consider the statements that were available to  her  when  assessing
       the existence of the familial link.

   95. I am additionally persuaded that, in concluding  that  the  familial
       relationship was not made out, the respondent failed to take account
       of  relevant  considerations,  namely,  the   detailed   information
       provided by ASM and the applicant concerning their relationship, the
       conduct of ASM towards the  applicant,  which  suggests  a  familial
       relationship, and the views of the Greek  professionals  caring  for
       the applicant.

   96. The respondent's Dublin III Regulation  guidance  (version  2.0,  18
       April 2019) requires a decision-maker to consider  whether,  on  the
       "balance of  probabilities",  there  is  sufficient  information  to
       accept that the parties are related as claimed, "... in other words,
       you must decide whether, after looking at all the  evidence,  it  is
       more likely than not that the applicant and the person in the UK are
       related as claimed" (at page 44 of 46). It is not apparent from  the
       decision that the respondent has looked at  "all  of  the  evidence"
       when reaching her decision. The respondent is not of course  obliged
       to refer to every item of evidence produced by an individual, and  I
       remind myself that I am undertaking a review of  the  lawfulness  of
       the  respondent's  decision  and  not  a  merits   assessment.   The
       respondent must however demonstrate that she has taken into  account
       material evidence bearing on the core issue in contention  and  show
       that she has applied the balance of probabilities standard. Although
       there  was  no  independent  documentary  evidence  confirming   the
       relationship, the BIA, which constituted a  detailed  assessment  of
       the applicant's account and circumstances and which was conducted by
       a professional psychologist at the  hostel,  presented  a  plausible
       description of the familial relationship, and this was supported  by
       ASM's statement of 7 February 2020. The familial  relationship  was,
       moreover, accepted by the professionals with responsibility for  the
       applicant's welfare in Greece  (as  evidenced  in  the  psychosocial
       report dated 23 December 2019). The evidence from  the  psychologist
       was relevant  when  determining  the  family  link  as  he  saw  the
       applicant every day since his  arrival  in  the  Athens  hostel  and
       observed the applicant's interaction with ASM (as  detailed  in  his
       statement). Moreover, the evidence of ASM's journey to  Somalia  and
       then India with the applicant and his  payment  of  the  applicant's
       medical  procedures  provided  further  support  for  their  claimed
       relationship. The very fact that ASM was supportive of the applicant
       to such a high  degree  was  relevant  when  assessing  the  claimed
       relationship.  Nor  was  there  any  contrary  evidence   that   the
       relationship was other than as claimed. It is not apparent that  the
       totality of this evidence has been considered by the respondent, and
       if  it  was  considered,  given  the  nature  of  the  BIA  and  the
       psychosocial  report,  there  was  no  basis  for  the  respondent's
       conclusion  that  the  evidence  was  incapable   of   adding   "any
       substantial evidential value".

   97. Quite apart however from the reasons given above, I am  additionally
       but independently satisfied that, in her assessment of the  familial
       relationship, the respondent acted in a procedurally unfair  manner.
       In neither of her first two decisions had  the  respondent  disputed
       the claimed familial relationship. It  was  not  therefore  apparent
       that the relationship was being disputed. This  is  clear  from  the
       third reconsideration request dated 18  May  2020  in  which  Greece
       underlined the fact that the decision of 27 April 2020 was the first
       time the respondent mentioned that the  family  link  had  not  been
       demonstrated as a reason for rejecting the request, despite the  two
       earlier decisions.

      98. In MS/UT the Upper Tribunal held (at [123]  to  [124])  that  the
          SSHD may be obliged to inform an individual of the "gist" of what
          is  being  said  against  them  so  as  to  be   able   to   make
          representations  and/or  adduce  evidence,  before   the   actual
          decision  is  taken.  The  content  of  the  duty  to  inform  an
          individual of the "gist" of the case against them was  considered
          in the  context  of  Article  17(2)  in  BAA.  Having  considered
          relevant authorities including R (Doody) v SSHD [1994] 1 AC  531,
          Balajigari, R (Citizens UK) v SSHD [2018] 4 WLR 123, and R v SSHD
          ex parte Fayed [1998] 1 WLR 763, Mr  Justice  Lane  rejected  (at
          [91] to [93]) the respondent's submission that, in Article  17(2)
          applications, domestic common law fairness  principles  mean  the
          respondent is never required to provide an indication or gist, to
          an applicant or his claimed United Kingdom relation,  of  matters
          of concern that may lead to a  refusal  to  take  charge  of  the
          applicant,  particularly  when  Article  8   ECHR   rights   were
          potentially in issue. At [92] Mr Justice Lane stated,

                "Whilst  the  ability  of  the  requesting  State  to   seek
                reconsideration from  the  requested  State  of  an  initial
                adverse decision may diminish or even remove  the  potential
                obligation in respect of the initial decision, as a  general
                matter there is likely to be an actual  obligation  to  give
                the necessary indication, prior to a second  refusal,  where
                the concerns harboured by the requested State are  not  ones
                that have been ventilated by it."

   99. At [93] Mr Justice Lane recognised that this was an area  where  one
       could not lay down hard and fast rules and that the process must not
       become so elaborate as to defeat the aim  of  expeditious  decision-
       making, but found it difficult to see what  legitimate  purpose  was
       served  where  the  respondent  had  a  specific  concern  that  the
       requesting State or relevant individual may be able to  address.  In
       the instant case no issue with the family link had  previously  been
       raised by  the  respondent.  Neither  the  applicant  nor  ASM  were
       informed of 'the gist' of the respondent's belief, expressed for the
       first time in the decision dated 27 April 2020,  that  the  familial
       relationship was not made out before the refusal to  reconsider  the
       TCR. It would not have imposed an onerous burden on  the  respondent
       to have informed ASM and the applicant. It would have given both  an
       opportunity to further explain the details  of  their  relationship.
       Had the respondent made  her  concerns  apparent  to  the  applicant
       and/or ASM,  more  details  and  further  evidence  of  the  claimed
       relationship could  have  been  provided.  I  find  that  procedural
       fairness required the respondent to alert the applicant, ASM  and/or
       Greece of her concerns before proceeding to make a decision.

  100. For the reasons given above at paragraphs 93 to 99 I find  that  the
       respondent acted unlawfully in  reaching  her  conclusion  that  the
       familial relationship was not made out. In her oral  submissions  Ms
       Masood indicated that the applicant was  being  'put  to  proof'  in
       respect of the claimed  familial  relationship.  With  reference  to
       Article 27(1) DIII,  and  by  analogy  with  MS/UT,  I  consider  it
       appropriate  to  determine   for   myself   whether   the   familial
       relationship is made out. In doing so I adopt the  approach  to  the
       elements of proof and circumstantial evidence set out in Article  22
       DIII, particularly with regard to circumstantial evidence  (although
       Article 22 DIII does not  strictly  apply  there  is  no  reason  in
       principle why the approach should differ in respect of an assessment
       of a family relationship  under  Article  17(2))  and  I  apply  the
       balance of probabilities standard. I note that  both  the  applicant
       and ASM have consistently maintained that they are  second  cousins,
       and that this account is inherently plausible having regard to ASM's
       description of how he came to meet the applicant and his interaction
       with him. I note that the professionals who are  concerned  for  the
       applicant's wellbeing and welfare,  including  the  observations  of
       Othon Christofilis, the psychologist who prepared both the  BIA  and
       the  psychosocial  report  and  who  has   observed   the   (remote)
       interaction between the applicant and ASM, did not have any  concern
       with the genuineness  of  the  claimed  relationship.  I  take  into
       account the evidence that ASM has visited Somalia and  travelled  to
       India and Turkey in pursuit of medical treatment for  the  applicant
       and that ASM paid for such medical treatment, and the evidence  that
       ASM continues to communicate  with  and  support  the  applicant  in
       Greece. Although I cannot entirely discount the possibility that ASM
       did so out of purely altruistic reasons, I find it more likely  than
       not  that  his  actions  are  the  result  of  a   relationship   of
       consanguinity between him and the applicant.

    The exercise of discretion: the applicant's medical condition

     101. I now consider the  lawfulness  of  the  respondent's  conclusion
          that, even if the applicant and ASM were related as  claimed,  it
          was not appropriate to  exercise  her  discretion  under  Article
          17(2).  With reference  to  the  extract  from  the  respondent's
          decision set out at paragraph 27 above, the respondent considered
          it "important to note" that the causes of the applicant's medical
          conditions were historic  and  that  there  was  no  causal  link
          between those medical conditions and the  applicant's  separation
          from ASM.

     102. Neither the TCR nor the reconsideration requests maintained  that
          the applicant's condition was causally linked to the respondent's
          decisions. The TCR and the reconsideration requests asserted that
          the applicant had a particularly high level of  need  that  could
          not be catered for in Greece and that ASM could provide him  with
          the necessary space and privacy and the emotional support  needed
          by a young child living with  his  condition  who  was  otherwise
          without any other family support. These  reasons  were  carefully
          set  out  in  the  TCR,   the   reconsideration   requests,   the
          psychosocial  report,  the  BIA  and   the   evidence   from   Mr
          Christofilis.

     103. In BAA one of the reasons upon which the SSHD relied in  refusing
          to reconsider her refusal  of  the  TCR  was  that  A1's  medical
          condition was 'historic' and that  the  evidence  had  "...   not
          established  a  clear  causal  link   between   the   applicant's
          conditions and his separation from the UK  sponsor"  (at  [148]).
          The decision of 27 April 2020 in the  present  case  is  in  very
          similar terms. At [129] of BAA Mr Justice Lane stated  that  "The
          focus of attention should  have  been  on  A1's  best  interests,
          taking account of his documented difficulties, whether they  were
          "pre-existing" or not." The fact  that  the  applicant's  medical
          condition was historic was therefore irrelevant to  the  exercise
          of the respondent's discretion.

     104. Another reason relied on by  the  SSHD  in  BAA  in  refusing  to
          reconsider  her  refusal  of  the  TCR  was  that  there  was  no
          explanation as to how the sponsor would be in a  better  position
          than professionals in Greece to provide for A1's care  needs  (at
          [150]). In the instant case it was not clear  to  the  respondent
          from the reports how the applicant's conditions  were  not  being
          adequately treated or why the UK health system, and  specifically
          ASM, would be in a better position to provide the care  needs  of
          the applicant. In BAA Mr Justice Lane held,

                "The question is not whether  or  how  A2  would  clinically
                address the psychiatric and cognitive conditions, from which
                A1 suffers. Rather, given those conditions, the question  is
                whether it would be in A1's best interests to be living with
                a person, A2, whom he trusts and regards as a father figure,
                alongside the other cousins, who regard him  as  members  of
                their family. Although  the  evidence  in  that  regard  has
                further developed since the date of the  decision,  even  on
                the evidence available to the decision-maker in April  2020,
                the treatment of the  reports  is  so  deficient  as  to  be
                legally flawed."

     105. I find that similar reasoning applies  in  the  instant  case.  I
          adopt the  reasoning  of  Mr  Justice  Lane  and  find  that  the
          respondent's treatment of the evidence failed to consider whether
          it would be in the applicant's best interests, given his  medical
          condition and his circumstances in the Greek hostel, to live with
          the only family relation who have consistently cared and provided
          for him and who he trusts and regards as a father figure.

    The exercise of discretion: 'best interests' and 'humanitarian grounds'



     106. I am further persuaded that the respondent  acted  unlawfully  in
          the way she approached the applicant's 'best interests.' The best
          interests of a minor are  of  significant  relevance  within  the
          framework of the Dublin III Regulation (see, for example, Recital
          13, Article 6, and  Article  8(4),  which  states  that,  in  the
          absence of a family member, a sibling or a relative,  the  Member
          State responsible  will  be  that  where  the  minor  lodged  his
          protection application "provided that it is in the best interests
          of the minor"). It is incumbent on the respondent  to  apply  the
          relevant provisions of the CFR, including Article  24  CFR  which
          gives children the right to  "such  protection  and  care  as  is
          necessary for their wellbeing."  It  is  also  incumbent  on  the
          respondent, when considering whether to exercise  her  discretion
          under Article 17(2), to treat the applicant's best interests as a
          primary  consideration  and  to  undertake  for  herself  a  best
          interests assessment (e.g. HA at  [30]  &  [32]).  This  is  also
          apparent from the respondent's 'Dublin III Regulation'  guidance,
          version 2.0, published on 18 April 2019, which states (page 8  of
          46)

                "however, acting in  a  way  that  takes  account  of  these
                interests is a shared responsibility at this point  and  you
                must carefully consider all of the information and  evidence
                provided as to how a child will be affected  by  a  decision
                and  this  must  be  addressed  when  assessing  whether  an
                applicant meets the criteria in the Dublin 3 Regulation.  In
                addition, you must demonstrate that all relevant information
                and evidence provided about the best interests of  a  child,
                such as a sibling or other relative, in  the  UK  have  been
                considered."

     107. And at page 39 and 40 of 46 the guidance states,

                "when considering a request  to  transfer  an  unaccompanied
                child to the UK under the Dublin III  Regulation,  you  must
                adhere to the spirit of the  section  55  duty  and  careful
                consideration  must  be  given  to  their  safeguarding  and
                welfare needs in assessing their best  interests....  It  is
                important that you  demonstrate  and  record  how  you  have
                considered a child's best interests in line with the section
                55 duty."

     108. The 'best interests' assessment is therefore  a  relevant  factor
          for the respondent to take into account when determining  whether
          it is appropriate to exercise her discretion under Article 17(2),
          and this includes an assessment as to the existence and nature of
          any 'humanitarian grounds'.

     109. Once  it  is  established  that  the  applicant  is  the  'family
          relation' of ASM, it is possible for the discretion under Article
          17(2) to be exercised in the applicant's favour even if Article 8
          ECHR/Article 7 CFR is not engaged. In BAA Mr Justice Lane stated,
          at [69],

                 "It is also necessary to make the following point. Although
                Article 17(2) relates to the bringing  together  of  "family
                relations", the fact  that  this  may  be  "on  humanitarian
                grounds based ... on ... cultural considerations"  makes  it
                clear that the ambit of Article 17(2) encompasses cases that
                may elicit a  favourable  response,  even  where  Article  8
                ECHR/Article 7  CFR  is  not  engaged.  Just  as  Ms  Masood
                correctly points out that the Guidance covers applicants who
                may not be children (whether or not accompanied),  the  fact
                that it extends beyond the classic Article 8 scenarios  must
                be borne in mind, when reading it."

     110. Although such instances may be rare, the obligation to treat  the
          best interests of a child as a primary consideration contained in
          Article 6 DIII, and the right of a child to such  protection  and
          'care as is necessary for their well-being' contained in  Article
          24 CFR, read in  conjunction  with  Recital  39  to  Dublin  III,
          requires the respondent  to  consider  whether  to  exercise  her
          discretion even if the relationship between the applicant and ASM
          does not engage Article 8 ECHR. This was not done. The respondent
          considered herself tethered to the prior establishment of Article
          8 ECHR/Article 7 CFR family life between the  applicant  and  ASM
          before her discretion could be exercised. The respondent was only
          willing to consider exercising her discretion in the  applicant's
          favour if she was satisfied that family life,  as  understood  by
          reference to Article 8 ECHR, existed. Her exercise of  discretion
          was therefore pinned to the existence of Article  8  ECHR  family
          life. There was no consideration of whether the discretion should
          be exercised based on 'family or  cultural  considerations'  that
          did not engage Article 8 ECHR/Article 7 CFR, having regard to his
          best interests, his right to protection and care as is  necessary
          for his well-being, and  his  particular  medical  condition  and
          circumstances. This constitutes  an  unlawful  fettering  of  the
          respondent' discretion.

     111. Nor am I satisfied that there has been a lawful 'best  interests'
          assessment. The respondent does not purport herself to  undertake
          a 'best interests' assessment (she only refers to Greece's BIA of
          28 February 2020) and she does not identify what the  applicant's
          best interests are. Whilst the best interests of a child are  not
          a paramount consideration and  cannot  determine  the  manner  in
          which the Article 17(2) discretion is exercised,  the  respondent
          does not explain why she  concluded  that  the  applicant's  best
          interests were outweighed by other considerations in the exercise
          of her discretion.

     112. I additionally find there has been  no  lawful  consideration  or
          application of Article 24 CFR  in  relation  to  the  applicant's
          right to have the care that is necessary for  his  well-being  in
          the respondent's assessment  of  the  humanitarian  grounds.  The
          decision focuses on  whether  there  is  dependency  between  the
          applicant and ASM such as to constitute family life under Article
          8 ECHR and Article 7 CFR. There is little if  any  assessment  of
          the  elements  underpinning  the  asserted  humanitarian  grounds
          (including the applicant's history of neglect, social  exclusion,
          stigmatisation and abuse, his young age, the absence of any other
          significant family member willing to offer support, the  BIA  and
          psychologist's assessment  of  his  particular  care  needs,  his
          difficulties in communicating in the Athens hostel and  the  lack
          of privacy, and the strong bonds that exist between the applicant
          and ASM, including his claim that ASM is the only  family  member
          who could love and care for him).  Even  if  the  respondent  was
          entitled to find there was no Article 8 ECHR family life  between
          the applicant and ASM, the humanitarian grounds were particularly
          compelling.

    Procedural unlawfulness and the duty to investigate

     113. The respondent's Dublin III Regulation guidance,  extant  at  the
          dates of the decisions under challenge, indicates (at page 38  of
          46)  that  relevant  local  authorities  will  be  requested   to
          undertake an assessment with an  applicant's  family  in  the  UK
          which will inform a recommendation  to  EIU  as  to  whether  the
          request should be accepted or rejected.

                "All decisions on whether to accept a request to take charge
                of a child's asylum application (and so accept the  transfer
                of a child to the UK) will be the responsibility of the Home
                Office; however, these decisions will  be  informed  by  the
                assessment   and   recommendation    provided    by    local
                authorities."

     114. In the part of BAA dealing with the duty of  investigation  under
          Dublin III so far as it relates to the involvement of a  relevant
          local authority, Mr Justice Lane stated, at [77] and [78]:

   77. Although Article 17(2) lacks some of the formal requirements  as  to
       verification etc, which derive from the Implementing Regulations, it
       would   be   remarkable   if    the    respondent's    investigatory
       responsibilities were materially narrower in an Article  17(2)  case
       which concerns an unaccompanied minor and his or her best interests,
       than they would be in respect of any other take-charge request.

   78. But this is not to say that the precise nature of the  investigatory
       obligation bears no relationship with the nature of the  request  to
       take charge made under Article 17(2), and the  information  supplied
       in connection with it. Given the breadth of Article 17(2), there may
       well be some cases in which what the respondent and,  by  extension,
       the relevant local authority, are expected to do would be less  than
       in other cases.  Where,  however,  the  request  in  respect  of  an
       unaccompanied minor raises issues that involve  an  asserted  family
       life within Article 8/Article 7,  then,  in  the  normal  course  of
       events, the respondent's degree  of  engagement  with  the  relevant
       local authority should be no less than in  the  case  of  any  other
       unaccompanied minor where the  take-charge  request  is  made  under
       Article 8 of Dublin III on the basis that the relation in the United
       Kingdom is a sibling or a "family member" or "relative", as defined.
       Unless  the  respondent  is  satisfied  that  the   relevant   local
       authority's assessment could not possibly cast any relevant light on
       whether the alleged family relationship exists, or upon the  alleged
       humanitarian grounds, I consider that, in  an  Article  8/Article  7
       case of this kind, the respondent should seek an assessment from the
       relevant local authority.

     115. At [79] Mr Justice  Lane  considered  statements  from  Ms  Julia
          Farman, Head of the European Intake  Unit  (EIU),  who  indicated
          that a family assessment will only  be  requested  from  a  local
          authority  once  the  claimed  family   relationship   had   been
          established and once it had been decided to  exercise  discretion
          under Article  17(2).  Mr  Justice  Lane  did  not  consider  the
          statements of the respondent's practice to be compatible with the
          requirements of Dublin III. At [80] he stated,

                "There are likely to be circumstances in  which  information
                from the relevant  local  authority,  deriving  from  direct
                engagement with the asserted United Kingdom  relation,  will
                inform the making of the respondent's decision, both  as  to
                the existence of the claimed relationship and as to the  way
                in which the Article 17(2) discretion should be exercised."

     116. Mr Justice Lane considered that the case before him was  not  one
          in which a lawful decision might be reached without calling for a
          local authority assessment. At [117] he stated,

                "... the materials from Greece that accompanied the  initial
                take-charge request, although somewhat sparse,  nevertheless
                raised the issue of there being an  Article  8  family  life
                between A1 and A2, as cousins, by reference to the emotional
                and material dependency of A1 upon A2. Given that  there  is
                no question but that A1 is an unaccompanied minor, there was
                no reason for the  respondent  to  depart  from  her  normal
                policy, as  set  out  in  the  Guidance,  of  requesting  an
                assessment. As I have already  held,  I  consider  that  the
                practice of  the  respondent  in  Article  17(2)  cases,  as
                disclosed in Ms Farman's statements,  is  incompatible  with
                the respondent's obligations under Dublin III, the ECHR  and
                the CFR. Such an assessment could have  shed  light  on  the
                relevant issues in this case."

     117. It is not in dispute that there was no  request  from  the  local
          authority for an assessment. Such an assessment may have  yielded
          relevant information both in respect of establishing  the  family
          link, and in the assessment of the applicant's best interests and
          the manner in  which  the  Article  17(2)  discretion  should  be
          exercised. The  local  authority's  assessment  would  have  been
          particularly  relevant  when  determining  the  applicant's  best
          interests as it is only possible to determine  whether  his  best
          interests lie in coming to the UK if his  circumstances  in  this
          country are known and considered. The local authority would  have
          considered,  inter  alia,  the  suitability   of   the   proposed
          accommodation and ASM's suitability  as  the  applicant's  carer,
          including his ability to provide for his physical  and  emotional
          needs. The respondent contends that an assessment from the  local
          authority could not possibly have cast any relevant light capable
          of assisting in her, but this view is speculative in the  absence
          of any such assessment and it cannot be rationally said that  the
          absence of a  local  authority  assessment  could  have  made  no
          material difference. I observe that there was  no  indication  at
          the date of any of the relevant  decisions  that  the  respondent
          considered that a local authority assessment was  unnecessary  as
          all relevant information had already been obtained.

     118. The extant Dublin III Regulation guidance stated, at page  40  of
          46:

                A  sponsorship  undertaking  form  must  be  sent   to   [an
                applicant's]  family  member  or  relative  in  the  UK  and
                representative (where notification is given) as  soon  as  a
                transfer request is received.  five  working  days  must  be
                given to complete and return the form. If it is not returned
                within this time limit you must pursue by  telephone,  if  a
                number  is  available,  or  by  sending  a  further   letter
                requesting a response.

     119. ASM contends that he did not receive any undertaking form or  any
          telephone call from the respondent. The Royal Mail, by way of the
          Track and Trace document,  was  unable  to  confirm  whether  the
          undertaking form was delivered to ASM's address, and Ms Goddard's
          statement, in which she confirmed that she did telephone  ASM  on
          or around 17 January 2020, was provided very late in the day  and
          failed to explain, other than by reference to an "oversight"  why
          there was no reference to the attempted  telephone  call  in  the
          GCID notes. There is however  no  reason  for  me  to  doubt  the
          credibility of Ms Goddard's  assertion  and  the  GCID  notes  do
          suggest that an undertaking form  was  dispatched  to  ASM  on  3
          January 2020. I am not therefore persuaded  that  there  was  any
          unlawfulness  in  the  respondent's  attempts   to   obtain   the
          undertaking form from ASM.

    Article 8 ECHR/Article 7 CFR

     120. I will consider the lawfulness of  respondent's  conclusion  that
          there was no  Article  8  ECHR  or  Article  7  CFR  family  life
          relationship between the applicant and ASM, in  respect  of  both
          the challenge on traditional judicial review  principles  and  in
          respect of the challenge based on a breach of fundamental rights,
          in the context of the factual framework based on the  information
          and evidence that  was  available  to  the  respondent  when  her
          decisions were made, including that summarised at paragraphs 2 to
          11 above.

    Must the applicant meet a "very exceptional circumstances" test for the
    applicability of Article 8 ECHR?

     121. The respondent contends that her obligations under Article 8 ECHR
          to an unaccompanied minor  are  limited  to  the  kind  of  "very
          exceptional circumstances" described in ZT (Syria), as considered
          in FTH and R  (AM).  Although  all  three  authorities  concerned
          challenges to decisions taken outside the Dublin III system,  the
          respondent argues that the Court of Appeal was clear that  "where
          the Dublin III procedure (including  the  enforcement  procedures
          available through the French judicial system) was  available"  to
          an unaccompanied asylum-seeking  child,  the  SSHD's  independent
          obligations under Article 8 ECHR would only arise  if  "for  some
          reason, it could be shown that there  was  a  deficiency  in  the
          [Dublin] system". Ms Masood submitted that the  Tribunal  in  BAA
          did not deal with the  respondent's  submission  that  the  "very
          exceptional circumstances" test applied given that the respondent
          was being asked to exercise discretion to do  something  she  was
          not normally required to do.

     122. The applicants in ZT  (Syria),  concerned  with  aspects  of  the
          asylum determining procedures in France,  entirely  bypassed  the
          procedures and requirements  of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  by
          directly requesting asylum in the UK and challenging  the  SSHD's
          refusal to admit them and consider their requests. It was in this
          specific context, where the Court of Appeal was  considering  the
          strength of a human rights case needed to override the  processes
          and procedures of the Dublin system, that it concluded that  only
          "very exceptional circumstances" would entitle the applicants  to
          rely on Article 8 ECHR considerations without having  to  utilise
          the Dublin III system (see [65] and [95]).

     123. R (AM) was concerned  with  the  'expedited  process'  which  was
          established  by  the  SSHD  in  conjunction   with   the   French
          authorities  in  October  2016  in  response  to  the   impending
          demolition of the makeshift  encampment  in  Calais  and  through
          which the SSHD sought to assess the eligibility of  unaccompanied
          asylum-seeking children to be transferred to the  UK.  The  Upper
          Tribunal found, inter alia, that the expedited  process  breached
          the procedural protections afforded by Article 8 ECHR. The  Court
          of Appeal accepted  the  SSHD's  submission  that  the  expedited
          process operated outside and  without  prejudice  to  Dublin  III
          [85]. The SSHD submitted [66], in  reliance  on  ZT(Syria),  that
          Article 8 ECHR did  not  require  a  different  approach  to  the
          admission of the applicants to the UK outside  the  framework  of
          the expedited process and the Dublin  III  Regulation.  Singh  LJ
          explained, at [88] and [89]:

   88. First, the Upper Tribunal reached a view which, in my judgement,  is
       inconsistent with the decision of this Court in ZT (Syria). It seems
       to have regarded  Article  8  and  its  procedural  requirements  as
       essentially interchangeable  with  the  procedural  requirements  of
       Dublin III and/or the common law. However, as this Court made  clear
       in ZT (Syria), Article 8 will only have  a  role  to  play  in  very
       exceptional circumstances. In particular it must be shown  that  the
       French legal system had systemic deficiencies in it, which  rendered
       it incapable of providing an  effective  remedy  to  the  Respondent
       children: see ZT (Syria), at para. 95 (Beatson  LJ);  and  also  the
       judgments of this Court in RSM, at paras. 132-144 (Arden LJ) and 173-
       175 (Singh LJ).

   89. Secondly, I agree  with  the  Secretary  of  State  that  the  Upper
       Tribunal gave insufficient recognition to the importance of the fact
       that the children concerned  were  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
       French care system.

     124. R (AM) was therefore also concerned  with  the  applicability  of
          Article 8  ECHR  outside  of  the  Dublin  III  system,  and  the
          reference to "very exceptional circumstances" must be  considered
          in this specific context.

     125. R (FTH) was also concerned  with  the  'expedited  process'.  The
          applicant in that case chose not  to  make  an  asylum  claim  in
          France  and  therefore  the  Dublin  III  procedures   were   not
          triggered.  The  SSHD  appealed  against  the  Upper   Tribunal's
          declaration that Article 8 ECHR was breached on  the  basis  that
          this was inconsistent with R  (AM).  The  SSHD  argued  that  the
          Dublin III system sufficiently respected Article  8  ECHR  rights
          and effectively ensured that Article 8 ECHR rights were  properly
          respected,  save  in  very  exceptional  circumstances  (see  the
          summary of the SSHD's submissions at [41] to [47]). Allowing  the
          appeal, the Court of Appeal held, at [55]:

                55.     It seems clear to us, however, from  [88]  of  Singh
                LJ's judgment read  in  the  context  of  the  arguments  he
                earlier set out, that, even  though  the  expedited  process
                operated outside Dublin III, AM held that the  Secretary  of
                State's obligations under article 8 to a UASC in France were
                limited to the very exceptional circumstances  as  described
                in ZT (Syria), even where that child had been the subject of
                the expedited process. That is because, where the Dublin III
                procedure (including the  enforcement  procedures  available
                through the French judicial system) was available to such  a
                UASC, that would usually have provided sufficient protection
                for his or her article 8 rights by  (amongst  other  things)
                providing an effective  remedy.  The  Secretary  of  State's
                independent obligations under  article  8  would  only  have
                arisen if, for some reason, it could be shown that there was
                a deficiency in the system which meant  that  the  UASC  was
                denied such a remedy by that route.

     126. In my judgment this paragraph indicates that the Court of  Appeal
          was principally concerned with  Article  8  ECHR  claims  brought
          outside of the Dublin III system. None of the authorities  relied
          on by the respondent in support of her submission  that  reliance
          on Article  8  ECHR  is  only  triggered  if  the  applicant  can
          demonstrate the existence of "very exceptional circumstances" are
          concerned with the assessment of  Article  8  ECHR  relationships
          within the framework of the Dublin III Regulation or breaches  of
          Article 8 ECHR rights that are identified through the application
          of the Dublin III process and procedures. The assessment  of  the
          existence of a family or private life relationship and the impact
          of separation on that relationship are  factors  that  ordinarily
          fall to be considered by Member States applying  the  Dublin  III
          procedures, including  the  exercise  of  discretion  in  Article
          17(2), by reference to and application of recitals 13, 14 and 39.
          In this way the Dublin III procedures will  sufficiently  respect
          family life rights. I find there is no support in the authorities
          indicating that the test for determining a breach  of  Article  8
          ECHR undertaken within the Dublin  III  procedures  requires  the
          existence of "very exceptional circumstances."

    Is there an Article 8/Article 7 CFR family  life  relationship  between
    the applicant and ASM?

     127. As the present challenges contend that the respondent's decisions
          are contrary to section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998,  and
          having regard to the authorities of R  (Nasseri)  v  SSHD  [2009]
          UKHL 23, Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (no 2) [2013] UKSC 38 and  39,
          R (Lord Carlile of Berriew) v SSHD [2014]  UKSC  60,  Caroopen  &
          Myrie [2016] EWCA Civ 1307, and the Dublin III related  decisions
          including MS/UT and, more recently, BAA (at [61]), this  Tribunal
          must determine  for  itself  whether  the  respondent's  decision
          (principally, the decision of 27 April 2020) breaches  Article  8
          ECHR rights. In reaching my decision on whether Article 8 ECHR is
          engaged, with respect to both  family  life  (and  private  life)
          relationships, and on the issue of proportionality, I give weight
          to the view of the respondent, who is the primary  decision-maker
          and the person with  the  authority  to  make  a  decision  under
          Article 17(2).

     128. When assessing  whether  a  protected  family  life  relationship
          exists between the applicant and ASM I note the  observations  of
          the House of Lords in Huang [2007] UKHL 11, at [18]

                "Human beings are social animals.  They  depend  on  others.
                Their family, or extended family, is the group on which many
                people most heavily depend, socially, emotionally and  often
                financially.  There  comes  a  point  at  which,  for  some,
                prolonged  and  unavoidable  separation  from   this   group
                seriously inhibits their ability to live full and fulfilling
                lives. Matters such as the age, health and vulnerability  of
                the applicant, the closeness and  previous  history  of  the
                family, the applicant's  dependence  on  the  financial  and
                emotional support of the  family,  the  prevailing  cultural
                tradition and conditions in the country of origin  and  many
                other factors may all be relevant."

     129. In her  decision  the  respondent  relies  on  the  authority  of
          Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31. Although the case  itself  concerned
          the relationship between adult children and  their  parents,  the
          principles it established equally apply to consideration of other
          relationships concerning the existence of family life.  At  [14],
          Sedley LJ cited with approval the report of the Commission in S v
          United Kingdom (1984) 40 DR 196 at [198]:

                "Generally, the protection of family life  under  Article  8
                involves cohabiting dependents, such as  parents  and  their
                dependent, minor  children.  Whether  it  extends  to  other
                relationships depends on the circumstances of the particular
                case. Relationships between adults ... would not necessarily
                acquire the  protection  of  Article  8  of  the  Convention
                without  evidence  of  further   elements   of   dependency,
                involving more than the normal emotional ties."

     130. Sedley LJ considered the issue of dependency at [17]:

                "But if dependency is read down as meaning "support", in the
                personal sense, and if  one  adds,  echoing  the  Strasbourg
                jurisprudence, "real" or "committed" or "effective"  to  the
                word  "support",  then  it  represents  in   my   view   the
                irreducible minimum of what family life implies."

     131.  When  considering  the  material  factors  that   comprise   the
          "irreducible minimum" of what constitutes family  life  Arden  LJ
          stated, at [24]:

                "There is no presumption that a person has  a  family  life,
                even with the members of a person's  immediate  family.  The
                court has to scrutinise the relevant factors.  Such  factors
                include identifying  who  are  the  near  relatives  of  the
                appellant, the nature of the  links  between  them  and  the
                appellant, the age of the appellant, where and with whom  he
                has resided in the past, and the forms  of  contact  he  has
                maintained with the other members of the family with whom he
                claims to have a family life."

     132. And at [25] Arden LJ stated:

                "Because there is no  presumption  of  family  life,  in  my
                judgment a family life is not established between  an  adult
                child and his surviving  parent  or  other  siblings  unless
                something more exists than normal emotional  ties  ...  Such
                ties might exist if the  appellant  were  dependent  on  his
                family or vice versa."

     133. In Uddin v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 338, having considered  Kugathas,
          the Senior President of Tribunals stated, at [31]:

                "Dependency, in the Kugathas sense,  is  accordingly  not  a
                term of art. It is a question of fact, a matter of substance
                not form.  The  irreducible  minimum  of  what  family  life
                implies remains that which  Sedley  LJ  described  as  being
                whether support is real or effective or committed."

     134.  Careful  consideration  must  be   given   to   the   particular
          circumstances of each  case,  and  the  situations  in  which  an
          Article 8 family life relationship exists  may  be  highly  fact-
          sensitive (Uddin, at [32]).

     135. In her  written  and  oral  submissions,  the  respondent  places
          particular reliance on Paradiso and Campanelli. The Grand Chamber
          of the European Court of  Human  Rights  considered  whether  the
          forced  removal  of  an  infant  from   his   surrogate   parents
          constituted an interference with the right to respect for  family
          or private life under Article  8  ECHR.  The  applicant  parents,
          Italian nationals, entered into  a  surrogacy  agreement  with  a
          Russian clinic as such an agreement was not legally available  in
          Italy. Mr Campanelli's sperm was supposed to have been  used  for
          the in vitro fertilisation but, after tests were carried  out  in
          Italy, it was discovered that he had no genetic connection to the
          child. The Italian authorities refused to  register  the  child's
          Russian issued birth certificate and sought an order to  put  the
          child, who had lived with the applicants for  8  months,  up  for
          adoption.  The  child  was  placed  in  a  children's  home   for
          approximately 15 months and then placed with a family with a view
          to adoption.

     136. In a majority decision the Grand Chamber concluded there  was  no
          family life between the applicants and the child, but that  there
          was a private life  relationship.  At  [140]  the  Grand  Chamber
          stated:

                  "The  existence  or  non-existence  of  "family  life"  is
                essentially a question of fact depending upon the  existence
                of close personal ties. The  notion  of  "family"  in  art.8
                concerns marriage-based relationships,  and  also  other  de
                facto "family ties" where the parties  are  living  together
                outside marriage or where other  factors  demonstrated  that
                the relationship had sufficient constancy."

     137. At [149] the Grand Chamber held:

                "The Court must ascertain whether, in the  circumstances  of
                the case, the relationship between the  applicants  and  the
                child came within the  sphere  of  family  life  within  the
                meaning of art.8. The Court accepts, in certain  situations,
                the existence of de facto family life between  an  adult  or
                adults and a child in the absence of biological  ties  or  a
                recognised  legal  tie,  provided  that  there  are  genuine
                personal ties."

     138. Having then considered other cases in  which  'de  facto'  family
          life  had  been  established  in   the   context   of   fostering
          relationships and adoption, the Grand Chamber stated, at [151] to
          [153]:

                "151   It is therefore necessary, in the  instant  case,  to
                consider the quality of the ties, the  role  played  by  the
                applicants vis--vis the  child  and  the  duration  of  the
                cohabitation between them and the child. The Court considers
                that the applicants had developed a parental project and had
                assumed their role as parents vis--vis the child. They  had
                forged close emotional bonds with him in the first stages of
                his life, the strength of which was,  moreover,  clear  from
                the report drawn up by the team of social workers  following
                a request by the Minors Court.

  152. With  regard  to  the  duration  of  the  cohabitation  between  the
       applicants and the child in this case,  the  Court  notes  that  the
       applicants and the child lived together for  six  months  in  Italy,
       preceded by a period of about two months' shared  life  between  the
       first applicant and the child in Russia.

  153. It would admittedly be inappropriate to define a minimal duration of
       shared life which would be necessary to constitute de  facto  family
       life, given that the assessment of any situation must  take  account
       of the "quality" of the bond and the  circumstances  of  each  case.
       However, the duration of the relationship with the child  is  a  key
       factor in the Court's recognition of the existence of a family life.
       In the above-cited case of Wagner and  JMWL,  the  cohabitation  had
       lasted for more than 10 years. Equally, in the  Nazarenko  case,  in
       which a married man had assumed the parental role before discovering
       that he was not the child's  biological  father,  the  period  spent
       together had lasted more than five years."

     139. And at [157] the Grand Chamber concluded:

                "Having regard to the above factors, namely the  absence  of
                any biological  tie  between  the  child  and  the  intended
                parents, the short duration of  the  relationship  with  the
                child  and  the  uncertainty  of  the  ties  from  a   legal
                perspective, and in spite of the  existence  of  a  parental
                project and the quality of the emotional  bonds,  the  Court
                considers that the conditions enabling it to  conclude  that
                there existed a de facto family life have not been met."

     140. In determining whether there was family life  between  the  child
          and the applicants the Grand Chamber's focused on  the  existence
          of  close  (and  genuine)  personal  ties  that  had   sufficient
          constancy  or  duration.  The  duration   or   constancy   of   a
          relationship is not however the same  as  cohabitation,  and  the
          Grand Chamber does not conflate the constancy or  duration  of  a
          relationship with whether there has been cohabitation as part  of
          the relationship. I additionally note that the child in  Paradiso
          was only 8 months old when separated from the applicants and that
          the nature of the emotional  bonds  in  the  first  stages  of  a
          child's life are different to those established when the child is
          older (such as a 14 year old) when the quality of any  attachment
          or dependency  is  likely  to  be  more  sophisticated  and  more
          focused.

     141. I bring to bear on the evidence available to the respondent  when
          her decisions were made the principles and  guidance  established
          by Huang, Kugathas, and Paradiso.

     142. There is no dispute as to the applicant's  age.  He  was  at  all
          material times, and remains, 14 years old. I have determined, for
          the reasons given above at paragraph 100 that the  applicant  and
          ASM are second cousins. There  is  therefore  a  relationship  of
          consanguinity between them, albeit one located, in terms of blood
          relationships,  at  the  outer  edges   for   the   purposes   of
          establishing  an   Article   8   ECHR   protected   family   life
          relationship. The evidence before the respondent  indicated  that
          the applicant and ASM had been regularly communicating with  each
          other since 2008, although they first met  in  2014  (BIA;  ASM's
          statement  23  April  2020).  The   applicant   and   ASM   spent
          approximately 2 months together in 2018 in Somalia and India, and
          then approximately 2 months together in  Somalia  and  Turkey  in
          2019 (psychosocial report dated 23 December 2019;  ASM  statement
          dated 7 February 2020; ASM statement 23 April 2020). I have taken
          into  account  the  more  remote  relationship  of  consanguinity
          between the applicant and ASM, and the  limited  time  that  they
          have lived together.

     143. The respondent was aware from the TCR issued in December 2019  of
          the applicant's claim that he had no other family  relations  who
          were able to care for him. He had been abandoned by his mother in
          infancy and his father, with  whom  he  never  had  any  parental
          relationship, died in May 2019 (BIA, dated 28 February 2020). The
          evidence before the respondent indicated that ASM wished to  take
          on responsibility for the applicant in the capacity of  a  parent
          (ASM statement dated 7 February 2020). There was no indication in
          the respondent's decisions that she had taken  into  account  the
          absence of any other close family  relations,  including  parents
          and siblings. The absence of any other close family member  is  a
          relevant factor when  assessing  the  existence  of  family  life
          between the applicant and ASM (Kugathas).

     144. In addition to the financial  support  provided  by  ASM  to  the
          applicant since  2008,  and  his  financing  of  the  applicant's
          medical treatment in India and  Turkey  and  the  purchase  of  a
          mobile phone for the applicant in Greece, the evidence before the
          respondent indicated that the applicant did not believe there was
          anyone else who could or wished to take care of  him  other  than
          ASM (psychosocial report dated 23 December 2019). In the BIA  the
          applicant described ASM as "being in the place of the  parents  I
          have never had" and said that ASM "is  the  only  person  who  is
          there for me and who cares about me and helps me."  In  the  same
          document  ASM  described  offering  the  applicant  "all  of  the
          emotional support he needed" and stated  that  he  was  the  only
          person with whom the applicant shared his thoughts and  problems.
          In his statement of 23 April 2020 ASM described how the applicant
          told him no one had ever said they loved him prior  to  ASM.  ASM
          said that he loved the applicant and wanted to  change  his  life
          and that "if [the applicant] came to the UK I will look after him
          like my child." ASM said,  with  respect  to  the  applicant,  "I
          listen to him, give advice and give him love and attention, which
          is what a child needs,  particularly  one  who  has  had  such  a
          difficult life." ASM continued to provide financial  support  for
          the  applicant  and  discussed  the  applicant's  behaviour   and
          progress with the professionals at the Athens hostel.

     145. The quality of emotional attachment between the applicant and ASM
          must also  be  considered  in  the  context  of  the  applicant's
          circumstances in the Athens hostel. He was said  to  be  shy  and
          introverted, matters exacerbated by  the  absence  of  a  regular
          Somali interpreter (which meant that he was not  followed  up  by
          the psychosocial team as frequently as necessary and which caused
          him difficulty in communicating with the other children and staff
          in the hostel) and the consequences  of  his  particular  medical
          condition (the  applicant  had  no  privacy  in  respect  of  his
          personal hygiene needs  and  was  concerned  that  if  the  other
          children in the shelter learnt  of  his  condition  he  would  be
          further ostracised (psychosocial report dated 23  December  2019;
          report by scientific supervisor dated 11 February 2020; BIA)). In
          his statement dated 22 April 2020 Othon  Christofilis  said  that
          the applicant needed the type of  emotional  support  that  could
          only be provided by a caregiver, that the  applicant  was  lonely
          and very closed, and that he  had  never  learned  social  skills
          relating to interaction with people his  own  age.  Nor  did  the
          applicant have a private space to change his colostomy bag. Othon
          Christofilis believed that ASM was the only person with whom  the
          applicant could talk when he was sad, happy or  angry,  the  only
          person who properly supported him directly, and the  only  person
          who could play the role of parent to him. It was the view of  the
          Greek professionals that the applicant was  very  close  to  ASM,
          that they spent a lot of time in contact  with  each  other,  and
          that the applicant needed a loving and caring  environment  which
          could only be provided by ASM (report  by  scientific  supervisor
          dated 11 February 2020; BIA).

     146. The relationship between the applicant and  ASM  should  also  be
          considered in  the  context  of  his  upbringing  which  involved
          neglect, bullying, social exclusion, rejection and  ostracisation
          from other family members and those with whom he resided and from
          the  communities  in  which  he  lived  (as   detailed   in   the
          psychosocial report dated 23 December 2019; ASM's statement dated
          7 February 2020; the  BIA  dated  28  February  2020;  and  ASM's
          statement of 23 April 2020). This was  materially  relevant  when
          assessing the nature of  the  bonds  that  had  been  established
          between the applicant and ASM as ASM was  the  first  person  who
          provided the applicant with love and care and was the only person
          to whom the applicant referred to as 'family' (the BIA  dated  28
          February 2020). There is no adequate indication from the decision
          that the evidence relating  to  the  applicant's  upbringing  was
          factored in when the  respondent  concluded  that  there  was  no
          dependency. Contrary to the conclusion of the respondent, and  in
          light of the evidence available to her which  I  have  considered
          above, I  find  there  was  considerable  evidence  of  emotional
          dependency between the applicant and ASM.

     147. Although the blood relationship between the applicant and ASM  is
          distant, and although they have only cohabited for short  periods
          of time, I have found  that  their  relationship  had  sufficient
          constancy, that there are close and  genuine  personal  ties  and
          that ASM provides support to the  applicant  that  is  "real"  or
          "committed" or "effective".

     148. I find, for the reasons given above, that  the  respondent  acted
          unlawfully in her assessment of whether there was Article 8  ECHR
          family life between the applicant and ASM on traditional judicial
          review principles. I find, also for the reasons given above, that
          there is family life between the applicant and ASM sufficient  to
          trigger the protection of Article 8 ECHR.

    Whether the respondent's decisions  disproportionately  interfere  with
    the Article 8 ECHR family life relationship

     149. I understood Ms Masood's position to be that,  if  I  found  that
          Article 8 family life existed  between  the  applicant  and  ASM,
          there was no suggestion that the  challenged  decisions  did  not
          interfere with that relationship.  It  then  falls  to  determine
          whether the decisions were disproportionate.

     150. There is no general obligation on Member  States  to  allow  non-
          nationals into their country to reunite with their family (Sen  v
          Netherlands (2001) 36 EHRR 7). A state may however owe a positive
          Article 8 obligation to admit individuals to  its  territory  for
          family reunification, although the extent of that obligation will
          vary according to the particular  circumstances  of  the  persons
          involved and the general interest (Secretary  of  State  for  the
          Home Department v ZAT & Ors [2016] EWCA Civ 810).

     151. At [175] of his decision in BAA Mr Justice Lane stated,

                "As I have earlier  explained,  although  the  existence  of
                family life is conceptually separate from whether there  has
                been a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  right  to
                respect for it, on the facts of the present case the two are
                closely intertwined. The extreme emotional  dependency  that
                A1 has on A2 is not only a factor that helps  establish  the
                existence of family life between them. It also goes  to  the
                question of whether the respondent's decisions, refusing  to
                exercise  discretion  under  Article  17(2),   represent   a
                disproportionate interference with that family life."

     152. At [66(2)] of BAA Mr Justice Lane held that, as is the case  with
          any other discretionary power of  the  SSHD  in  the  immigration
          field, Article 17(2) must be exercised in an individual's favour,
          where to do otherwise would breach the individual's human  rights
          (or those of some other person), contrary to  section  6  of  the
          Human Rights Act 1998.

     153. I find, on the facts  of  the  instant  case,  having  particular
          regard  to  the  applicant's  young  age,  his  serious   medical
          condition, the circumstances in which he is living in  the  Greek
          hostel, the absence of any other close  family  members  and  his
          strong emotional dependency  on  ASM,  that  the  factual  matrix
          supporting the existence of a family life relationship also  goes
          to the question of whether the respondent's refusal  to  exercise
          her discretion under Article 17(2) constitutes a disproportionate
          interference under Article 8 ECHR.  I  note  that  the  principal
          decision under challenge (27 April 2020) failed  to  address  the
          issue of proportionality as  it  rejected  the  existence  of  an
          Article 8 ECHR family life relationship. I take into account  the
          factors  identified  in  section   117B   of   the   Nationality,
          Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as being relevant to  the  public
          interest considerations, including the  public  interest  in  the
          maintenance of effective immigration controls. I  note  that  the
          applicant would not be transferred to the UK for the purposes  of
          settlement but to enable his asylum claim  to  be  determined.  I
          find however that the applicant's need for affection and  support
          from the only family relation willing to provide  it  during  the
          processing of his asylum claim, which is a challenging  time,  in
          light of his age and his history of neglect  and  abuse  and  his
          medical condition, and his dependency on ASM, is sufficient, even
          having regard to the width  of  the  discretion,  to  render  the
          refusal  to   exercise   discretion   under   Article   17(2)   a
          disproportionate interference  with  the  right  to  respect  for
          family life under Article 8 ECHR.

    Article 8 ECHR Private life

     154. If I am wrong in my assessment that there  exists  an  Article  8
          ECHR family life relationship between the applicant and ASM, I am
          satisfied, for the reasons enumerated at paragraphs  142  to  146
          above, that their relationship is protected by the  private  life
          aspect of Article 8 ECHR.

     155. The respondent relies on Abbas in support of her submission  that
          there is no positive obligation on a state to admit someone  into
          its territory for the  purposes  of  establishing  or  continuing
          private life relationships. Mr Abbas was an adult who lived  with
          his own family Pakistan and who was refused  entry  clearance  to
          visit his uncle and grandmother  in  the  UK.  His  human  rights
          appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was allowed on the  basis  that
          private life, as understood  by  Article  8  ECHR,  included  the
          maintenance of relationships outside those which count as  family
          life, that the development of private life included being able to
          visit the UK for that purpose (so long as the  immigration  rules
          were met), that there was a positive obligation under  Article  8
          ECHR to allow a foreign national to enter the UK to  develop  his
          private life if he satisfied the immigration rules, and that,  as
          the First-tier Tribunal found  that  Mr  Abbas  did  satisfy  the
          immigration  rules,  the   refusal   of   entry   clearance   was
          disproportionate. The point of principle considered by the  Court
          of Appeal in Abbas was set out at [2].

                "To what extent does the state have a positive obligation on
                grounds of private  life  (where  no  relevant  family  life
                exists) to grant entry clearance for an adult  to  visit  an
                elderly relative located in the United Kingdom?"

     156. Lord Justice Burnett answered the above question at [3]:

                "In my judgment the answer to that question is that no  such
                positive obligation exists. There is no sign  of  it  having
                been recognised  in  the  jurisprudence  of  the  Strasbourg
                Court. It is inconsistent  with  the  jurisprudence  on  the
                positive obligation under article 8 as regards  family  life
                which that court has recognised and would sit uneasily  with
                its approach to the extra-territorial reach of the ECHR."

     157. The Court accepted that the SSHD had been unable to identify  any
          case or settled line of authority in which the  Strasbourg  Court
          held that the private life aspect of  Article  8  ECHR  has  been
          engaged in respect  of  a  person  outside  a  Contracting  State
          seeking to enter to develop that private  life  [18].  The  Court
          commented on the broad reach  of  private  life,  as  opposed  to
          family life, and the prospect of a large  number  of  individuals
          relying on  the  private  life  aspect  to  support  their  entry
          clearance applications, and that it would be wrong, as  a  matter
          of principle, to accept that the private life aspect of Article 8
          ECHR could require a state to allow an alien into  its  territory
          [supra]. At [19] and [20] the Court held:

   19. It would be wrong as a matter  of  principle  because  there  is  no
       equivalence for these purposes between private life and family life.
       The passage from Khan set out above recognises the unitary nature of
       a family for article  8  purposes  with  the  consequence  that  the
       interference with the family life of one is an interference with the
       rights of all those within the ambit of the family whose rights  are
       engaged. That is a feature of family life recognised,  for  example,
       in Beoku-Betts v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]
       AC 115 which held that the rights of all  family  members,  and  not
       only the person immediately affected by a removal decision, must  be
       considered in the article 8 balance. As Lord Brown  of  Eaton-under-
       Heywood observed:

                       "Together these members enjoy a single  family  life
                       and whether  or  not  the  removal  would  interfere
                       disproportionately with it has to be  looked  at  by
                       reference to the family unit  as  a  whole  and  the
                       impact of the removal upon each member.  If  overall
                       the removal would be disproportionate, all  affected
                       family members  are  to  be  regarded  as  victims."
                       (paragraph [20]).

                Lady Hale put it this way:

                       " ... the central point about  family  life  ...  is
                       that the whole  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  its
                       individual parts. The right to  respect  for  family
                       life of one necessarily  encompasses  the  right  to
                       respect for family life of others, normally a spouse
                       or minor children, with  whom  the  family  life  in
                       enjoyed." (paragraph 4)

   20. No such reasoning could apply to  the  multifarious  aspects  of  an
       individual's private life.

     158. The Court found that the Tribunal had "out-paced  the  Strasbourg
          Court by expanding the reach of article  8  in  a  way  which  is
          entirely  novel"  which  it  was  precluded  from  doing  by  the
          principles in Ullah v Special Adjudicator [2004] 2 AC 323.

     159. As I am bound by the  decision  in  Abbas,  it  is  important  to
          consider the point of principle that was being considered in  its
          full context. It is clear from the  question  considered  by  the
          Court, and from the factual matrix, that the situation  in  Abbas
          was materially different from  the  present.  Abbas  involved  an
          application for entry clearance by an adult for  a  short  visit,
          not the exercise of (albeit  a  wide)  discretion  that  requires
          consideration of humanitarian grounds in respect of a  vulnerable
          child who is emotionally dependent on his family relation, set in
          the context of legal obligations to respect the best interests of
          unaccompanied minors.

     160. The Court's decision was based on the "multifarious aspects of an
          individual's private  life"  and  the  absence  of  "equivalence"
          between private life and family life. In  the  instant  case  the
          applicant does not rely on multifarious aspects  of  his  private
          life but only on his relationship with ASM, and  the  aspects  of
          his private life relationship with ASM reflect, to a  significant
          degree, that between close family members.  The  quality  of  the
          emotional relationship between the applicant and ASM, the support
          ASM provides to the  applicant,  and  the  manner  in  which  the
          applicant regards ASM, share  the  elements  of  a  close  family
          relationship and is 'equivalent' to  that  between  close  family
          members.

     161. Support for this approach can be found in Paradiso, at [161]  and
          [162]:

  161. The Court considers that there is no valid reason to understand  the
       concept of "private life" as excluding the emotional  bonds  created
       and developed between an adult and a child in situations other  than
       the classic situations of kinship. This type of bond  also  pertains
       to individuals' life and social identity. In certain cases involving
       a relationship between  adults  and  a  child  where  there  are  no
       biological or legal ties the facts may nonetheless fall  within  the
       scope of "private life".

  162. In particular, in the above-cited  case  of  X  v  Switzerland,  the
       Commission examined the situation of  an  individual  who  had  been
       entrusted by friends with the care of their child, a task which  she
       fulfilled. When, several years later, the authorities  decided  that
       the child could no longer remain with the  individual  in  question,
       since the parents had asked to resume caring for him, the  applicant
       lodged an appeal in order to be able to keep the child,  relying  on
       art.8 of the Convention. The Commission held  that  the  applicant's
       private life was involved, in that she was deeply  attached  to  the
       child.

     162. The applicability of the private life aspect of  Article  8  ECHR
          was considered in the context of the Dublin III Regulation in  HN
          & MN. The applicants, who were brothers, met their maternal uncle
          (a recognised refugee settled in the UK) on two occasions when he
          visited Afghanistan and they maintained regular contact with  him
          whilst in Turkey for 3 to 3 years and following their arrival in
          Greece. Greece made a TCR pursuant to Article 8(2) DIII. Although
          the Presidential Tribunal did not accept there  was  family  life
          between the applicants and their uncle,  it  did  find  that  the
          relationships that developed formed part of their  private  lives
          protected by Article 8 ECHR based on the  on-going  communication
          between the applicants and their uncle and the  support  provided
          by him ([122] to [125]). The  Tribunal  found  that  a  delay  in
          transferring the applicants to the UK pursuant  to  Article  8(2)
          DIII interfered with the applicants' private life  rights  [128].
          Paragraph 135 of the Tribunal's decision contains a postscript.

                "In responding to the embargoed version  of  this  judgment,
                the respondent sought to raise the  case  of  Abbas  v  SSHD
                [2017] EWCA Civ [sic], in  connection  with  the  Tribunal's
                findings on Article 8 of the ECHR. The respondent wished  to
                rely upon this case as authority for  the  proposition  that
                entry clearance cases that  turn  on  private  life  do  not
                engage  Article  8.  Abbas,  however,  did  not  concern   a
                situation   where   the   United   Kingdom's   international
                obligations  required  the  government  to  take  charge  of
                individuals  outside  the  United  Kingdom,  and  where  the
                failure to comply with those  obligations  threatened  their
                moral and physical integrity."

     163. I accept that, unlike HN &  MN,  which  concerned  a  TCR  issued
          pursuant to Article 8 DIII, the respondent is not subject  to  an
          international  obligation   to   accept   the   TCR   given   the
          discretionary  nature  of  Article  17(2).  Given   however   the
          equivalence  of  the  particular  elements  that  constitute  the
          private life relationship between the applicant and ASM with that
          of a family life relationship, I find that the  present  case  is
          distinguishable from Abbas and that the respondent's  refusal  to
          exercise her discretion in the applicant's favour does constitute
          a   disproportionate   interference   with   the   private   life
          relationship between the applicant and ASM. Moreover, an unlawful
          exercise of that discretion is also very likely to  result  in  a
          breach of the applicant's moral and  physical  integrity,  having
          holistic regard to the evidence considered above, including,  but
          not  limited  to,  the  evidence  relating  to  the   applicant's
          emotional dependency on ASM.

     164. Even if I am wrong in my above assessment  of  the  private  life
          relationship,  and  the  particular  private  life   relationship
          established by the applicant  and  ASM  cannot  give  rise  to  a
          positive obligation  to  admit  the  applicant  to  the  UK,  the
          existence  of  a  strong  private  life  involving  elements   of
          dependency between an  unaccompanied  vulnerable  child  and  his
          family relation in the UK is a material factor that  should  have
          been considered in the exercise of the  respondent's  discretion,
          but was not. It was incumbent on the respondent,  when  assessing
          the relationship between  the  applicant  and  ASM,  to  consider
          whether a private life relationship has been established, even in
          the absence of a positive obligation to allow  the  applicant  to
          enter the UK on the  basis  of  his  private  life  relationship,
          because this informed the nature of the humanitarian grounds  and
          therefore had a bearing  on  whether  the  discretion  should  be
          exercised. If there is no obligation on the respondent  to  admit
          the applicant to the UK as a consequence of his  Article  8  ECHR
          private life relationship with ASM, the fact that  an  Article  8
          relationship existed was therefore a relevant factor that  should
          have been considered in the exercise of the discretion.

    Conclusion

     165. Following the above assessment, and in light of  my  findings,  I
          will quash the challenged decisions in a separate order.

     166. I additionally consider it appropriate to issue a declaration, to
          be contained in a separate order, that each of  the  respondent's
          decisions was unlawful as it breached the applicant's  Article  8
          ECHR/Article 7 CFR rights.

     167. I decline to make a declaration that the UK  is  the  responsible
          Member State for the applicant's asylum claim under  Dublin  III,
          or a mandatory order that the respondent exercise her  discretion
          in the applicant's favour. I note that the  local  authority  has
          not yet had the opportunity of confirming ASM's ability  to  take
          charge of and care  for  the  applicant,  and  it  would  not  be
          appropriate  to  deprive  the  respondent  of  the  ability   the
          determine whether there are now any matters that may  affect  the
          exercise of discretion in the applicant's favour. The  respondent
          will be aware of the need to exercise all due expedition in  this
          matter.

     168. The parties are to provide written submissions on the question of
          damages in accordance with the order issued in  respect  of  this
          decision.




    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

     Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  applicant
     in this judicial review  is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
     proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
     his family. This direction applies both to the  applicant  and  to  the
     respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
     contempt of court proceedings.




                             D.Blum


       Signed:    [pic]


                                      Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




      Dated:     15 December 2020






    [pic]
    Applicant's solicitors:
    Respondent's solicitors:
    Home Office Ref:
    Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 15/12/20
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    -------------------------------------------------------------------
    ----------
     Notification of appeal rights


    A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial  review
    is a decision that disposes of proceedings.


     A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal on a
    question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to
    the Upper Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision
    is given. If no application is  made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless
    consider at the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to  appeal
    (rule 44(4B) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008).




    If  the  Tribunal  refuses  permission,  either  in  response   to   an
    application or by virtue of rule 44(4B),  then  the  party  wishing  to
    appeal can apply for permission from the Court of Appeal  itself.  This
    must be done by filing an appellant's notice  with  the  Civil  Appeals
    Office of the Court of Appeal within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's
    decision on permission  to  appeal  was  sent  (Civil  Procedure  Rules
    Practice Direction 52D 3.3.








                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/1265/2020

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                     The Queen on the application of MA
                   (a child by his litigation friend ASM)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


                                    ORDER

This order follows a remote hearing in respect of which there  has  been  no
objection by the parties. The form of remote hearing was by video  (V),  the
platform was Skype for Business.

UPON  considering  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms M Knorr  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Wilson
Solicitors LLP, on behalf of the applicant and  Ms  H  Masood,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  respondent,
at a remote hearing at Field House, London on 1 and 2 October 2020,  and  at
the handing down of this decision on 15 December 2020;

AND UPON the respondent confirming that she  intends  to  ask  the  relevant
local authority to complete an assessment;

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1. The application for judicial review is granted for the  reasons  set
       out in the Judgment dated 15 December 2020.

    2. The respondent's decisions dated 27 January 2020, 13 March 2020,  27
       April 2020 and 2 June 2020 refusing the Take  Charge  Request  (TCR)
       made by the Greek authorities on 24 December 2019 are quashed.

    3. There be a declaration that the respondent's decisions  refusing  to
       accept the TCR breached the applicant's rights under  EU  Regulation
       604/2013  (Dublin  III),  Article  7  and  24  of  the  Charter   of
       Fundamental Rights of the European Union and Article 8 ECHR.

    4. The respondent shall:

    i) take a new lawful  decision  on  the  TCR  in  accordance  with  the
       Judgment and paragraph 3 of this Order.

   ii) make a request to the local authority within 2 working days of  this
       Order to conduct an urgent  assessment,  and  must  communicate  her
       decision on the TCR to the Greek  Authorities  and  the  applicant's
       solicitor within two working days of receipt of the local  authority
       assessment.

  iii) in the event she accepts the  TCR,  make  a  request  to  the  Greek
       authorities to expedite the applicant's transfer to the  UK  insofar
       as they are able to do so, and shall provide a copy of that  request
       to the applicant's solicitor.

    5. The parties have 8 weeks to try to reach an agreement on damages. If
       damages are agreed the applicant is to notify the Tribunal within  7
       days of agreement. If damages are not agreed:

    i) The applicant is to file and serve written  submissions  on  damages
       within 10 weeks;

   ii) The respondent is to file and serve written submissions  on  damages
       within 14 days of receipt of the applicant's submissions;

  iii) The applicant is to file and serve any  Reply  to  the  respondent's
       submissions, if  so  advised,  within  7  days  of  receipt  of  the
       respondent's submissions.

    6. The respondent will pay the  applicant's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
       assessed if not agreed.

    7. The applicant's legally aided costs to  be  subject  to  a  detailed
       assessment.

    8. Permission to appeal is refused.

    i) Ground 1 is academic as the Tribunal did not  consider  any  of  the
       postdecision evidence. The  issue  of  the  admissibility  of  post-
       decision evidence is most appropriately left to  a  case  where  the
       admission of the evidence had a material impact.

   ii) There is no merit in Ground  2  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  the
       substantive judgment at paragraphs 121 to 126. I note that the Court
       of  Appeal  in  MS  v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1340  endorsed   the
       distinction, in the context  of  the  application  Article  8  ECHR,
       between cases in which applicants seek  to  bypass  the  Dublin  III
       procedures and those in which the procedures are utilised.

  iii) Ground 3 is no more than a disagreement with the Judge's  Article  8
       ECHR findings, which did accord appropriate weight to the  issue  of
       cohabitation (paragraphs 142 & 147), and does not disclose  a  legal
       error.

   iv) Ground 4 is academic as Article 8 ECHR private life  was  considered
       in the alternative.

    v) Liberty to apply.

    9. Any renewed application for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
       Appeal is to be made within 28 days.





                      D.Blum

       Signed:    [pic]


                       Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




      Dated:     15 December 2020


The date on which this order was sent is given below

[pic]

For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
15/12/20

Solicitors:
Ref No.
Home Office Ref:

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).
