


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                JR/2616/2017

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                                                4 APRIL 2019

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between
                                 ASIF ADNAN
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

MR STEPHEN CLARK, Counsel  instructed  by  Thamina  Solicitors  appeared  on
behalf of the applicant

MS JENNIFER  GRAY,  Counsel  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Service
appeared on behalf of the respondent
                          ________________________

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          ________________________
      JUDGE GLEESON:  The applicant has permission to seek  judicial  review
      of the respondent's decision on 20 December 2016 to maintain,  by  way
      of administrative review, her decision of 9  November  2016,  refusing
      the applicant's application of 9 September 2015, for further leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

   2. The November 2016 decision and its December 2016 administrative review
      were made by  way  of  reconsideration  of  the  respondent's  earlier
      refusal decision of 3 December 2015, which was withdrawn  following  a
      consent order.  The applicant was legally advised in agreeing to  that
      consent order and it is not now open to him to  challenge  it  out  of
      time.

   3. By the time the respondent made her Tier 2 decision,  the  applicant's
      sponsor had lost its Tier 2 status.  The applicant  contends  that  he
      should have been given time to find an alternative sponsor, as is done
      for students when a college loses its Tier 4 licence. I bear  in  mind
      that there are four dependants whose applications were refused in line
      and the outcome of whose applications depends on that of Mr Adnan.

   4. The applicant's judicial review was  lodged  not  promptly  after  the
      decision on 20 December 2017, but just within  the  long-stop  3-month
      time limit.  It was received at the Upper Tribunal on  17  March  2017
      and was then stayed, pending first the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
      in Islam and Pathan, R (on the application of) v  Secretary  of  State
      for  the  Home  Department  (Tier  2  licence-revocation-consequences)
      [2017] UKUT 369 (IAC) on 17 August 2017, and then the decision of  the
      Court of Appeal in Pathan & Anor v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2018] EWCA Civ 2103 on 2 October 2018.

   5. On 29 October 2018 following the  Pathan  decision  in  the  Court  of
      Appeal, Mr Jay Gajjar settled amended grounds which were  admitted  by
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith.  The amended grounds argue that Pathan  is
      distinguishable  on  the  facts;  that  it  was  irrational  for   the
      respondent not to grant any kind of discretionary relief following the
      sponsor losing its licence, which was not the applicant's fault;  that
      the respondent's actions made the applicant an overstayer  because  of
      errors in her decision on 3 December 2015; and that Patel fairness  is
      applicable.

   6. I have the benefit of skeleton arguments from both parties, but at the
      hearing  today,  Mr  Clarke  for  the  applicant  accepted  that   the
      applicant's pleaded grounds and skeleton argument could  not  succeed.
      It is accepted that the applicant  lost  his  Tier  2  Migrant  status
      through no fault of his own.

   7. Mr Clarke sought leave to amend the grounds for review at the  hearing
      to advance further fairness arguments of which the respondent had  not
      had notice. There were no draft re-amended grounds for the  respondent
      or Tribunal to consider. I refused permission: the applicant  had  the
      opportunity to amend his grounds following the Pathan judgment by  the
      Court of Appeal in October 2018 and it was not  appropriate  to  allow
      last minute amendment in April 2019 at the  hearing,  by  a  different
      Counsel, to advance an entirely different case.

   8. The parties' pleaded cases are in the amended grounds for  review  and
      the respondent's detailed grounds.  Save for his application  to  vary
      the grounds for review, Mr Clark relied on the skeleton argument and I
      did not call on Ms Gray to expand the respondent's skeleton  argument.



   9. The respondent noted  that  the  applicant  had  no  leave  under  the
      Immigration Rules after 14 June 2015 and that  his  section  3C  leave
      expired at the latest on 1 September 2015.   The  respondent  reminded
      the tribunal that the Court of Appeal in Pathan held that it  was  not
      improper for a different regime to apply to Tier 2 and Tier 4  because
      Tier 4 relates to student  leave  to  remain,  whereas  Tier  2  leave
      relates to the filling of a specific existing vacancy.

  10. The applicant had an  alternative  remedy  available  to  him  at  all
      material times.  He could return to Pakistan, find a  further  Tier  2
      employer sponsor and make a further application for  leave  to  enter.
      The applicant had  complied  with  the  Immigration  Rules  until  the
      curtailment of his leave.

  11. Mr Clark said that there was nothing he  could  add  to  his  skeleton
      argument.  I did not hear from Ms Gray, whose arguments are fully  set
      out in her skeleton argument.

  12. In Pathan at [71]-[74] in the judgment of  Lord  Justice  Singh,  with
      whom Sir Andrew MacFarlane, President of the Family Division and  Lord
      Justice Coulson agreed, the Court found that  the  difference  between
      the two  regimes  is  rational,  having  regard  to  their  respective
      purposes.  In particular, at [71], Singh LJ said this:

      "71.   First, the purpose of the two regimes, Tier 2 and Tier  4,  are
      very different. This is expressly set out  in  the  Immigration  Rules
      themselves, as I have mentioned earlier. The purpose of Tier 4  is  to
      enable students from overseas to come to this country to pursue  their
      studies. If a particular educational institution's licence is  revoked
      by the Secretary of State, it is understandable why a period of  grace
      should be given to that student to try to see if they can pursue their
      studies at another institution in this country. There may be  no  good
      public interest reason to refuse them that opportunity.  In  contrast,
      the whole purpose of the Tier 2 regime for migrant workers is to match
      up their application for leave  with  a  particular  vacancy  in  this
      country in circumstances where the local labour market (including  for
      this purpose the EEA) has been shown not to lead to a suitable  worker
      being employable.  In  those  circumstances,  it  is  pre-eminently  a
      political judgment on the part  of  the  Secretary  of  State  whether
      people should be able to put forward an  alternative  sponsor  if  the
      particular sponsor has had its licence revoked. People may  reasonably
      disagree on whether that would  be  a  good  thing  or  a  bad  thing.
      However, as a matter of law, this Court cannot possibly stigmatise the
      decision which the Secretary of State has taken as being irrational."


  13. The respondent was under  no  obligation  to  give  the  applicant  an
      opportunity to find a  different  employer.   The  Tier  2  leave  was
      attached to a particular job and  it  has  always  been  open  to  the
      applicant to relocate to Pakistan with his family and seek to re-enter
      the United Kingdom lawfully to  take  up  a  different  position  with
      another Tier 2 employer.

  14. This application cannot succeed and is dismissed.

  15. The applicant will pay the respondent's costs of these proceedings, to
      be assessed if not agreed.

  16. Mr Clarke sought permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.  He  did
      not challenge my decision not to allow  a  further  amendment  of  the
      applicant's grounds for review.

  17. Mr Clark argued that following the withdrawal of  the  respondent's  3
      December 2015  decision  by  consent,  the  respondent's  reconsidered
      decision in November 2016,  maintained  by  administrative  review  in
      December 2016, led to substantive  unfairness  on  the  facts  of  the
      applicant's individual case, such  that  the  respondent  should  have
      granted him a 60-day grace period in which to find an alternative Tier
      2 sponsor.  Mr Clark further contended that the situation in which the
      applicant found himself was  sufficiently  compelling  to  lead  to  a
      different outcome from that in Pathan's case.

  18.  I refuse permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  for  three
      reasons:  first, the applicant cannot be heard to complain  of  the  3
      December  2015  decision  following  his  decision   to   consent   to
      reconsideration by the respondent; second, he has produced no evidence
      that any other employer would have taken him on,  within  60  days  or
      otherwise, and it remains open to him to return to  Pakistan  and  re-
      apply from there once he has identified  a  suitable  Tier  2  sponsor
      employer; and third, it is not possible to discern in the judgment  in
      Pathan of Lord Justice Singh (with whom Lord Justice Coulson  and  Sir
      Andrew McFarlane agreed), that the innocence or complicity of a Tier 2
      employee is operative in the distinction drawn therein between Tier  2
      and Tier 4 leave (see in particular [71]-[74] of that judgment).

  19. The proposed  grounds  of  appeal  are  no  more  in  reality  than  a
      reiteration of the amended grounds of appeal which Mr  Clark  accepted
      at the hearing were unarguable.  They cannot  therefore  constitute  a
      properly arguable error of law in my judgment in this application.

  20. I refuse permission to appeal as I am not satisfied that there is  any
      arguable error of law in the judgment I have given.
