
                                                                      UTIJR5


                                                                JR/2236/2019



                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice





                     The Queen on the application of [E]
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


Having considered all documents lodged and having  heard  the  applicant  in
person and Mr Myles Grandison, of Counsel,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, at a hearing at Field  House,
London on 20 January 2020


Decision:  permission is refused


   1) The applicant has permission  to  challenge  by  judicial  review  the
      respondent's decision on 31  January  2019  to  refuse  to  treat  her
      further submissions dated 10 January 2019 as  a  paragraph  353  fresh
      claim.  The applicant appears in person, with  the  assistance  of  an
      Urdu interpreter.   Both the applicant and her daughter are  Pakistani
      citizens.

   2) The applicant makes this application on  behalf  of  herself  and  her
      daughter, born on 10 July 2012.  Her daughter is 7 years old  and  has
      been in the United Kingdom for  less  than  5  years:  she  is  not  a
      qualifying child.  The applicant is a Christian, a fact  not  disputed
      in the respondent's decisions or the First-tier Tribunal determination
      of her in-country appeal.

   3) The applicant and her daughter are unlawfully in the  United  Kingdom.
      Following the issue of several visit visas, from which she returned to
      Pakistan, the applicant, her now estranged husband, and their daughter
      entered the United Kingdom for the last time on 25 February  2015  and
      overstayed, that visa expiring on 25  August  2015.   The  applicant's
      daughter was 2 years old then.  The applicant says that she  separated
      from her husband on 8 June 2016 and that  he  remains  in  the  United
      Kingdom, but she does not know where he lives now.

   4) On 29 April 2015, the applicant made an asylum claim but on 14  August
      2015, the respondent refused  that  claim.   The  applicant  had,  and
      exercised, a full in-country right of appeal and became appeal  rights
      exhausted on 20 July  2016.   The  First-tier  Judge  found  that  the
      applicant was not a reliable or credible witness  and  that  her  core
      account of being at risk  of  persecution  as  a  Christian,  and  the
      subject of a fatwa, was untrue.

   5) The applicant made further submissions  on  2  June  2017  which  were
      refused in a refusal letter of 8 September  2018.  Removal  directions
      and notice of immigration bail were served.   The  applicant  and  her
      daughter did not  embark  for  Pakistan  and  were  not  removed.  The
      applicant and her daughter have not had  access  to  public  funds  or
      accommodation since then.

   6) On 30 January 2019, the applicant again made further submissions which
      were refused on 31 January 2019.  The respondent considered  that  the
      further submissions raised no additional matters over and above  those
      already  considered  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  and  the
      previous refusal letter of 8 September  2018.  That  is  the  decision
      under challenge today.


   7) The effect of a paragraph 353 refusal is that  the  applicant  has  no
      right of appeal against the respondent's decision, whether in  or  out
      of country because the  respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  was
      anything significantly different in the further submissions.

   8) Permission to seek judicial review was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
      Norton-Taylor on 3 October 2019, on the basis that the respondent  had
      arguably not given anxious scrutiny to the further submissions, and/or
      that the respondent had failed  to  place  the  new  evidence  in  the
      context of the paragraph 353 test of a realistic prospect  of  success
      before an immigration  judge.   Judge  Norton-Taylor  considered  that
      paragraph 17 of the refusal letter indicated that the  respondent  had
      arguably ceased  her  consideration  at  her  own  assessment  of  the
      evidence.  Further  and  in  the  alternative,   Judge   Norton-Taylor
      considered that there was arguably a material change in circumstances:
      the applicant was separated from her husband and was the  lone  parent
      of a 6-year-old daughter.  Judge Norton-Taylor considered it  arguable
      that the respondent had failed to consider whether the  new  evidence,
      in that context, would create a realistic prospect of success before a
      First-tier Tribunal Judge.

   9) Following the grant of permission on 3 October 2019, by a letter dated
      25 October 2019, the respondent offered to settle the judicial  review
      application by reconsidering, within 3 months from the date a  consent
      order was sealed, absent special  circumstances,  with  the  applicant
      withdrawing her application and no order for costs.

  10) In her skeleton  argument  for  the  present  hearing,  the  applicant
      indicates why she rejected that offer.  She relied on the terms of the
      grant of permission to the Upper Tribunal and repeated that she was  a
      lone mother, with a 6-year-old daughter to care for, and that  further
      delay in  her  case  would  affect  the  child's  rights  badly.   The
      applicant would be left with minimal options and following withdrawal,
      would be the losing party in this application.

  11) The applicant observed that her daughter had the option of  making  an
      asylum claim in her own right, with reference to paragraph 391 and 315
      of the Immigration Rules  HC395  (as  amended).   She  relied  on  the
      respondent's policy Processing an asylum application from a child, and
      asserted that 'every child  matters,  even  if  they  are  subject  to
      immigration control'.  She further relied on section 55 of the Borders
      Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

  12) The applicant, perhaps understandably, does not appear  to  understand
      how judicial review works.  In her skeleton argument she concluded  by
      saying:

           "The main applicant and the child are without  an  accommodation
           and any cash  allowance  for  the  last  many  months,  and  the
           concerned offices were requested for that, time and  again,  but
           without an outcome.

           In the light of  the  above-mentioned  facts  of  the  case  and
           solicitations by the appellant [sic] it is requested  that  both
           the lone mother and the child be granted leave to  remain  as  a
           refugee."

  13) Those closing paragraphs indicate that the applicant has misunderstood
      the powers of the Upper Tribunal in judicial review.   An  application
      for judicial review is not an appeal and the  Upper  Tribunal  has  no
      power to declare that the applicant and  her  daughter  are  refugees:
      that question was settled in the 2016 appeal decision and  unless  the
      claim is accepted  as  a  paragraph  353  fresh  claim  it  cannot  be
      reopened.

  14) The applicant made  oral  submissions  at  the  hearing,  against  her
      skeleton argument, repeating the points therein made and asking me  to
      grant refugee status, which I cannot do in the context of  a  judicial
      review application.  She also  complained  of  difficulties  with  the
      housing support provided by Manchester City  Council  and  by  Burnley
      Council.  Neither of those bodies is a respondent in this application.
       I am not seised of any housing or social security problems which  the
      applicant is experiencing and I make no order thereon.

  15) The respondent in offering to reconsider and make a fresh decision has
      offered everything that the Upper Tribunal has power  to  order.   The
      Upper Tribunal has power only to approve or  quash  the  Secretary  of
      State's decision and to make ancillary orders and declarations.   This
      application for judicial review is now academic and must fail.



Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


  16) There was no application for permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
      Appeal.  Pursuant to paragraph 44(4B) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended), I have considered whether I  should
      grant permission to appeal.


  17) I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal because I am  not
      satisfied that there is any arguable error of law in my judgment.



Costs

  18) By consent, there shall be no order for inter partes costs.

           Judith AJC Gleeson
Signed:     Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson     Dated:      20 January 2020

Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------

Notification of appeal rights

A refusal by the Upper Tribunal  of  permission  to  bring  judicial  review
proceedings,  following  a  hearing  is  a   decision   that   disposes   of
proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).
