
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/2246/2020  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |Mamun Sarkar                                 |              |
|              |Naima Jesmin                                 |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Secretary of State for the Home Department   |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

HAVING considered all documents lodged and  having  heard  Mr  M  Symes,  of
Counsel, instructed by Chancery Solicitors,  for  the  Applicant  and  Mr  R
Harland of Counsel, instructed by GLD, for the Respondent at  a  hearing  on
15 June 2021

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The application for judicial review is refused for the reasons in the
       attached judgment.


    2) I have considered the costs submissions  made  by  the  parties.  The
       Applicant accepts that costs follow the event, but relies on para  10
       (7) (b) of the 2008 Procedure Rules. Mr Symes  submits  that  the  UT
       should set a "reasonable" cap on costs  because  of  the  Applicant's
       financial circumstances.  I have taken into  consideration  all  that
       has been said on the Applicant's behalf; however, in this case I find
       no good reason to justify a departure from the general rule that  the
       unsuccessful party should pay the costs of the successful party.  The
       Applicant  is  to  pay  the  Respondent's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
       determined by a costs judge if not agreed.


    3) Permission to appeal is refused for the reasons  given  for  refusing
       this application.




      Signed:     Joanna McWilliam


                 Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


      Dated:           27 July 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
27/07/2021

Solicitors:
Ref No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

IAC-AH-KRL-V2


                                    [pic]
                                                   Case No: JR/2246/2020 (v)
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR
                                                                27 July 2021

                                   Before:

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                            on the application of
                                MAMUN SARKAR
                                NAIMA JESMIN
                                                                  Applicants
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                 Mr M Symes
           (instructed by Chancery Solicitors), for the applicant

                                Mr R Harland
     (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the respondent

                         Hearing date: 15 June 2021

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               J U D G M E N T

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




JUDGE McWilliam: In a decision of  22  January  2021  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
Allen granted the Applicant, Mamun Sarkar, permission to  judicially  review
the decisions of the Secretary of State on 28 August 2020 and 20 July  2020
to refuse his application of 22 February 2018 for leave to remain (LTR)  in
the United Kingdom as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.


 2. I shall refer to Mamun Sarkar as the Applicant.  The  second  Applicant
    is his wife. She is dependent on his application.

 3. The Applicant entered the UK as a student  on  17  February  2010  with
    valid leave until 13 April 2013.   He thereafter repeatedly applied for
    extensions of his student visa on 5 April 2013  (granted  to  22  April
    2014); on 20 April 2014  (granted  to  29 February  2016)  and  on  17
    November 2014 (granted to 20 September 2016).  His partner entered the
    UK on 1 May 2016.

 4. On 19 September 2016 (the day before his  student  leave  expired)  the
    Applicant applied for LTR under the ten-year family/private life route.
     He varied this to apply  for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  (ILR)  on
    compassionate grounds.  He again varied  the  application  to  one  for
    leave outside of the Rules (LOTR) on 22 February 2017.  On 22 September
    2017 his application was refused and  certified  as  clearly  unfounded
    under s.94 NIAA 2002.  The Applicant's leave under s.3C Immigration Act
    1971 (s. 3C leave) expired fourteen days later, since when he has  been
    an overstayer. (The Applicant unsuccessfully challenged the decision of
    22 September 2017 by way of judicial review).

 5. On 10 October 2017 the Applicant again applied for LTR under the family
    life route. He varied  the  application  on  22  February  2017  to  an
    application for LOTR.  He varied it for a third  time  on  16 February
    2018, to a Tier 2 (General) Migrant application under the PBS.  It  was
    this application which was refused on 21 July 2020. That refusal is the
    decision against which the Applicant now seeks judicial review.

 6. The application was refused because although the Applicant relied on  a
    certificate of sponsorship ("CoS")  which  purported  to  come  from  a
    Sponsor called Enactor, that company made it  clear  that  it  had  not
    sponsored the Applicant or given him employment.   The  SSHD  gave  the
    Applicant notice of this fact on 20 January 2020 and informed him  that
    she was considering refusing the application  on  the  basis  of  false
    representations.  She invited him to respond as to why that should  not
    happen.

 7. In the event the Applicant responded within the set deadline by way  of
    letter dated 31 January 2020.  This document ("the 31 Jan letter")  is
    important and I shall return to it in due course. The SSHD did not make
    a finding of deception, but she went on to refuse the application on 20
    July 2020 on the basis that the Applicant cannot meet the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules (IRs).

 8. The Respondent did not make any finding of deception,  however  refused
    the PBS application on 20 July 2020 under  245HD  of  the  IRs  because
    there was no valid CoS.  Her reasons were enlarged upon by  way  of  an
    administrative review ("AR") response dated 20 August 2020 (HB 42)  and
    the PAP response (HB 73).

 9. The grounds before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Allen  are  threefold.   The
    second ground is  that  the  Respondent  failed  to  consider  her  own
    responsibility for the Applicant's failure, having had  notice  of  the
    failures in Enactor's maintenance in May 2018.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Allen specifically refused permission  on  this  ground,  stating  that



         "The fact that the Applicant is without a remedy against either the
         fraudster or the Sponsor is not a matter that  arguably  should  be
         put at  the  Respondent's  door.   The  fact  that  the  Respondent
         continued to allow the Sponsor to continue in that capacity despite
         awareness of hacks in the Sponsor's system is  not  a  matter  that
         arguably gave rise to any  duty  on  the  part  of  the  Respondent
         towards the Applicant".


10. Ground 3 argues that the Applicant failed to give  timely  notification
    of the flaw in the Applicant's application  with  reference  to  Pathan
    [2020] UKSC 41.  Upper Tribunal Judge Allen refused permission on  this
    ground, stating that

         "the guidance in Pathan [2020] UKSC 41 does not arguably  encompass
         the circumstances of a case such as this.  There  was  no  arguably
         undue delay on the part of the Respondent".


11. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen  in  respect  of
    ground 1 only, on the basis that it is arguable that there has  been  a
    failure by the Secretary of State to consider  discretion  outside  the
    Rules.

12. The Applicant's case, in a nutshell, is that the 31 Jan  letter  is  an
    application to vary his application  from  one  under  the  PBS  to  an
    application for LOTR for a period of  60  days  described  as  a  grace
    period, in order to find a new Sponsor.   He  sought  the  exercise  of
    discretion in his favour. The SSHD did not properly consider whether to
    exercise discretion outside the Rules, with reference  to  her  policy.
    The decision of the SSHD dated  20  July  2020  (and  the  AR  decision
    28 August 2020) discloses  public  law  error  because  the  SSHD  was
    obliged, following the 31 Jan letter, to consider exercising discretion
    to grant LOTR and did not do so.

The 31 Jan letter


13. The majority of the contents of the letter refer to the  allegation  of
    dishonesty and the delay in investigating the allegation.  However  for
    the purposes of this decision the salient parts are as follows:-

         "7.      Accordingly, it is submitted that the SSHD  has  acted  so
             unreasonably that no  reasonable  authority  in  her  position
             could have acted in this manner.  Therefore, it  has  amounted
             to a Wednesbury unreasonableness and to a procedural error  on
             her part.  It is further submitted that the  SSHD's  delay  in
             communicating and investigating the matter earlier and  making
             a decision is nothing but an abuse of power.


         8.       The SSHD is ought to withdraw the allegation or deter from
             making such allegation.  We further submit the SSHD  is  ought
             to allow them a 60 day period to find an alternative Sponsor.


             We would like to point out that the main Applicant is eligible
             for an indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  under  long
             residence of the Immigration Rules.  Since entering the UK  on
             17/02/2010, the main Applicant has been residing in the UK for
             a continuous period of ten years (eligible on the date 28 days
             prior to the date ten years' residence is completed).   Hence,
             we submit the main Applicant is  eligible  to  be  granted  an
             indefinite leave to remain, which in turn makes the  dependant
             eligible to  apply  under  family  route.   Further  both  the
             Applicant and dependant during their long period of  residence
             in the UK have formed a private and family life under  Article
             8 of the ECHR.  They have  formed  deep  connection  with  the
             culture, society and most importantly their friends and family
             members present  in  the  UK.   Detailed  submission  in  this
             regard, together with documents  supporting  their  connection
             and integration will be provided as  soon  as  possible.   You
             would  appreciate  that  they  were  not   accumulating   such
             documents as they were waiting  for  the  SSHD's  decision  on
             their Tier 2 application.


             We further  submit  that  the  SSHD  is  required  to  make  a
             consideration with due  compassion  of  how  his  dealing  and
             conduct of their Tier 2 application, as outlined  above,  have
             affected them and their circumstances.  The  unreasonable  and
             overall lack of care in dealing with the matter have paralysed
             them to the point that they  are  now  consumed  with  stress,
             anxiety and sleep  deprivation,  suicidal  thoughts  and  many
             other symptoms, as we have been informed, which in our opinion
             refer to nothing but case of severe depression.   Accordingly,
             we have advised them to seek  urgent  medical  attention.   We
             will forward your relevant medical documents, if any, as  soon
             as they are available".


The Applicant's grounds


14. The Respondent failed to consider the request in the 31 Jan letter with
    reference to the terms of the LOTR policy.  The state  of  affairs  was
    arguably an "unexpected event" or a "crisis ...  that  could  not  have
    been anticipated" and thus apt to call for  consideration  of  a  short
    grant of leave under the LOTR policy.

15. The delay prejudiced  the  Applicant's  ability  to  pursue  any  claim
    against the Sponsor or the agent.  Had  the  Applicant  had  notice  of
    Enactor's lack of knowledge of his  application  he  could  have  taken
    steps  to  protect  his  position  which  would  have  given  him   the
    opportunity to find an alternative Sponsor.  The  Respondent's  lengthy
    inaction prevented him from doing so.  From  January  2020  until  July
    2020 the Applicant was unable to take steps to find a new Sponsor given
    that the Respondent had accused  him  of  dishonesty.   Therefore,  any
    further application would not have been tenable whilst the  Applicant's
    honesty was in issue.

16.  The  Applicant  was  not  given  adequate  notice  that  there  was  a
    significant difficulty with his application.  The making of  a  further
    application is not an alternative remedy  to  challenging  the  present
    refusal.  The Applicant can no longer satisfy an employer that  he  has
    the right to work in the UK.

17. The present application on 10 October 2017 within fourteen days of  his
    human rights application refusal on 27 September 2017 falls within  the
    Rule 39E tolerance for overstaying.  Any further new  application  that
    the Applicant seeks to make in the future would not  fall  within  that
    proviso.

The Detailed Grounds of Defence


18. The application made by the Applicant was one under the PBS scheme,  in
    particular Tier 2 (General) Migrant provisions.   The  application  was
    bound to fail  under  the  IRs  because  the  Applicant  did  not  have
    sufficient points (see paragraph 245HD of the Immigration  Rules).  The
    prescriptive nature of the PBS scheme has been  set  down  in  numerous
    authorities: (R (Muhammad Junied) and SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2293).

19. It is recognised that the Secretary of State has a residual  discretion
    to grant leave outside of the Rules.  This was defined by the Court  of
    Appeal in MS (Ivory Coast) and SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 133.

20. The Applicant  asserts  that  the  decision  is  unlawful  because  the
    Respondent did not take into account her own unreasonable delay and the
    Applicant's inability to take steps to protect himself.   However,  the
    two points are different formulations of grounds 2 and 3.  However  the
    arguments in grounds 2 and 3 cannot be pursued in this judicial review.
     They are not to be repackaged into ground 1.

21. In any event the Applicant's situation is far away from a  Pathan  type
    case where fairness would dictate a different outcome.   The  Applicant
    in this case is an overstayer.  The Pathan principle does not apply  to
    him any more than it did to Mr Pathan's co-Appellant.  The  failure  of
    the application was not caused by the actions of the SSHD but  was  the
    result of the behaviour of a third party.   In  Pathan  Arden  JSC,  at
    paragraph 66, stated as follows "there is no need for the Secretary  of
    State to give notice to the Applicant  if  the  licence  is  terminated
    other than as a result of the Secretary of State's actions".   In  this
    case the Applicant did have notice of the allegations against  him  and
    the contention of the purported Sponsor that the CoS was  not  genuine,
    and they did not intend to sponsor him.

22. Pathan does not assist the Applicant.  It establishes conclusively that
    there is no duty of substantive fairness in  the  circumstances,  still
    less procedural fairness which would require the Secretary of State  to
    grant a period of leave to the Applicants in order  to  allow  them  to
    make  a  further  application.   There  is  no  need  for   any   prior
    notification.  That is to say any specific period between the notice of
    the problem and the refusal of the application.  That is true  when  it
    is the Secretary of State's actions which have led to  the  failure  of
    the application, whilst the Secretary of State's actions have  not  led
    to the failure of this application. I accept the argument on this point
    as advanced in the Defendant's grounds.

23. The Applicant is contending that where an application has failed due to
    the behaviour of a third  party  employed  by  the  Applicant  who  has
    concocted a CoS for a job that does not exist, the Secretary  of  State
    should grant leave in any case so that the Applicant  can  apply  again
    for leave.  This goes against the ratio of Pathan and EK (Ivory  Coast)
    [2014].  It would also be manifestly prone to abuse and  it  would  run
    entirely against the prescriptive nature of the PBS system as  set  out
    in Junied and Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11.

24. The Applicant's argument as to whether the Secretary  of  State  should
    have exercised her discretion outside the Rules is bound to fail.  In R
    (On the application of Kalsi) v SSHD [2021] EWCA Civ 184 the court said
    that the PBS  system  is  prescriptive.   There  is  no  need  for  the
    Respondent to go on to consider a discretion because no such discretion
    exists.  The Rules mandate the refusal of the application.

The Applicant's Skeleton Argument


25. The Applicant relies on Ullah [2016] EWCA Civ.  The  court  found  that
    "there is no doubt that there is a general discretion to grant leave to
    remain in the United Kingdom outside the Rules" however, no  obligation
    to consider that discretion arose on the facts of the case.

26. It is submitted that the Applicant's case  is  made  out  and  judicial
    review should be granted if

      a) it was open to the Respondent to exercise her discretion  to  grant
         the Appellant leave to remain outside the Rules, but

      b) the  Respondent  unlawfully  failed  to  consider  exercising  that
         discretion.

27. The Respondent has a general power to grant leave  to  Applicants  even
    where they do not meet the requirements of the Rules.

The SSHD's skeleton argument


28. It is the Respondent's case that the 31 Jan  letter  was  not  a  valid
    application for LOTR either in form or substance.  There  was  no  need
    for the Respondent to go on to consider any further direct  discretion.
    The Applicant's characterisation of the 31 Jan letter does not  reflect
    its true nature.  It was not an application to supersede or replace the
    PBS application with an application for LOTR. The proper  question  for
    this Tribunal is  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to
    consider that the PBS application remained extant, and she was  plainly
    entitled to do so for two reasons.

29. The Applicant was required to make a proper application for LOTR (see R
    (on the application of Khajuria) v SSHD and Junied).  If the  Applicant
    was intending to  replace  his  PBS  application  with  an  application
    entirely outside the IRs,  then  he  was  required  to  apply  on  form
    FLR(HRO) and pay the requisite fee (likely �1,033 compared to �610  for
    a PBS application for leave up to three years).  This was not done.

30. In any event the 31 Jan letter makes no reference to LOTR. There is  no
    suggestion that the PBS application is being  superseded.   Rather  the
    application continued to push for a decision  on  the  PBS  application
    (see   for   example   the   correspondence   from   the    Applicant's
    representatives on 5 February 2020 (HB 152), 16 March 2020 (HB 163); 29
    May 2020 (HB 166) each of which is headed "Tier 2 -  general  leave  to
    remain application - Mamun Sarkar".

31. The Applicant's representatives now contend that the words at paragraph
    8 of the letter (HB 141) stating that "we further submit  the  SSHD  is
    ought to allow them a 60 days' period to find an  alternative  Sponsor"
    amounted to an application for LOTR superseding  the  PBS  application.
    This phrase cannot carry the weight the Applicant puts on it.   In  the
    context of the PBS case law a request for a further 60 days to  find  a
    new Sponsor does not  amount  to  an  application  for  LOTR.   To  the
    contrary, the practice in student cases following Patel (relocation  of
    sponsor licence - fairness) [2011] UKUT 00211 was for the SSHD to delay
    deciding the application for 60 days  where  a  Sponsor's  licence  was
    revoked (as Briggs JSC described in Pathan).  This is also  a  form  of
    exercise of the residual discretion, but it  prolongs  s.3C  leave  and
    does not involve a further grant of substantive leave.

32. In order for the Secretary of State to void  the  PBS  application  and
    replace it with a new one there must be  an  unambiguous  request;  not
    least to protect those Applicants who intend to pursue  their  original
    application.  A reference to a 60 days' period cannot be treated  as  a
    sufficiently clear application for further LOTR (rather  than,  as  was
    the conventional process, a short delay in deciding  the  application),
    to allow the Tribunal fairly to conclude that the  Secretary  of  State
    was acting irrationally by not treating it as such.

33. The words at paragraph 8 of the 31 Jan letter are immediately  preceded
    by a sentence requiring  that  the  SSHD  withdraw  her  allegation  of
    deception (consistent with the PBS application remaining live) and  are
    followed by representations about ILR and family  life.   As  the  LOTR
    guidance sets out if there were to be any application for ILR it  would
    have to be on a separate form. In any event  any  such  application  is
    hopeless, the Applicant being  an  open  ended  overstayer  (using  the
    terminology set out in Hoque and SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 1357 at paragraph
    9 (who fell approximately two years short of the ten-year  threshold)).
    Likewise, any human rights application would need to  be  made  on  the
    appropriate form (as  the  administrative  review  letter  subsequently
    pointed out in HB 44).  To  claim  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    required to treat the letter as an application for 60 days' LOTR rather
    than (say) an application for ILR reflects the  difficulties  with  his
    key argument (viz that this letter could only rationally  be  construed
    as an application for LOTR outside the  Rules).   Indeed,  the  31  Jan
    letter is not described as applying for LOTR, but for ILR, in  his  own
    chronology (see for example, paragraph 12(e) of  the  original  grounds
    (HB 12)).

34. Read as a whole the 31 Jan letter was not a clear, separate application
    for LOTR of the sort that was being required in Khajuria and Junied and
    which would trigger the  formal  variation  of  the  application.   The
    Applicant had previously successfully varied pending  applications.  He
    must be taken to be aware of the need for a  formal  variation  of  the
    application.  Indeed, at no point in the AR did the  Applicant  contend
    that the Secretary of State had erred in treating the application as  a
    PBS application, rather than one for LOTR (there was indeed no  mention
    of 60 days whatsoever).

35. In the Appellant's subsequent challenge, he did  not  initially  depict
    the 31 Jan letter as being an application for further  leave.   In  the
    PAP letter, the Applicant referred to the 31 Jan letter,  but  made  no
    reference to it being a further application for LOTR, or to 60  days  -
    only referring to human rights representations.   At  paragraph  16  he
    described his application as being a PBS application.  At paragraph  26
    he raised an allegation of procedural unfairness (which he said  should
    lead to discretionary leave or a reasonable remedy). This is manifestly
    a reference to the Patel type fairness case law and is  bound  to  fail
    with reference to EK (Ivory Coast) and Pathan et al.

36. The SSHD was  not  obliged  to  treat  the  31 Jan  letter  as  a  new
    application for leave  outside  the  Rules  which  superseded  the  PBS
    application.   She  was  not  required  to  respond  to  it  as  a  new
    application.   It  therefore  fails  for  the  same  reason  that   the
    application did in Junied.

37. Even if it were not for the  above  the  Applicant's  arguments  cannot
    succeed.  The request that the Respondent exercise discretion to  allow
    60 days for an  Applicant  to  obtain  a  new  Sponsor  has  plenty  of
    precedent in the case law set out, in particular EK (Ivory  Coast)  and
    Pathan.  It is bound to fail for the reasons set out in case law.

38. The SSHD does not  have  a  policy  of  granting  extra  time  in  such
    circumstances.   That  approach  has  repeatedly  been  deemed  lawful.
    Indeed, even in this judicial review,  arguments  that  the  Respondent
    acted unfairly in not taking into account her  own  responsibility  for
    the failure of the application (so as to distinguish the case  from  EK
    (Ivory Coast) and bring it within the Patel line  of  authorities)  and
    that the Respondent should have given prompter notification (so  as  to
    bring it within Pathan) have both been deemed unarguable.

39. The Applicant seeks to argue that the case law has  no  relevance.  The
    Applicant cannot sensibly escape that case law which  explicitly  deals
    with how the Secretary of State should exercise her discretion to allow
    a short period of leave to obtain a new Sponsor -  by  claiming  (after
    the event) that he seeks the  exercise  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    discretion for the exact  same  short  period,  for  exactly  the  same
    reasons, but in relation to LOTR (rather than generally).

40. The delays did not affect the outcome. Any delay and the fraud  do  not
    require the Respondent  to  grant  him  further  leave  and  a  further
    opportunity to seek a new Sponsor.  That is the effect of the  IRs  and
    the SSHD's policy as expressed and upheld in EK (Ivory Coast).

41.  The  SSHD's   consideration   and   rejection   of   the   Applicant's
    representations in the AR and in the PAP letter was open to her.

42. Even if the Respondent's consideration of her  discretion  in  the  PBS
    context was incorrect (which is denied) there is no reason to  consider
    that she would have reached a different conclusion had  she  considered
    it in the context of a LOTR application.  The  Applicant  contends  (at
    paragraphs 31-32 of his skeleton argument) that the PBS  case  law  has
    "no relevance" to  the  LOTR  consideration.   The  two  processes  run
    alongside each other and the  LOTR  scheme  cannot  undermine  the  PBS
    scheme.  The same policy considerations must underpin both.  It  is  at
    very least highly likely and in fact inevitable that the outcome  would
    not have been substantially different if the conduct complained of  had
    not occurred.

The law


43. The case law to which I  was  referred  concerned  the  SSHD's  general
    discretion to allow an application outside of the Rules,  the  exercise
    of discretion within the  IRs,  specifically  the  PBS  and  issues  of
    fairness applying to the PBS.





44. Section 3A of the Immigration Act 1971 gives  the  Secretary  of  State
    discretion to grant leave, which is generally exercised under the  IRs,
    but it is well recognised that she has a residual discretion  to  grant
    LOTR.  This was defined by the Court of Appeal in MS (Ivory  Coast)  as
    follows at paragraph 44; -

         "In situations falling outside the API there is  a  possibility  of
         leave outside the Immigration Rules  (LOTR).   LOTR's  legal  basis
         arises from s3A of the 1971  Act  and  the  Immigration  (Leave  to
         Enter) Order 2001 (SI 2590/2001).  Broadly,  this  is  a  residuary
         power to deal with special or unusual  situations  that  would  not
         otherwise be covered".


45.  In  Alvi  [2012]  UKSC  33,  the  court  considered  the  Respondent's
    discretion to grant leave where the requirements of the  IRs  were  not
    met.

    "31.   In R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, Ex p  Ounejma
         (1989) Imm A R 75, 80 per  Glidewell  LJ  said  that  the  residual
         prerogative powers remain, and in Macdonald,  Immigration  Law  and
         Practice in the United Kingdom 8th  ed  (2010),  para  2.35  it  is
         asserted that the prerogative power is not impaired or  superseded,
         merely put in  abeyance.  But  these  propositions  understate  the
         effect of the 1971 Act. It  should  be  seen  as  a  constitutional
         landmark which, for all practical purposes, gave statutory force to
         all the powers previously exercisable in the field  of  immigration
         control under the prerogative. It is still open to the Secretary of
         State in her discretion to grant leave to enter  or  remain  to  an
         alien whose application does  not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
         Immigration Rules. It is for her to determine the  practice  to  be
         followed in the  administration  of  the  Act.  But  the  statutory
         context  in  which  those  powers  are  being  exercised  must   be
         respected. As their source is the 1971 Act itself, it would not  be
         open to her to exercise them in a way that was  not  in  accordance
         with the rules that she has laid before Parliament.


    32.    What then is one to make of Lord Brown's observation in Odelola,
         para 35 on which Mr Swift relies? Are the Immigration Rules  to  be
         seen, as Lord Brown said, as an indication of how it is proposed to
         exercise  the  prerogative  power  of  immigration  control?   Lord
         Hoffmann's description of them in para 6 as detailed statements  of
         how the Crown proposes to exercise its executive power  to  control
         immigration avoids attributing the source  of  that  power  to  the
         prerogative, and it is unexceptionable. Although I said in  para  1
         of Odelola that I agreed with Lord Brown's opinion, I think that it
         must be recognised that his statement as to the source of the power
         was wrong. The entry to and stay in this  country  of  Commonwealth
         citizens was never subject to control under  the  prerogative.  The
         powers of control that are vested in the Secretary of State in  the
         case of all those who require leave to enter or to remain  are  now
         entirely the creature of statute. That includes the power  to  make
         rules of the kind referred to in the 1971 Act."


46. The issue was considered by Mostyn J in Thebo [2013] EWHC 146: -

         "13.     ... plainly the Secretary of State cannot when making  her
                decisions adopt  and  apply  a  policy  of  restriction  and
                control which is more confined and rigorous than  the  Rules
                stipulate.  On the other hand  the  Secretary  of  State  is
                surely perfectly entitled in an individual case to decide it
                more generously than the rules, literally read, allow.  This
                is why Lord Hope refers in the passage in para  33  which  I
                have cited to "powers to restrict or control immigration  in
                ways that are not disclosed by the rules."  Of  course  were
                such latitude to become  commonplace  then  Parliamentarians
                may well start to wonder whether the rules were  being  paid
                more than lip service  and  in  that  event,  as  Mr  Moules
                rightly says, the Secretary of State may well have to answer
                for her decisions on the floor of the House.


                .'  ... .


         14.      It is for these reasons that the phenomenon has arisen  of
                'applications made outside the Rules', and these are  fairly
                regular.  Decisions on them from time to time give  rise  to
                applications for judicial review.  Mr Moules was not able to
                give  me  statistical  data  about  the   volume   of   such
                applications, but they are certainly made  and  decided,  if
                infrequently.  I therefore respectfully disagree  ...  that
                the effect of the decision in Alvi is to  abrogate  entirely
                the residual discretion of the Secretary of State to make  a
                decision in favour of an Applicant  migrant  which  is  more
                favourable than a literal reading of the Rules allows.   Put
                another way, there remains vested in the Secretary of  State
                a residual discretion by way of a safety net for those  hard
                cases dealt with over harshly by the Rules as framed.  It is
                worth noting that in this very case on 5 November  2007  the
                claimant made an application outside the  Immigration  Rules
                to remain here."


47. Mostyn J went on to  emphasise  at  paragraph  30  that  "the  residual
    discretion here is not just false air and lives on in a meaningful  and
    active way".   This remark was cited with  approval  by  the  Court  of
    Appeal in Sayaniya [2016] EWCA Civ 85.

48. The Respondent's discretion to grant leave to people who  do  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules was again affirmed in the Court of Appeal
    in Behary and SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 702 (also  known  as  Ullah)  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 702 at paragraphs 32 to 39 in a judgment given by Burnett  LJ.
    The case concerned a Tier 4 Student application which failed to meet  a
    requirement under paragraph 14 of Appendix C of  the  IRs.   The  court
    found that "there is no doubt that there is  a  general  discretion  to
    grant leave to remain in the United Kingdom outside the Rules" however,
    no obligation to consider that discretion arose on  the  facts  of  the
    case.  It was accepted by the Appellant in that case that "there is  no
    legal obligation upon  the  Home  Office  to  consider  its  discretion
    outside the Rules in every application for leave to remain", however it
    was argued that "whether it was required to do so as a  matter  of  law
    depends upon the facts of the case".  The court found at  paragraph  39
    that

         "there was no obligation upon the Home Office to consider the grant
         of leave to remain outside the Rules in Mr Ullah's case.  There  is
         an obligation to consider a grant when expressly  asked  to  do  so
         and, if but briefly, deal with  any  material  relied  upon  by  an
         Applicant in support".


49. The residual discretion to grant LOTR as it applies to the PBS has been
    considered in a number of cases, including by Lord Reed JSC in Agyarko.
     At paragraph 4 he stated: -

         "The Secretary of State has a discretionary power  under  the  1971
         Act to grant leave to enter or remain in the UK  even  where  leave
         would not be given under the Rules:  R  (Munir)  and  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 32; [2012] 1  Weekly  Law
         Review 2192, para 44.  The  manner  in  which  that  discretion  is
         exercised may be the subject of a policy, which may be expressed in
         guidance to the Secretary of State's officials.  The discretion may
         also be  converted  into  an  obligation  where  the  duty  of  the
         Secretary of State to act compatibility with Convention  rights  is
         applicable".


50. At paragraph 7 he commented on the priority given to certainty,  rather
    than discretion:

         "... over time, increasing emphasis has been  placed  on  certainty
         rather than discretion, on predictability rather than  flexibility,
         on detail rather than broad guidance, and on ease  and  economy  of
         administration.   The  increased  numbers  of   applications,   the
         increasing complexity of the system,  and  the  increasing  use  of
         modern  technology  for  its  administration,   have   necessitated
         increasingly detailed Rules and instructions.  In some  areas,  the
         apparent aim is for  the  decision-making  process  to  involve  as
         little discretion or judgment as can be achieved consistently  with
         the duty to respect Convention rights".


51. In Khajuria a claimant who could not succeed under the PBS argued  that
    discretion should be exercised so that she should be granted LOTR.  She
    argued that the covering letter to her application  was  sufficient  to
    put the SSHD on notice that  she  was  seeking  the  discretion  to  be
    exercised in her favour.  Her argument failed because she had not  made
    an application for LOTR for which there is  a  specified  form  with  a
    specific fee.

52. The prescriptive nature of PBS scheme has been  set  down  in  numerous
    authorities.  The Court of Appeal  summarised  the  law  in  Junied  at
    paragraphs 11-14, per Davis LJ;

         "11.      Various  aspects  of  the  PBS   contained   within   the
                Immigration Rules have been the subject of  court  decisions
                over the years.  The prescriptive and inflexible  nature  of
                the PBS has been the subject of much judicial discussion and
                comment (indeed it has been the prescriptive and  inflexible
                nature of the scheme in question in any given case which has
                usually given rise to the particular litigation in the first
                place).


         12.      As noted by Lord Hope in paragraph 42 of his judgment in R
                (on the application of Alvi) and Secretary of State for  the
                Home Department [2012] UKSC 33, [2012] 1 Weekly  Law  Review
                2228:


                    "  ... the introduction of the points-based  system  has
                        created an entirely different means of  immigration
                        control.  The emphasis now is on certainty in place
                        of  discretion,  on  detail   rather   than   broad
                        guidance.  There is much in this change of approach
                        that is to be commended ....


                        If  an  Applicant  wishes  to  invoke  that   wider
                        discretion he must, as Mr Malik submitted,  make  a
                        separate application for that purpose; as,  indeed,
                        the decision letter in this case so indicated."


53. In Kalsi Elizabeth  Laing  LJ  (on  behalf  of  the  court)  noted  the
    arguments of the SSHD that: -

         "62.     The court should  not  endorse  the  submission  that  the
                Secretary of State had some residual discretion to  exercise
                in a case like this.  Such a discretion would undermine  the
                PBS and make it unworkable.  The suggestion that it  existed
                is contrary to authority.  He cited ten  decisions  of  this
                court to that effect in his skeleton  argument,  culminating
                in Junied and SSHD [2019] EWCA (Civ) 2293 at  paragraph  13.
                Mehta was irrelevant.  It is an old decision and concerns an
                express power to extend time.  The  authority  which  is  in
                point is Al-Medhawi and Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
                Department [1990] 1 AC 876".


54. Laing LJ accepted the arguments on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State.
    She stated as follows: -

         "70.      The  question  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had  a
                discretion to grant an application which the Rules  required
                him to refuse is a  distinct  question.   That  question  is
                answered decisively in the context of the PBS,  and  against
                A, by the decisions  to  which  Mr  Malik  referred  in  his
                skeleton argument, which this court is bound to follow.  The
                contrary is not arguable".


55. There is case law in which  the  courts  have  specifically  considered
    whether  fairness  requires  the  SSHD   to   waive/vary   the   strict
    requirements of the PBS by allowing or granting an Applicant  60  days'
    leave to find a new Sponsor.  In Patel, the UT  considered  that  where
    the SSHD had revoked  a  Sponsor's  licence,  then  "it  was  obviously
    unfair" for the SSHD not to inform the Applicant that the college is no
    longer on the approved list of Sponsors and that fairness required UKVI
    to defer the decision on the application for "a period of 60  days"  to
    give the Applicant an opportunity to vary the  application  to  "obtain
    the relevant qualification" (by obtaining a new CAS  from  a  different
    college during the course).  There was the same outcome in Thakur  (PBS
    decision - common law fairness) [2011] UKUT 151.

56. The principle did not apply where it was not the Secretary of State who
    was substantially responsible for the failure of the  application.   In
    EK (Ivory Coast) the Applicant Sponsor had accidentally  withdrawn  the
    Applicant's certificate of sponsorship  by  way  of  an  administrative
    error.  Sales LJ distinguished Patel and Thakur and noted:

         "In the present case, by contrast the Secretary  of  State  had  no
         means of knowing why the Appellant's CAS letter had been  withdrawn
         and was not responsible for its withdrawal, and  the  fair  balance
         between the public interest in the due operation of the PBS  regime
         and the individual interest of  the  Appellant  was  in  favour  of
         simple operation of the regime without further ado".


57. One factor which Sales LJ identified  at  paragraph  34  of  EK  (Ivory
    Coast) as affecting what fairness required in  cases  where  the  error
    lies at the Sponsor's door is that in such cases:

         "An Applicant deals directly with  their  college  in  relation  to
         sorting out acceptance onto a course and the certification of  that
         fact, and so has an opportunity to check the contract made with the
         college so far as concerns the risk of withdrawal of a CAS  letter.
         If a college withdraws a CAS  letter,  the  Applicant  may  have  a
         contractual right of recourse against the college.  The  fact  that
         there  is  scope  for  Applicants  to   seek   protection   against
         administrative errors by choosing a college with a good  reputation
         and checking the contractual position before enrolling is  of  some
         relevance to the fair balance  to  be  struck  between  the  public
         interest in the due operation of the PBS regime and the interest of
         an individual who is detrimentally affected by it.


         In my view the circumstances in which the PBS applies are not  such
         that  it  would  be  fair,  as  between  the  Secretary  of   State
         (representing, for these purposes, the general public interest) and
         the Applicant, to expect the Secretary of State to have to  distort
         the ordinary operation of the PBS regime to  protect  an  Applicant
         against the speculative possibility that  a  college  has  made  an
         administrative error in  withdrawing  a  CAS  letter;  rather  than
         withdrawing it for reasons which do indeed indicate that  no  leave
         to  enter  or  remain  ought  to  be  granted.   The  interests  of
         Applicants such as the Appellant are not so pressing  and  of  such
         weight that a duty of delay and inquiry as  contended  for  by  the
         Appellant can be spelled out of the obligation to act fairly".


58. In Pathan it was decided that even where it was the SSHD who had caused
    the application to  fail,  in  that  case  by  revoking  the  Sponsor's
    licence, there was no obligation to give a further period of  leave  to
    remain or to delay the decision of the application until the  Applicant
    had had chance to find a new Sponsor (Briggs JSC noted at paragraph 165
    the Appellant's argument in that case that the SSHD could exercise  her
    residual  discretion  by  delaying  the  determination  of  a   pending
    application), this being what had been done in Patel so as to provide a
    further 60 days in which to vary the application if necessary.

59. An Applicant can only have one application for leave extant at any  one
    time pursuant to paragraph  34BB  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   If  an
    application is to be varied from one application to another it must  be
    done by way of an application.

60. The Secretary of State's Guidance "Applications for  Leave  to  Remain:
    Validation, Variation and Withdrawal (v2.0,  dated  30  November  2018)
    "states that:-

             "If  the  Applicant  wishes  to  vary  the  purpose  of  their
             application, they must complete the specified  form  and  meet
             all the requirements of paragraph 34 of the Immigration  Rules
             for the variation to be valid".


61. The Secretary of State's Guidance "Leave outside the Immigration  Rules
    (version 1.0, published 27 February  2018)  ("the  LOTR  policy")states
    that:-

         "LOTR on compelling compassionate grounds may be granted where  the
         decision maker decides that the specific circumstance of  the  case
         includes exceptional circumstances.  These circumstances will  mean
         that a refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for
         the Applicant or their family, but which do not  render  refusal  a
         breach of ECHR Article 8, Article 3, Refugee  Convention  or  other
         obligations.


         Not all LOTR is granted for  the  same  reason  and  discretion  is
         applied in different ways depending on  the  circumstances  of  the
         case and the Applicant's circumstances.


         ... .


         Important principles


         A grant  of  LOTR  should  be  rare.   Discretion  should  be  used
         sparingly where there are factors that warrant  a  grant  of  leave
         despite the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or  specific
         policies having not been met.  Factors raised in their  application
         must mean it would not be proportionate to  expect  the  person  to
         remain outside of the UK or to leave the UK.


         The Immigration Rules have been written with clear  objectives  and
         Applicants are expected to make an application for leave  to  enter
         or remain in the UK on an  appropriate  route  under  the  relevant
         Immigration Rules and meet the requirements of the  category  under
         which  they  are  applying  -  including  paying  any   fees   due.
         Considerations of whether to grant LOTR should  not  undermine  the
         objectives of the Rules or create a parallel regime for  those  who
         do not meet them.


         ... .


         The period of LOTR granted should be of a duration that is suitable
         to accommodate or overcome  the  compassionate  compelling  grounds
         raised and no more than necessary based on the individual facts  of
         a case.  Most successful  Applicants  would  require  leave  for  a
         specific often short, one off period.  Indefinite leave to enter or
         remain can be granted outside the Rules where the  grounds  are  so
         exceptional that they warrant it.  Such  cases  are  likely  to  be
         extremely  rare.   The  length  of  leave  will   depend   on   the
         circumstances of the case.  Applicants who are granted LOTR are not
         considered to be on a route  to  settlement  (indefinite  leave  to
         remain) unless leave is granted in a specific  concessionary  route
         to settlement.


         Reasons to go grant LOTR


         Compelling compassionate factors are, broadly speaking, exceptional
         circumstances which mean that a refusal of entry clearance or leave
         to remain would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the
         Applicant or their family, but which do not render refusal a breach
         of ECHR Article 8, Refugee Convention or obligations.   An  example
         might  be  where  an  Applicant  or  relevant  family  member   has
         experienced personal tragedy and there is a specific event to  take
         place or action to be taken in the UK as a result, but  which  does
         not in itself render refusal an ECHR breach.


         Where the Immigration Rules are not met, and  where  there  are  no
         exceptional circumstances that  warrant  a  grant  of  leave  under
         Article 8, Article 3 medical or discretionary leave policies, there
         may be other factors that when taken into account  along  with  the
         compelling compassionate grounds  raised  in  an  individual  case,
         warrant a grant of LOTR.  Factors, in the UK or  overseas,  can  be
         raised in a LOTR application.  The  decision  maker  must  consider
         whether the application  raises  compelling  compassionate  factors
         which mean that the Home Office should grant  LOTR.   Such  factors
         may include:


         .  emergency or unexpected events.


         .  a  crisis,  disaster  or  accident  that  could  not  have  been
             anticipated.


         LOTR will not be granted  where  it  is  considered  reasonable  to
         expect the Applicant to leave the UK despite such factors.  Factors
         in the UK or overseas can be raised in a LOTR  application.   These
         factors can arise in any application type.


         ... .


         Applying in the UK for LOTR


         Applicants in the UK must apply on the  application  form  for  the
         route which most closely matches their circumstances  and  pay  the
         relevant fees and charges.  Any  compelling  compassionate  factors
         they wish to be considered,  including  any  documentary  evidence,
         must be raised within the application on their chosen route for  it
         to be considered, if the requirement  for  leave  on  their  chosen
         route are not met."


Oral Submissions


62. I heard oral submissions from both parties.  Mr Symes' oral submissions
    followed his arguments in his skeleton argument.  The  Applicant  is  a
    victim of fraud.  The issue arose not simply as a result of a  mistake.
    The Respondent has taken a very long time to investigate the matter and
    to inform the Applicant of the fraud.  The Applicant's life has been on
    hold for two years and this has caused real distress to his wife.   The
    application properly considered cries out for consideration under leave
    outside the Rules.  The 31 Jan letter  is  clear  enough.   The  SSHD's
    position is predicated strongly on discretion within the Rules  however
    there is a wide discretion outside  the  Rules  which  does  not  apply
    without a proper application.  He referred me to Kalsi at paragraph  58
    and Junied, paragraph 43.  What the Applicant was seeking was  a  short
    period of leave  for  60  days.   The  Applicant  recognised  that  the
    application under the PBS system was "dead in the water".

63. While the fairness cases suggest that there is  no  duty  on  the  SSHD
    where there has been a third-party failure, there is a  general  public
    law duty of fairness. Here the issue is  different  because  there  has
    been a distinct application for LOTR  on  the  basis  of  a  series  of
    issues, including delay, fraud and where the Applicant has been left in
    a lengthy period of limbo.

64. The SSHD has not done a good  job.   The  decision  shows  no  sign  of
    understanding that there is any  discretion,  and  the  author  of  the
    letter seems to be blind to the existence of discretion.

65. Mr Harland addressed me initially specifically on the letter  from  the
    Home Office to the Applicant of 20 January 2020 (page  128)  where  the
    following is stated

         "The purpose of this letter is  not  to  consider  all  the  issues
         raised in your current application.  We will make a decision on the
         application once we have received any response to  this  letter  or
         you run out of time to reply.


         However, if there are other grounds which you think are relevant to
         whether you should be allowed to stay in the UK, even  if  we  find
         false representations were made, you should include  them  in  your
         response.  This requirement is being imposed under Section  120  of
         the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  If  you  do  not
         tell us as soon as reasonably practicable and  you  tell  us  later
         without good reason for the delay, you may lose any right of appeal
         you may have had.  Your application is refused".


66. He submitted that the s.120 notice did not trigger a particular  route.
    There was an expectation of a formal application.  The suggestion  that
    is put forward that there  has  been  an  application  or  grounds  for
    further leave is not accepted.

 2. He specifically referred to paragraph 8 of the 31 Jan letter.  Mr Symes
    says that this is an application for LOTR; however, it is important  to
    remember the 60 days' context in PBS cases flowing from Patel. What the
    Applicant is asking for is a deferral of a decision,  however  in  this
    respect he had  already  received  a  six-month  deferral  having  been
    notified of the fraud in January. He says that he wanted leave in order
    to change his status, however what he sought was not to be put into the
    position that he was in before he made his application because when  he
    made his application, he did not have leave.   He  was  an  overstayer.
    Patel would not apply to him in any event.

 3. The reference to s.120 in the does not indicate that the Applicant does
    not have to make an application should he wish for LOTR.  In any  event
    the letter of 31 Jan cannot reasonably be construed as  an  application
    for LOTR (or as a variation).

Conclusions


 4. Mr Symes in his skeleton argument indicates that the  Applicant's  case
    is made out if it was open to the Respondent to exercise her discretion
    to  grant  the  Applicant  leave,  but  that  she  failed  to  consider
    exercising that discretion. However, it is always open to the  SSHD  to
    exercise discretion to grant LOTR. The issue is whether it was rational
    for her, in this case, not to consider exercising discretion outside of
    the Rules.

 5. The parties were in  no  disagreement  as  regards  the  law,  which  I
    summarise as follows. The SSHD  has  a  discretion  to  consider  LOTR.
    However, she has no discretion to waive strict compliance with the  IRs
    in a PBS application. There is an obligation to  consider  a  grant  of
    LOTR when expressly asked to do so. An  applicant  can  only  have  one
    application for leave extant at any given time, pursuant  to  paragraph
    34BB of the IRs. If  the  applicant  is  deemed  to  have  made  a  new
    application (a variation) the SSHD will void the original  application.
    There is no obligation to consider the grant of LOTR  unless  expressly
    asked to do so, unless there are specific facts that  are  so  striking
    that it would be irrational not to do so.





 6. An application for LOTR could succeed where a  PBS  application  fails.
    Following Patel and Thakur, the practice of the Respondent  in  student
    cases has been to defer a decision for 60 days to  give  the  applicant
    the opportunity to vary the application  on  the  basis  that  fairness
    demands this where the Respondent had  been  substantially  responsible
    for the failure of the application; however, in Pathan it  was  decided
    that there is no obligation on the SSHD in these circumstances to grant
    residual leave and delay the determination of the application.

 7. A summary of the LOTR policy follows. A grant of LOTR  should  be  rare
    and should not undermine the objective of the IRs or create a  parallel
    regime. Reasons for  granting  LOTR  can  be  compelling  compassionate
    grounds which are broadly speaking exceptional circumstances which mean
    that a refusal of entry clearance or leave to remain  would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh consequences for the applicant or their family, but
    which do not  render  refusal  a  breach  of  Article  8,  the  Refugee
    Convention of other obligations.

 8. Having considered the letter of 31 Jan, I am  in  no  doubt  that  this
    Applicant did not make an application for LOTR and it was  clearly  not
    the intention of his solicitors to make such an application.

 9. There is no reference to LOTR in the  letter  of  31  Jan  which  is  a
    response to the allegation of deception.  The letter asks the SSSHD  to
    "withdraw" the allegation of deception, which would  suggest  that  the
    PBS application was very much alive.  It is an acceptance that at  that
    time, the PBS rules cannot be met because of the problem with the  CoS,
    and a request (albeit misconceived) for 60 days is made to  enable  the
    Applicant to find another Sponsor.  There  is  an  assertion  that  the
    decision breaches the Applicant's rights under art 8 and a misconceived
    attempt to make an application  for  ILR  on  the  basis  of  10  years
    residence; however, these matters are not pursued in these proceedings.
    The Applicant did not make an application on either basis. However, the
    fact that the Applicant raised these matters is further  evidence  that
    had he intended to ask for LOTR, he would have  done  so.   It  further
    undermines Mr Symes' argument that the 31 January  letter  "cries  out"
    for consideration of LOTR.

10. There is no indication that the  Applicant  intends  to  vary  the  PBS
    application to an application for LOTR.  The Appellant has twice varied
    the application and is aware of the procedure.

11. The Appellant is legally represented. The 31 Jan letter was prepared by
    his solicitors. It can reasonably be inferred  that  had  it  been  the
    Applicant's intention to apply for 60 days LOTR, they would be able  to
    express this with a degree of clarity properly seeking a  variation  of
    the application.

12. The reference to 60  days  is  unarguably  a  clear  reference  to  the
    Patel/Thakur case law.  Moreover, had it  been  the  intention  of  the
    Applicant to vary the application /apply for LOTR, I  would  reasonably
    have expected his solicitors to have raised this in the application for
    AR and correspondence after the decision.

13. The fact that the Applicant made  an  application  for  AR  is  further
    support that he had not intended to vary the application. Moreover, the
    application for AR makes a number of assertions; however, it  does  not
    mention an application for LOTR or a failure by the  SSHD  to  exercise
    discretion. It is asserted in the AR  that  actions  of  the  SSHD  are
    "grossly  unreasonable  so  much  that  it  amounts  to  a   Wednesbury
    unreasonableness and rendered her decision unlawful" and that the  SSHD
    "acts or omission to act are nothing  but  an  abuse  of  process".  It
    claims that there was a "serious injustice" to  the  Applicant  because
    the SSHD "unreasonably failed to make a decision on  their  application
    for almost two and a half  years".    It  is  asserted  that  the  SSHD
    "failed to take action or inform the Applicant despite  becoming  aware
    of the allegation as early as May 2018" and "as a result  of  this  the
    Applicant and his partner have suffered from  stress  and  anxiety  and
    "the remedy or actions the  Applicant  could  have  taken  against  the
    Sponsor and Applicant job prospects are diminished".   It  is  asserted
    that the Appellant's partner "is in serious health risk (suffering from
    severe mental health) and her pregnancy is  in  danger"  and  that  the
    Secretary of State failed to consider the length of residence  here  in
    the UK "and surrounding human rights issues raised specifically  on  31
    January 2020".  There is an assertion that  the  decision  is  "grossly
    unreasonable and unlawful" and that there "has been a failure to  apply
    evidential flexibility Rules".  The claims are consistent  with  a  PBS
    application being pursued and the application of Thakur/Patel.

14. The SSHD in the AR stated as follows: -

         "... whilst we empathise the delay on your application  has  caused
         stressed to you and your  spouse  we  maintain  that  the  original
         caseworker has followed the appropriate procedures in  relation  to
         the service standard and has informed you when a request  was  made
         that your application was still being considered.  Issues regarding
         human rights or  Article  8  grounds  are  not  factors  which  are
         considered   within   a   point-based   system   application    and
         unfortunately, Article 8 issues  are  not  eligible  decisions  for
         administrative  review  as  defined  under  Appendix  AR   of   the
         Immigration Rules - specifically  AR2.6.   If  you  wish  for  such
         matters  to  be  considered  it  is  open  for  you  to  submit  an
         appropriate human rights focused application.  We maintain that the
         decision to refuse your application is not unreasonable or unlawful
         because it was your Sponsor themselves that had confirmed that they
         did not intend to employ you and therefore we  consider  it  to  be
         reasonable to refuse your application under paragraph  245HD(f)  of
         the Immigration Rules.  We therefore do not consider that there has
         been  a  case  working  error  and  the  decision  to  refuse  your
         application has been maintained."


15. The PAP letter does not claim that  the  SSHD  has  not  considered  an
    application for DL for a period of 60 days LOTR. There is no  complaint
    that the Applicant varied his application (for a second time)  or  that
    the letter of 31 Jan  should  be  deemed  to  be  a  variation  of  the
    application under the PBS to an application for LOTR. The focus of  the
    PAP letter is on delay in reaching a decision.  Much  is  made  of  the
    discovery by the SSHD of the fraudulent CoS on 17 May  2018,  the  same
    date the Respondent inquired with the Applicant whether he still relied
    on a variation of his application to one under the PBS.  It is asserted
    that the Respondent's "failures and conducts since May 2018 are grossly
    unreasonable by any standards".  It is asserted that the  Secretary  of
    State's conduct is "seriously questionable." It is suggested  that  the
    Sponsor note on the SMS system was made in May 2018,  yet  it  was  not
    until 14 November 2019 that the Respondent contacted Enactor Limited by
    e-mail.  Enactor responded on 15 November  2019.  Even  once  that  was
    received there was a delay in contacting the Applicant. It is  asserted
    that the Respondent has failed in her duty to reasonably  regulate  the
    Sponsor licence of the company.  Allegations are made by the  Applicant
    regarding the actions of Enactor Limited.   It  is  asserted  that  the
    Applicants have wasted two and a half years of  their  lives  and  that
    they cannot return to Bangladesh.  Assertions are made that  there  has
    been a procedural irregularity in regard to  the  delay  and  that  the
    delay is unreasonable and excessive.  Article 8 is raised.

16. In the PAP the solicitors state that "the appropriate course of  action
    would be to grant a (sic) discretionary  leave  or  reasonable  remedy"
    (p63). It is advanced that "it would be  rational  and  appropriate  to
    reconsider the decision as an alternative to judicial intervention"  on
    the basis of procedural unfairness. It is asserted that the "respondent
    was under an obligation to act in a manner which afforded the applicant
    a fair opportunity to  either  challenge  a  decision  or  other  (sic)
    necessary steps, i.e., a  decision  in  a  reasonable  period  of  time
    (wherein the sponsor would have provided the  necessary  employment  or
    could have been challenged reasonably and LTR would have been  granted)
    or a reasonable remedy or a discretionary leave giving consideration to
    the circumstances  existing".  The  reference  to  procedural  fairness
    supports the view that the Applicant was seeking a Thakur  /Patel  type
    remedy.

17. In the response to the PAP the Respondent engaged with the  claim  made
    by the Applicant that he is entitled to DL (see para 6 (vii) of the PAP
    (P.77). It is stated that the Applicant "has not provided  evidence  of
    why this should be a consideration..."

18. The reference to LOTR (and the policy) is raised, for the  first  time,
    in the grounds prepared by Counsel. It is  asserted  therein  that  the
    SSHD should have  considered  whether  the  fraud  perpetrated  on  the
    Applicant constituted an exceptional  circumstance.  This  is  a  clear
    reference  to  the  LOTR  policy,   hitherto   not   referred   to   in
    correspondence from the Applicant to the SSHD.

19. The SSHD rationally concluded that the application was  an  application
    under the PBS.  It is clear that the Applicant understood that he could
    not meet the requirements of the IRs.  The SSHD  was  not  required  to
    respond to the letter of 30 Jan as though it were  a  new  application.
    The assertion that the letter of 30 Jan was an application for 60  days
    LOTR with reference to the SSHD's policy is an afterthought and it is a
    response to the case law and the Applicant's untenable position  should
    he rely on the Thakur/Patel line of authority. The assertion  does  not
    accurately reflect the application or indeed any communication from the
    Applicant's solicitors relating to the application. The  Applicant  has
    sought to recharacterize the application in the hope of  enhancing  his
    position.

20. The Respondent was not obliged to consider LOTR with reference  to  the
    policy.  She was not expressly asked to do so by the  Applicant.  There
    was  no  identification  of  "compelling  compassionate   grounds"   or
    "exceptional circumstances" with reference to  the  policy.   What  the
    Applicant was seeking in the letter of 30 Jan (apart from  leave  under
    art 8 and ILR which are not pursued) was for the  Respondent  to  grant
    him 60 days to find a new Sponsor in response to his application  under
    the PBS relying on the Thakur/Patel case law. He has not  pursued  this
    because the argument is hopeless.  The Applicant would not be  entitled
    to a 60-day extension of leave under s.3(c) of  the  1971  Act  in  any
    event because he did not have leave when he made  the  application.  He
    was an overstayer. (While the Applicant states that the application was
    made within 14 days of the refusal of the  human  rights  claim  on  27
    September 2017, this does not accord with the SSHD's case that date  of
    the refusal is 22 September. Mr Symes did not address me on the point).
    Furthermore, any unfairness caused to the Applicant was not as a result
    of the actions of the SSHD. Albeit there was a delay in  communicating,
    investigating and communication of the decision, the Respondent is  not
    responsible for the invalid CoS. In respect of the issue of delay,  the
    Applicant was notified of the invalid CoS in January, six months before
    the decision.  In the light of Pathan, these issues including the  date
    of the September decision are not material. The  fact  that  permission
    has not been  granted  to  argue  these  matters  as  discrete  issues,
    undermines the Applicant's case that they are matters  that  could  and
    should bring him under the LOTR policy.

21. Albeit misconceived the reference to 60 days in the 31 Jan letter   was
    unarguably meant in the context of  an  extension  of  s.3C  leave  (or
    deferral of the consideration of the application under the  PBS).  This
    can  only  rationally  be  characterised  as  a  request  to   exercise
    discretion  under  the  PBS  supported  by  the  Applicant's  continual
    assertions of unfairness which is an argument which is bound  to  fail,
    for the reasons explained above.  The request  for  60  days  has  been
    reframed by the Applicant as an application for LOTR. I  disagree  with
    Mr Symes' that a distinct application  has  been  made  for  LOTR.  The
    submission that the SSHD has not done a good job, is  unsupported.  The
    31 Jan letter lacks clarity and focus. However,  what  is  clearly  not
    contained therein is a distinct application for LOTR or  anything  that
    could rationally be deemed as such. In these circumstances it  was  not
    incumbent on the SSHD to consider exercising discretion outside of  the
    IRs.

22. In reality this  application  is  an  argument  that  the  SSHD  should
    mitigate the hard consequences of  the  PBS  by  way  of  her  residual
    discretion. This is an argument that has been rejected by the Court  of
    Appeal many times because to do so would undermine the purpose  of  the
    PBS. The same argument is being made but the Applicant is seeking to re-
    characterise it an application for LOTR, with  reference  to  the  LOTR
    policy in order to achieve the same ends.  Of course, the  SSHD  has  a
    discretion to allow any application when the IR cannot be  met,  as  in
    this case, if an application has been made  (or  deemed  to  have  been
    made)  for  LOTR  where  there  are  properly  identified   exceptional
    circumstances  and  when  a  grant  of  leave  does  not  subvert   the
    requirements of the IR.

23. The Applicant cannot meet the IRs. Granting him LOTR  would  unarguably
    create a parallel regime for  those  who  cannot  meet  the  IRs.   The
    Applicant seeks time to find another Sponsor; however, he did not  have
    leave in the first place. It would be very odd for him to be granted  a
    period of leave when he cannot meet the IRs when he did not have  leave
    in the first place. To characterise any delay and the fraudulent CoS as
    "a crisis, disaster or accident  that  could  not  be  anticipated"  is
    fanciful and is a misconceived attempt to avoid the application of case
    law which does not assist him.  This is a very clear case of an attempt
    to subvert the requirements of the IRs. The delay and/or fraud are  not
    capable of amounting to 'exceptional circumstances'.  Bearing  in  mind
    that the Applicant did not have leave when he made the application,  it
    is difficult to identify "unjustifiably harsh consequences".

24. There was no obligation on the SSHD to consider this application as  an
    application for LOTR and had she done so, properly  applying  the  LOTR
    policy,  in  the   absence   of   properly   identifiable   exceptional
    circumstances, the application would have no prospect of success.

25. To summarise my findings, in the absence of an application to vary or a
    deemed variation, the Applicant's application was one  made  under  the
    PBS and not an application for LOTR. The SSHD rationally considered the
    application under the IRs (PBS)and in the absence of an application for
    LOTR, there was no discretion to allow the application.

26. In any event, had the Respondent considered discretion in  the  absence
    of properly  identified  "exceptional  circumstances"  and  "compelling
    compassionate grounds", the application could only  be  refused.  I  am
    satisfied that the application is an attempt to subvert the IR  and  it
    has no prospect of success.  The LOTR scheme cannot undermine  the  PBS
    scheme. It is inevitable that the outcome would have been the  same  if
    the  SSHD  had  considered  whether  to  exercise  discretion.     This
    application for judicial review is refused.




UTJ McWilliam





27 July 2021


