
IAC-FH-LW-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/2323/2013

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            21 December 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                 Farooq [Q]
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms B Poynor, Counsel, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer Solicitors
appeared on behalf of the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


1.   This is an application for judicial  review  of  the  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State made as long ago as 7 March 2013  whereby  what  was
    submitted as a fresh claim by the applicant was rejected.


2.   The applicant himself is Iranian of Kurdish ethnicity. He came to  this
    country originally and claimed asylum on  the  basis  that  he  was  an
    active supporter of the PJAK and had been arrested in July 2009 and had
    been, he said, tortured in detention.


3.   His claim based on that was rejected by both  the  Secretary  of  State
    and on appeal by an Immigration Judge who essentially  found  that  the
    entirety of his account was a fabrication, save that he was Iranian and
    of Kurdish ethnicity, and the Immigration Judge found that he would  be
    of no interest to the Iranian authorities or anyone on return to  Iran.




4.   The fresh claim was made on the basis essentially, or supported  by,  a
    report from Professor Joffe who is accepted to be an expert in relation
    to Iran.  That report was in general terms and  was  provided  not  for
    this applicant, but the applicant's  solicitors  had  obtained  consent
    that it be used in this claim.  Essentially, what was  being  said  was
    that the fact that he was someone who had left Iran illegally  and  had
    claimed asylum here and needed documentation which had to  be  provided
    from the Iranian Embassy here, meant that he would be, if  a  Kurd,  of
    interest to the authorities and would be liable to be detained at least
    on return.


5.   Any political activities  were  not  necessary  to  create  that  risk,
    although it must be obvious that if there were any political activities
    the chances of action against the individual by the Iranian authorities
    was substantially increased and it is accepted that anyone  who  is  in
    the hands of the Iranian authorities on  the  basis  that  there  is  a
    belief that he may be someone who is essentially an enemy of the  state
    meant that the chances of  substantial  ill-treatment  and  persecution
    were all too likely, and that certainly there would be a real risk.


6.   The refusal letter was largely based upon the assertion that there  was
    no risk because he was not a political activist having  regard  to  the
    findings of the Immigration Judge.  That it was submitted, and I accept
    to a large extent, missed the point. The application letter was lengthy
    and diffuse and it maybe did not spell out as clearly as it should  the
    basis upon which the claim was now being made,  but  Professor  Joffe's
    report did speak for itself and did indicate that there was in his view
    a risk by virtue merely of Kurdish ethnicity.


7.   The situation inevitably and as is  well-known  in  that  part  of  the
    world has moved on in the last three years.  There has now been  too  a
    fresh country guidance case which was handed down this year.  That  was
    concerned with whether there was a risk on return for  those  who  left
    illegally and who needed the necessary documentation from  the  Embassy
    here.  The decision reached in that case in country guidance terms  was
    that there was no real risk in those circumstances.  I gather that  the
    applicants in that case were Kurds,  but  the  risk  on  the  basis  of
    Kurdish ethnicity and the evidence to that effect from Professor  Joffe
    was not before the Tribunal, and accordingly it is now  submitted  that
    that country guidance case cannot be regarded as  reliable  in  dealing
    with the situation that arises here, namely the risk that there may  be
    to those of Kurdish ethnicity.


8.   There is an added factor which I am bound to say  I  am  surprised  has
    not been taken into account and that is that  it  was  the  applicant's
    claim that his uncle was involved with the PJAK as a supporter  of  it.
    That, the Immigration Judge did not reject as being necessarily untrue,
    and if there is evidence that family  of  an  individual  was  involved
    politically in a way  which  was  not  considered  appropriate  by  the
    regime, then that might have an ongoing effect.


9.   It seems to me, in all the  circumstances,  for  reasons  that  I  have
    indicated that the 2013 decision is one which now cannot stand and was,
    in any event, even on the basis of what was  before  the  Secretary  of
    State then, one which was flawed.   Obviously,  the  Immigration  Judge
    granting permission was right to focus on the alleged defects  that  he
    did.


10.  In those circumstances I propose to quash that decision.  I do not  say
    that the reconsideration which  in  fairness  the  Secretary  of  State
    recognises is something that should occur, albeit not on the basis that
    the original decision was flawed, but merely on the  basis  that  times
    have moved on, and it is right to consider the situation as  it  exists
    now, and that therefore  there  was  no  need  to  quash  the  original
    decision. I have, I think, indicated, I do not agree, but I do  not  go
    further and say that there is now no possible outcome other  than  that
    it must be regarded as a fresh claim, but  it  is  necessary  that  the
    applicant now puts before the Secretary of State all that he wishes  to
    be taken into account in reaching the final  decision  on  what  he  is
    submitting is a fresh claim.  It may be that  it  would  be  desirable,
    indeed I think  certainly  it  would  be  desirable  that  if  possible
    Professor Joffe gives a supplementary report which is based  upon  this
    particular applicant rather than merely a general report as to what  in
    his view might occur.


11.  Obviously, there must be a reasonable time given  for  any  submissions
    to be made, and what I propose to do therefore is to  direct  that  any
    further application or any further material is put before the Secretary
    of State by the end of next month.  The Secretary of  State  of  course
    will then take such time (one hopes not too long) to  make  a  decision
    based upon that, so to that extent this application succeeds.


Costs


12.  The applicant's representatives to put  their  submissions  in  writing
    and to serve a schedule of costs by no later than 20 January 2017.

13.  The respondent to respond on liability and quantum. ~~~~0~~~~


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/2323/2013


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of

                                 Farooq [Q]
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



     Before Mr Justice Collins sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr B Poynor, of Counsel,  instructed  by  Barnes
Harrild & Dyer Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant  and  Mr  Z  Malik  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 21st December 2016.

Order


(1)  The application succeeds and the decision of 7 March 2013 is quashed.

(2)  The applicant must make any submissions to the defendant  and  serve  a
      schedule of costs by 20 January 2017.

Reasons

In the judgment annexed.


                                    [pic]

         Signed:


                                     The Honourable Mr Justice Collins




        Dated:    21 December 2016










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).






