
IAC-FH-LW-V1


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                                JR/2801/2019


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                                  Heard on: 17 February 2020

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between


             The Queen (on the application of Rohit Singh Mehta)


                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

    Mr L Lourdes, Counsel, instructed by JML Diplock Solicitors, on behalf
    of the Applicant
    Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
    behalf of the Respondent.
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


 1) These are a written record of the oral reasons given for  the  judgment
    at the hearing.



The application

Background

 2) The applicant, an Indian national, applied on 21 May 2019 for  judicial
    review of the  respondent's  decisions  of  17  December  2018  and  22
    February 2019 to refuse the applicant's application for leave to remain
    as the dependant of a Tier 4 (General) Migrant.

 3) As summarised by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor in his later  grant
    of permission to proceed with the application, the respondent initially
    refused  the  applicant's  application  under  paragraph  319C  of  the
    Immigration Rules in the December 2018 decision, on the  basis  of  the
    applicant was not in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  his
    sponsoring wife, and in addition, could  not  satisfy  the  maintenance
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. In respect of the latter  point,
    the respondent relied in the absence of a sponsorship declaration  from
    the claimed provider of funds, namely the applicant's father-in-law.

 4) In the second decision of February 2019, which was  in  response  to  a
    request for administrative review, the  respondent  accepted  that  the
    applicant's relationship with his wife was genuine and  subsisting  and
    so reissued the initial decision, while maintaining her refusal of  the
    application  because  the  applicant  did  not  meet  the   maintenance
    requirements.

Grounds


 5) In the grounds, the applicant challenged both decisions  on  the  basis
    that he had submitted a sponsorship declaration from his father-in-law,
    with his application for leave to remain, and that the  respondent  had
    erred in failing to have regard to that evidence. Alternatively, it was
    said that if the evidence had  not  in  fact  been  uploaded  with  the
    application, the respondent had erred in failing  to  apply  evidential
    flexibility in his case.

The basis of the respondent's resistance to the orders sought

 6) In the Acknowledgement  of  Service,  the  basis  of  the  respondent's
    rejection of the application appeared to change once again. As set  out
    at paragraphs [16]  to  [23],  the  respondent  acknowledged  that  the
    decisions  referred  to  the  financial  maintenance   requirement   by
    reference  to  sponsorship  from  the  applicant's  father-in-law.  The
    decisions gave the impression that the reason that the application  was
    refused was because the applicant did not provide a letter  of  consent
    from  his  father-in-law  for  access  to  his  funds.  The  respondent
    acknowledged that that was not correct.  Rather,  the  requirements  of
    appendix E were that the funds must be available to  the  applicant  or
    his wife. Nevertheless, the AoS asserted that the decisions were  taken
    on  the  correct  basis,  namely  that  reliance  on  funds  from   the
    applicant's father-in-law was not a satisfactory source of finance,  as
    defined in appendix E, so that  any  request  for  further  information
    under the respondent's evidential flexibility  policy  would  serve  no
    purpose, because it would not alter the fact that the funds  themselves
    were not from an acceptable source.  The respondent  accepted  that  it
    would have been preferable if the reasoning  as  recorded  in  its  own
    internal 'GCID' notes had been provided in the December 2018  decision,
    but that the end-result was the same. The applicant was seeking to rely
    on funds in a third-party account held in the name  of  his  father-in-
    law, which was not acceptable. In further detailed grounds  of  defence
    dated 20 August 2019, the respondent, in the alternative, resisted  the
    application because it was inevitable that the application  would  fall
    for refusal in light of the absence of evidence of the  required  funds
    in the bank account of the applicant  or  his  wife,  so  that  section
    31(2A) of the Senior Courts Act 1981 applied.


The grant of permission

 7) On 5 July 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor  granted  permission
    on the papers, in light of the position adopted by  the  respondent  in
    the Acknowledgement of Service. In doing so, he regarded there as being
    two points flowing from the respondent's  revised  position  that  only
    funds held in the name of the applicant or his wife could be relied  on
    to prove maintenance. First, it  was  arguable  that  the  respondent's
    original decision and the administrative review decision  were  flawed.
    Second, if the respondent's contention on the maintenance  requirements
    is correct, it may be the case of  the  applicant's  application  would
    have been refused in any event, but the correctness of  that  assertion
    would need to be assessed.

 8)  In  granting  permission,  UT  Judge  Norton-Taylor  noted  that   the
    applicant's representatives may wish to consider making application  to
    amend the grounds of challenge, but that that was a matter for them. He
    also gave standard case management directions, including in relation to
    the production  of  a  hearing  and  authorities  bundle  and  skeleton
    argument.   The  applicant  did  not  comply  within   the   stipulated
    timeframes with those directions and this resulted in a hearing of  the
    application on 11 October 2019 being adjourned, as a  result  of  which
    wasted costs were  ordered  against  JML  Diplock  Solicitors.  I  gave
    further  orders  on  22  November  2019,  permitting  the   applicant's
    application to  amend  the  grounds  of  challenge  and  to  allow  the
    respondent to serve additional grounds in response.

   The applicable law

 9) The following provisions of the Immigration Rules are relevant:

         "319C. Requirements for entry clearance or leave to remain


         To qualify for entry clearance or leave to remain as the Partner of
         a Relevant Points Based System Migrant ...an  applicant  must  meet
         the  requirements  listed  below.  If  the  applicant  meets  these
         requirements, entry clearance or leave to remain will  be  granted.
         If the applicant does not meet these requirements, the  application
         will be refused.

         Requirements:


         (g) Unless the applicant is applying as the Partner of  a  Relevant
         Points Based System Migrant who is a Tier 1 (Investor) Migrant or a
         Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent) Migrant, there  must  be  a  sufficient
         level of funds available to the applicant, as set out  in  Appendix
         E."


10) Appendix E in turn states:


         "Immigration Rules Appendix E: maintenance (funds) for  the  family
         of Relevant Points Based System Migrants


         A sufficient level of funds  must  be  available  to  an  applicant
         applying as the Partner  ....of  a  Relevant  Points  Based  System
         Migrant ...A sufficient level of funds will only  be  available  if
         the requirements below are met.


         (aa)     Paragraphs 1A and 1B of Appendix  C  also  apply  to  this
             Appendix.


         (c)      Where the applicant  is  applying  as  the  Partner  of  a
             Relevant Points Based System Migrant or Appendix W Worker  the
             relevant amount of funds  must  be  available  to  either  the
             applicant or the Relevant  Points  Based  System  Migrant  [my
             emphasis] or Appendix W Worker.


         (f)      In all cases, the funds in question must be available  to:
             (i) the applicant, or
             (ii) where they are applying as  the  partner  of  a  Relevant
             Points Based System Migrant..., either  to  them  or  to  that
             Relevant Points Based System Migrant


         (g)      The funds in question must  have  been  available  to  the
             person referred to in (f) above on the date of the application
             and for:


             (ii)       a  consecutive  28-day  period  of  time,  if   the
                  applicant is applying as the Partner of a Tier 4 (General)
                  Student


         (j)      In all cases the  applicant  must  provide  the  specified
             documents as set out in paragraph 1B of Appendix C..."


11) Appendix C concludes:


         "Immigration Rules Appendix C: maintenance (funds)


         1A.      In all cases where an  applicant  is  required  to  obtain
             points  under  Appendix  C,  the  applicant  must   meet   the
             requirements listed below:


             (a)       The funds specified in the relevant part of Appendix
                  C must be available to the applicant on the  date  of  the
                  application (as defined in Part 1 of these Rules)...


         1B. In all cases where Appendix C or  Appendix  E  states  that  an
         applicant is required to provide specified documents, the specified
         documents are:


         (a)      Personal bank or building society statements which satisfy
             the following requirements:


             (i)       The statements must cover:


                  (3)    a  consecutive  28-day  period  of  time,  if   the
                      applicant is applying as a  Tier  4  Migrant  or  the
                      Partner ....of a Relevant Points Based System Migrant
                      who is a Tier 4 Migrant


             (ii)      The most recent statement must be dated  no  earlier
                  than 31 days before the date of the application;


             (iii)     The statements must clearly show:


                  (1)  the name of:


                      i.    the applicant,


                      iii.  the name of the  Relevant  Points-Based  System
                           Migrant, if the  applicant    is  applying  as  a
                           Partner  of  a   Relevant   Points-Based   System
                           Migrant.  [my emphasis]"


12) In relation to Evidential Flexibility, paragraph 245AA states:


         "245AA.Documents not submitted with applications


         (a)       Subject  to  sub-paragraph  (b)   and   where   otherwise
             indicated, where Part 6A or any appendices referred to in Part
             6A state  that  specified  documents  must  be  provided,  the
             decision  maker  (that  is  the   Entry   Clearance   Officer,
             Immigration Officer or  the  Secretary  of  State)  will  only
             consider documents received by the Home Office before the date
             on which the application is considered.


         (b)      If the applicant has  submitted  the  specified  documents
             and:


             (i) specified evidence is missing from the documents; or


             (ii)      a document is in the wrong format (for example, if a
                  letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or


             (iv)      a document does not contain  all  of  the  specified
                  information;


             the  decision  maker  may  contact  the   applicant   or   his
             representative in writing, and request the correct  documents.
             The requested  documents  must  be  received  at  the  address
             specified in the request within 10 working days of the date of
             the request.


         (c)      Documents will not be requested where the  decision  maker
             does not think that  the  submission  of  missing  or  correct
             documents will lead to a grant because the application will be
             refused for other reasons.


         (d)       If  the  applicant  has  omitted  to  provide   specified
             evidence, or submitted it in the wrong format, but the missing
             information is verifiable from other documents  provided  with
             the application or elsewhere, the decision maker may grant the
             application  despite  the  error  or  omission,  if  they  are
             satisfied that the applicant meets all the other  requirements
             of the Rules."


13) The respondent's policy on Evidential Flexibility which applied to  the
    applicant's application, version 9.0, dated 3 December  2018,  included
    at page [5], the following:


         "If the application falls for refusal for a reason which could  not
         be addressed by requesting additional information, for example:


          . on genuineness grounds
          . where an application does not meet the other requirements in the
            rules
          . where it will be refused under general grounds for refusal


         then you must not request further evidence under  paragraph  245AA.
         If you are unsure, discuss this with your  senior  case  worker  or
         line manager.


         If you decide that evidential flexibility does  not  apply  to  the
         case, you must accurately  and  fully  record  on  the  caseworking
         system:


          . what evidence or information is missing
          . whether evidential flexibility has been applied and if not,  why
            not.


         You must explain in the decision letter why no request for  further
         information has been made."


14) Section 31(2A) of the 1981 Act states:


         "Application for judicial review


         (2A) The High Court-


         (a)      must refuse to grant relief on an application for judicial
             review, and


         (b)      may not make an award under  subsection  (4)  on  such  an
             application,


         if it appears to the court to be highly likely that the outcome for
         the applicant would not have been substantially  different  if  the
         conduct complained of had not occurred."

15) In the  amended  grounds,  the  applicant  also  relied  on  CDS  (PBS:
    "available":  Article  8)  Brazil  [2010]  UKUT  305  (IAC),  for   the
    proposition that an applicant could rely on funds from  a  third  party
    (see paragraphs [13] and [14]):


         "13.     In the absence of specific additional requirements of  the
             Immigration Rules, it seems to us that funds  are  "available"
             to a claimant at the material time if they belong to  a  third
             party but that party is shown to be willing to deploy them  to
             support the claimant for the purpose  contemplated.  Gifts  of
             money have always been acceptable for  visitors  who  need  to
             show they have resources  available  to  them.  The  need  for
             Immigration Rules to have  unambiguous  provisions  preventing
             recourse to financial assistance from other persons,  if  that
             is what is intended, was spelt out in Mahad v ECO [2009]  UKSC
             16 [2010] 1  WLR  48  at  [26]  to  [30].  That  decision  was
             concerned with the maintenance and accommodation  requirements
             of working holiday makers, but its implications go beyond this
             category of applicant.


         14.      Accordingly, we are satisfied on the facts  of  this  case
             that the appellant had sufficient funds "available" to her  to
             meet the objective requirements of Appendix C at the  relevant
             time. The word "available" can not be  read  restrictively  to
             mean "available to her  with  no  assistance  from  any  other
             person save a parent or guardian", by reference to the  Policy
             Guidance, and neither can such a requirement  be  imported  by
             the reference in the Immigration Rules to proving  maintenance
             by relevant documents."


16) The applicant asserted that  this  was  consistent  with  the  case  of
    Ejifugha (Tier 4 - funds -  credit)  Nigeria  [2011]  UKUT  244  (IAC),
    paragraphs [18] and [19]:


         "18.     Further, In the case of CDS (PBS - "available"  -  Article
             8) Brazil [2010] UKUT 00305 (IAC), a case decided on the  same
             day as FA and AA by the same Tribunal, it was held that  funds
             are "available" to a claimant at the  material  time  if  they
             belong to a third party but that party is shown to be  willing
             to deploy  them  to  support  the  claimant  for  the  purpose
             contemplated.


         19.     We find that there is no  proper  distinction  to  be  made
             between the situation of the appellant who has funds available
             to him from his bank and that of the appellants in  the  cases
             referred to above who had funds available from third parties."


Discussion of issues and conclusions

17) I discussed and agreed with the representatives the three issues I  was
    being asked to  consider,  by  reference  to  the  applicant's  amended
    grounds of challenge and the respondent's response:

          a. ground (1) - whether the applicant could rely  on  funds  from
             his father-in-law and whether the respondent's decisions could
             be impugned for failing to permit this;

          b. ground (2) - whether the respondent had  impermissibly  failed
             to apply her evidential flexibility  policy  and  had  instead
             changed the basis of refusal of the applicant's application;

          c. ground (3) - even if the applicant succeeded  on  grounds  (1)
             and (2), nevertheless,  whether  I  was  bound  to  apply  the
             provisions of section 31(2A) of the Senior Courts Act 1981.

The applicant's submissions on ground (1)

18) Mr Lourdes reiterated that the concept of 'available funds' in appendix
    E could include those from a third party.  When I asked  him  how  this
    was to be read in the context of appendix  C  and  the  requirement  of
    specified documents in the name of  the  applicant  or  the  sponsoring
    migrant (his wife), Mr Lourdes said that the two appendices  should  be
    read  separately,  without  cross-referring  to   one   another.    The
    respondent had ignored the fact that the sponsoring wife had, in  turn,
    obtained her student visa on the basis of funds provided by her father,
    and if in doubt, the respondent  should  have  made  further  enquiries
    about the source of the sponsoring wife's funds.  The funds  that  were
    available  to  the  sponsoring  wife  should  be  considered  as  being
    available to the applicant.

The respondent's submissions on ground (1)

19) Mr Malik submitted that I was effectively being asked  to  rewrite  the
    Immigration Rules.  The two authorities relied on by the applicant, CDS
    (PBS: "available": Article 8) Brazil; and of Ejifugha (Tier 4 - funds -
    credit) Nigeria, had considered the issue of the availability of  funds
    but had reached carefully caveated conclusions, (see [13] of CDS  which
    refers to 'In the absence of specific additional  requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.')  Both  cases  pre-dated  the   version   of   the
    Immigration Rules under which the applicant had applied and anticipated
    possible future versions of the rules. There  were  express  additional
    requirements as anticipated in CDS - namely appendix C.  There  was  no
    longer any general flexibility to waive  express  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules - see:  Mudiyanselage v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 65.  The
    version of the Immigration Rules which applied  to  the  applicant  was
    clear that the general availability of funds in a third party's account
    did not meet the requirements for the applicant's application.  It  was
    not enough to suggest that because the purpose behind the  requirements
    was to avoid  the  applicant  being  a  burden  on  UK  taxpayers,  the
    evidential requirement should be disregarded.

Conclusion on ground (1)

20) I accept  Mr  Malik's  submission  that  the  provisions  contained  in
    appendix E on availability of funds cannot be read  in  isolation  from
    appendix C, and indeed (j) of appendix E mandates that they  should  be
    read together:

    "In all cases the applicant must provide the specified documents as set
    out in paragraph 1B of Appendix C..."

21) Mr Lourdes does not dispute that 1B(iii)(1)  of  appendix  C  expressly
    refers to statements in the name of the  applicant  or  his  sponsoring
    wife, not her father.  CDS does not assist  the  applicant  and  indeed
    supports the respondent's proposition that the issue of availability of
    finds needs to be considered in  the  context  of  additional  specific
    requirements of the Immigration Rules (see [13] of CDS) - in this case,
    appendix C.  The respondent's decision to refuse the application on the
    basis of the lack of acceptance of  bank  statements  relating  to  the
    applicant's father-in-law cannot be impugned  on  public  law  grounds.
    This ground of challenge therefore fails.

Ground (2) and evidential flexibility

The applicant's submissions on ground (2)

22) Mr Lourdes relied on two elements. First, the  respondent  had  changed
    over time the basis  for  refusing  the  applicant's  application.  The
    initial refusal of 17 December 2018 had challenged the  genuineness  of
    the relationship between the  applicant  and  his  spouse,  and  raised
    general concerns about the availability of funds, whereas by  the  time
    of  the  administrative  review  decision  on  22  February  2019,  the
    respondent had accepted the relationship as  genuine  and  instead  had
    focussed on the lack of  consent  from  the  father-in-law  as  to  the
    availability of funds.  One of the main  reasons  for  refusal  at  the
    time, as recorded in contemporaneous GCID notes, namely  that  reliance
    on the father-in-law as a source of funds, was never  conveyed  to  the
    applicant until the Acknowledgement of Service to this judicial  review
    application.

23) The second aspect of the challenge was around  evidential  flexibility.
    If the respondent  had  had  concerns  about  the  genuineness  of  the
    applicant's marriage or the applicant's father-in-law's consent to  the
    availability of funds, then at that stage the  respondent  should  have
    stopped, asked the applicant for further evidence and then consequently
    reviewed the application, and should not have  considered  whether  the
    availability of funds from a  third  party  was  impermissible,  before
    engaging with the applicant.

The respondent's submissions on ground (2)

24)  In relation to the first element, paragraph AR.2.2(d) of  appendix  AR
    Administrative Review expressly permits the respondent  to  maintain  a
    decision with different or additional reasons to those specified in the
    decision under review.   The original decision had taken general  issue
    with the applicant not satisfying the maintenance requirements, and was
    correct to do so, so that the general issue was not a new one.

25) Evidential flexibility under paragraph 245AA of the  Immigration  Rules
    could not assist the applicant: see Mudiyanselage, referred  to  above.
    It was not the case that the applicant had submitted a document in  the
    wrong format or  anything  analogous  -  he  had  submitted  the  wrong
    document - i.e. a statement of his father-in-law's  bank  account,  not
    his or his wife's account.

Conclusion on ground (2)

26) Taking the two elements of ground (2) in reverse  order,  I  accept  Mr
    Malik's submission that the rules around evidential flexibility do  not
    assist  the  applicant.   Looking  at  paragraph  245AA(b),  the   bank
    statements adduced do not contain an omission in a series of documents;
    or are in the wrong format; or miss certain information.   Even  taking
    the applicant's case at its  highest,  that  the  father-in-law's  bank
    statements at [97] to [101] of the applicant's  bundle  were  submitted
    prior to the applicant's biometric interview on  4  December  2018,  so
    that the respondent's assertion about a lack of consent by the  father-
    in-law was incorrect, the point remains that the bank statements do not
    comply with the requirements of paragraph  1B(iii)(1)  of  appendix  C.
    This is because they relate to  the  applicant's  father-in-law's  bank
    account, not the accounts of the applicant or his wife.  This  case  is
    analogous to the facts described by Upper Tribunal Judge Lane,  (as  he
    then was) at [103] of Mudiyanselage:

    "UTJ Peter Lane accepted Ms Negbenebor's case as  regards  (a)  but  he
    dismissed it as regards (b).  He  held  that  the  Current  Appointment
    Report was not a specified document. He said, at paras.  18-19  of  his
    judgment:

       "18. ... That document in my view plainly is not  one  that  engages
    paragraph 245AA. It is not a document that failed to contain all of the
    specified information. On the contrary, it is a document which contains
    all the information it is designed to contain  and  which  is  entirely
    coherent and complete on its face.

        19. The problem with the document is that it is dated too early. It
    is, in other words, the wrong document. It would in my  view  be  going
    much too far to interpret paragraph  245AA  as  encompassing  documents
    that are the wrong kind of document because they are produced at points
    in time other than those required by the Rules."

27) The provider of the funds was not as required in appendix C  and  there
    was, and is, no document before the respondent or this Tribunal,  which
    complies with paragraph 1B(iii)(1) of  appendix  C.   This  element  of
    challenge has no merit.

28) In relation to the second element of the challenge, I see  strength  in
    the argument that whilst the respondent's principal reason for refusal,
    namely the lack of acceptability of third  party  funds,  was  recorded
    contemporaneously and so is  not  a  post-decision  rationalisation  of
    refusal, that reason was not communicated to the  applicant  until  the
    Acknowledgement of Service to this judicial review decision.   That  is
    distinct from the ground of challenge that the respondent was providing
    post-decision reasons, which were not in the mind of the respondent  at
    the time.

29)  Instead,  while  the  respondent's  decision  itself  to  refuse   the
    application and the  principal  reason  for  that  decision  cannot  be
    impugned on public law grounds, other reasons were cited for refusal in
    the decision letters - namely that the  applicant's  relationship  with
    his wife was not genuine and his father-in-law  had  not  consented  to
    make the funds available.   On  the  one  hand,  I  accept  Mr  Malik's
    submission  that  paragraph  AR.2.2(d)  of  appendix  AR   allows   the
    respondent to rely on different or additional grounds while maintaining
    a decision.  On the other hand, the difficulty is  that  the  principal
    reason now relied on by the respondent  was  not  referred  to  in  the
    administrative review decision.

30) To the extent that the applicant asserts that the respondent  did  not,
    at the time of the decisions of 17 December 2018 and 22 February  2019,
    consider and take those decisions because  of  the  unacceptability  of
    third party funds and only afterwards sought to rely on that reason,  I
    reject that ground, on the basis of the contemporaneous GCID notes, the
    contents of which have not been disputed.

31) On the different issue of whether the decisions can be impugned because
    they fail to refer to the principal reason taken for the  decisions  at
    the time, I accept that there has been  such  a  failure  and  in  that
    narrow, but important sense, the decisions were defective and unlawful.
       The unlawfulness of the decisions in that narrow  aspect  does  not,
    however, answer the question of whether it would appropriate  to  quash
    the decisions, which I considered in ground (3).

Ground (3) - section 31(2A) of the 1981 - discussion and conclusions

32) Mr Lourdes did  not  deal  with  the  issue  in  his  written  skeleton
    argument. In oral submissions on  the  issue,  these  were  limited  to
    reiterating the importance of ground (2), namely the lack  of  accurate
    reasons in the decisions.

33) Mr Malik referred to a case  pre-dating  the  introduction  of  section
    31(2A), namely R (Alladin) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1334, which supported
    his proposition that even if the decisions had omitted to refer to  the
    principal reason for refusal, relief should refused where the decisions
    were reached for reasons that cannot be impugned legally.  He  accepted
    that given the introduction of section 31(2A) of  the  2002  Act  which
    applies here, I should focus on the statutory provisions,  rather  than
    Alladin.

34) Section 31(2A) confirms that I do not need  to  be  satisfied  that  an
    outcome would inevitably have been the same, only  that  it  is  highly
    likely.  Second, the outcome does not need to be  precisely  the  same,
    provided it would not have been substantially different.  Third,  I  do
    not have a discretion where the conditions set  out  in  the  statutory
    provision are met. I am under a duty to refuse relief.   This  duty  is
    subject to the power to disregard that requirement if I  consider  that
    it is appropriate to do so for reasons of exceptional public interest.

35) While I am not applying a test that the outcome would  inevitably  have
    been the same, only that it is 'highly likely', which is a lower  test,
    I accept Mr Malik's submission that  the  refusal  of  the  applicant's
    application would have been inevitable.  As a consequence, the correct,
    lower legal test is met, namely that  the  outcome  for  the  applicant
    would not have been substantially different, had the  principal  reason
    for refusal been referred to in the two decisions.  Mr Lourdes  has  no
    answer to this and to re-iterate, the bank statements  adduced  do  not
    contain an omission in a series of  documents;  or  are  in  the  wrong
    format; or have missing information - they are the wrong documents; and
    correct documents in the name of the applicant and his wife have  never
    been adduced to the respondent or  this  Tribunal,  nor  is  there  any
    suggestion that they exist.  If the respondent had  included  reference
    to the principal reason in the decisions, the outcome  would  not  have
    been substantially different, for the same reason that  I  refused  the
    challenge under ground (1), namely  that  the  applicant's  application
    does not meet the requirements of paragraph 1B(iii)(1) of appendix C.

36) Except where it is appropriate to quash the decisions  for  reasons  of
    exceptional public interest, under section 31(2B) of the  1981  Act,  I
    must refuse to grant relief. Mr Lourdes made no submissions in relation
    to section 31(2B) applying, but I nevertheless considered it. I do  not
    accept that there are such  reasons  of  exceptional  public  interest,
    where the applicant's  application  could  never  have  succeeded,  for
    reasons already set out.

37) In the circumstances, section 31(2A) of the 1981  applies  and  I  must
    refuse relief.

Costs

38) To the extent that the respondent's costs have already been ordered  as
    a result  of  my  previous  wasted  costs  order  against  JML  Diplock
    Solicitors, the respondent cannot recover their costs twice. I note the
    principles set out in the authority of M v London  Borough  of  Croydon
    [2012] EWCA Civ  595  and  order  that  the  applicant  shall  pay  the
    remainder of the respondent's reasonable costs, to be assessed, if  not
    agreed.  I do so for the following reasons.

39) Despite my conclusion of unlawfulness  on  one  narrow  aspect  of  the
    respondent's decisions, I have been mandated to refuse relief  and,  in
    that sense, the applicant has 'lost'. Even where the respondent did not
    communicate  the  principal  reasons  for  the  decisions   until   the
    Acknowledgment of Service, I regarded it as appropriate  to  award  the
    respondent her costs,  noting  that  the  applicant  is  professionally
    advised, and those advisors will, or ought to, have been aware  of  the
    provisions of paragraph 1B(iii)(1) of appendix C, as cross-referred  to
    by paragraphs (aa) and (j) of appendix E.

40) Mr Lourdes asserted that I should depart from the prima face  principle
    that a successful party can look to  the  unsuccessful  party  for  his
    costs.  Mr Lourdes limited his submission to one that there  should  be
    no award of costs, on the basis that this was a 'landmark'  case  which
    dealt with a novel  legal  point.   He  cites  no  authority  for  that
    proposition, which I do  not  accept,  i.e.  that  a  party  should  be
    protected in costs purely on the basis of a novel  legal  point.   Even
    had I concluded otherwise, the legal issues before me were  not  novel.
    I determined the issue simply by reading the passages from appendices A
    and C together, as the Rules expressly  require  and  assist,  in  that
    regard, by the use of cross-references, to which I refer in [39] above.



Decision

41) The application for judicial review is refused on grounds (1) and  (3).
    While ground (2) succeeds on the limited grounds set above, I refuse to
    order relief, pursuant to section 31(2A) of the Senior Courts Act 1981.


42) I order that the applicant pay the respondent's reasonable costs, to be
    assessed, if not agreed.




                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    20 February 2020



                                                                      UTIJR6






                                                                JR/2801/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice








             The Queen (on the application of Rohit Singh Mehta)


                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Having considered all documents  lodged  and  having  heard  Mr  L  Lourdes,
Counsel, instructed on behalf of the applicant  and  Mr  Z  Malik,  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department on behalf  of  the  respondent
at a hearing at Field House, London on 17 February 2020  and  upon  judgment
being handed down on 17 February 2020


It is ordered that


     1) The judicial review application is dismissed in accordance with the
        judgment attached.


     2) I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review  application  be
        dismissed.

        Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

     3) No application has been made seeking permission to  appeal  to  the
        Court of Appeal. I refuse permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
        Appeal for the same reasons that I have refused the  orders  sought
        for judicial review.






        Costs


     4) To the extent that they are not already the subject of  the  wasted
        costs order I made against JML Solicitors on 11 October  2019,  the
        applicant shall  pay  the  respondent's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
        assessed if not agreed.






                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    20 February 2020






      Applicant's solicitors:
      Respondent's solicitors:
      Home Office Ref:
      Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -------
       Notification of appeal rights


      A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review
      is a decision that disposes of proceedings.


       A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal  on
      a question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to
      the Upper Tribunal  for  permission,  at  the  hearing  at  which  the
      decision is given. If  no  application  is  made,  the  Tribunal  must
      nonetheless  consider  at  the  hearing  whether  to  give  or  refuse
      permission to appeal (rule 44(4B) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008).


      If  the  Tribunal  refuses  permission,  either  in  response  to   an
      application or by virtue of rule 44(4B), then  the  party  wishing  to
      appeal can apply for permission from the Court of Appeal itself.  This
      must be done by filing an applicant's notice with  the  Civil  Appeals
      Office of the  Court  of  Appeal  within  28  days  of  the  date  the
      Tribunal's decision on permission to appeal was sent (Civil  Procedure
      Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

