


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                      JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                               JR/ 2254/2019

                                                                 Field House
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                   Heard on: 3 February 2020


                                  THE QUEEN
                           (ON THE APPLICATION OF)
                                  WAQAR ALI
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   BEFORE

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr R Ahmed and Mr Z Raza, both of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Marks  &  Marks
Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the applicant.

Mr Z Malik, of Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,
appeared on behalf of the respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
JUDGE CRAIG:

 1. As will appear below, the issue which I now have to decide is a  narrow
    one. The interpretation of the rules on which  my  decision  turns  has
    only limited, if any, relevance for future cases as the rule  upon  the
    interpretation of which this decision turns has now been changed.

 2. The decision under challenge is a decision of the respondent made on 28
    January 2019, which was maintained on administrative review on 6  March
    2019.  By  this  decision,  the  respondent  refused  the   applicant's
    application for leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.
    This application will be referred to below as "the third  application".
    The sole ground of refusal was under paragraph 245DD(g) of  the  Rules,
    with reference to paragraph 39E, the basis of decision being  that  the
    applicant, who had been present without leave since  October  2016  was
    accordingly in breach of the  Immigration  Rules  as  at  the  date  of
    application.  The application was made under  the  points-based  system
    and it is common ground that had the application not been  refused  for
    this reason the applicant would have been  awarded  sufficient  points,
    that is the application would have been granted.

 3. The background facts are not in issue. The applicant is a  national  of
    Pakistan who was born on 17 February 1983. He entered the  UK  lawfully
    in January 2010 with  entry  clearance  as  a  student  and  leave  was
    extended in this capacity until 2 February 2012.

 4. Following an in-time application, on 8 March  2013  the  applicant  was
    granted further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study) Migrant  which
    leave was valid until 8 March 2015.

 5. While in the UK lawfully, on 27 February 2015 the applicant applied for
    leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  ("the  first
    application"). This application was refused  on  8  May  2015  but  the
    applicant was entitled to  an  in-country  right  of  appeal  which  he
    exercised. However, his appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal
    on 23 March 2016 and he was subsequently refused permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal both by the First-tier  Tribunal,  on  22  August
    2016 and then on renewal by the Upper  Tribunal  on  14  October  2016.
    Until the refusal of his application for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was rejected by the Upper Tribunal,  the  applicant  had
    continued to be present lawfully pursuant to the provisions of  Section
    3C of the Immigration Act 1971  ("3C  leave").  However,  again  it  is
    common ground that on the refusal of permission by the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 14 October 2016, the applicant was appeal rights exhausted and he no
    longer had 3C  leave.  Technically,  after  that  date,  the  applicant
    remained in the UK in breach of the immigration laws.

 6. On 9 November 2016, that is within 28  days  of  the  applicant  having
    become appeal rights exhausted in respect of the first application, the
    applicant applied again for leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant ("the second application"). This application was refused by the
    respondent on 4 January 2017 and  that  refusal  again  was  upheld  on
    administrative review on 18 February 2017.   There  is  some  confusion
    within the papers as to whether the date  of  decision  was  16  or  18
    February 2017, because the decision letter is dated  16  February  2017
    and not 18 February 2017.  However, it appears to be common ground that
    the decision was actually made on 18 February, this being the date  set
    cut in the respondent's reply to  the  Pre-Action  Protocol  Letter  in
    respect of these proceedings as  the  date  on  which  the  applicant's
    administrative review application regarding the second application  had
    been considered and the decision maintained,  it  being  stated  within
    brackets that that decision letter had been dated 16 February 2017.  In
    the initial  decision  letter  of  6  March  2019  refusing  the  third
    application, it is stated in terms  that  "it  is  accepted  that  your
    current application [discussed below] submitted on  4  March  2017  was
    made within fourteen days from your  last  refusal  dated  16  February
    2017".

 7. At no stage during the course of this application, either in writing or
    at the hearing before me, has the respondent attempted  to  argue  that
    the date of decision had in fact been the date  which  appears  on  the
    administrative review decision, 16 February 2017, rather than the  date
    asserted on behalf of the applicant, which is 18 February. This date is
    important, for the reasons which  will  be  apparent  below,  but  this
    decision is made on the understanding, as agreed between  the  parties,
    that the decision on administrative review upholding  the  respondent's
    decision refusing the second application, had been made on 18  February
    and not 16 February 2017.

 8. Thereafter, on 4 March 2017 (which is within fourteen days of the  date
    on which it is accepted that the respondent had upheld the  refusal  of
    the  second  application  on  administrative  review)   the   applicant
    submitted his third application, again being an application  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.  This  application  was
    refused by the respondent on 28 January  2019,  this  application  also
    being upheld on administrative review  on  6  March  2019.  It  is  the
    refusal of this third application  which  is  being  challenged  within
    these proceedings[pic]

 9. Although permission to bring these proceedings was  originally  refused
    on the papers  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Frances  on  18  June  2019,
    following the renewal of this application to an  oral  hearing,  having
    heard oral argument at a hearing on 10 September  2019,  permission  to
    bring this application was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Keith. Judge
    Keith's decision sets out the issues then being argued with clarity and
    it is helpful to repeat his reasons within this decision. Judge Keith's
    reasons were as follows:

         "(1) On 25 April 2019, the applicant issued this challenge  to  the
                respondent's decision on 28 January 2019  ("the  decision"),
                in which the respondent refused the applicant's  application
                for a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) visa, on the basis that  he  was
                an overstayer.

         (2)  The applicant is a Pakistani citizen, who was granted leave to
                remain as a post-study migrant from 8 March 2013 to 8  March
                2015. On 27 February 2015, he applied for to remain as  Tier
                1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant. This was refused  and  his  appeal
                was dismissed on 26 March 2016.  Permission  to  appeal  was
                refused and he became  appeal-rights  [pic]exhausted  on  14
                October 2016. The applicant's leave under Section 3C of  the
                Immigration Act 1971 ended on 14  October  2016.  While  his
                second application was made on 9 November  2016,  within  28
                days of the expiry of his Section 3C leave, this application
                was  refused  on  4   January   2017   and   maintained   on
                administrative review on 16  February  2017.  The  applicant
                made his  third  application  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
                Migrant on 4 March 2017, which the  respondent  rejected  in
                the Decision.

         (3)  In reaching her  decision,  the  respondent  referred  to  the
                applicant's immigration history and the  fact  that  his  3C
                leave had ended on 14 October  2016.  The  respondent  noted
                that the second application made on 9 November 2016 was  not
                rejected because of his overstaying, by virtue of  paragraph
                39E of the Immigration Rules,  under  which  an  application
                would not (then) be refused for overstaying when made within
                a 28 day "grace" period, but which did not operate to extend
                leave to remain under Section 3C. The consequence  was  that
                when the applicant made his third  application  on  4  March
                2017,  it  was  significantly  out-of-time.  The  respondent
                therefore rejected the application under paragraph  245DD(g)
                of the Immigration Rules. The "grace" period did not operate
                twice.

         (4)  In the permission application, the applicant asserts that  the
                respondent  arguably  erred  in   law   in   rejecting   the
                applicant's most recent application because of the period of
                overstaying when it had not been previously rejected in  the
                second  application.  In  addition,  the  rejection  of  the
                applicant's second application, because of the absence of  a
                company appointment report, amounted to an error of  law  in
                failing to apply evidential flexibility. In oral submissions
                before me, Mr Raza focussed  on  one  point  -  whether  the
                applicant could benefit from the provisions of paragraph 39E
                on the second occasion, even if "Section 3C leave" were  not
                extended.

         (5)  Ms Parsons submitted that paragraph 39E(2)(b)(ii) was clear on
                its face - where someone was only an overstayer for fourteen
                days,  they  could  seek  to  be  an  exception   from   the
                consequences of overstaying, which was not the case here.

         (6)  Mr Raza focussed on  the  fact  that  the  applicant's  second
                application  had  been  made  with  the   benefit   of   the
                predecessor provision to paragraph 39E, so that it was  "in-
                time" or within an exception for the  purpose  of  paragraph
                39E (2) He argued that it followed  from  the  existence  of
                paragraph 39E(2).  He  argued  that  it  followed  from  the
                existence of paragraph 39E(2)  that  the  second  period  of
                "grace" was possible.

         (7)  Neither representative was able to refer me to  any  authority
                on the point.  The  applicant's  application  had  not  been
                rejected on any other ground.

         (8)  I bear in mind the low threshold in relation to arguability of
                a permission application. There is an arguable error of  law
                in  the  respondent  refusing  to  treat   the   applicant's
                application as falling within an exception  under  paragraph
                39E on the second occasion, with the  consequence  that  his
                application was refused on that basis alone.

         (9)  Permission to proceed with the judicial  review  is  therefore
                granted."

The Hearing

10. In addition to the pleaded Grounds of Application and Detailed  Grounds
    of Defence, I was also  greatly  assisted  by  the  skeleton  arguments
    prepared on behalf of both parties,  which  set  out  their  respective
    cases concisely and with clarity. I am also  grateful  to  Counsel  for
    both parties for the clear way in which their arguments  were  advanced
    orally at the Hearing.

11. The subsidiary arguments referred to by Judge  Keith  in  his  decision
    granting permission to bring this application were not relied on within
    either the skeleton argument or the oral arguments advanced  on  behalf
    of the applicant and in light of the decision I make below,  I  do  not
    need to refer to them below. I will also not set  out  verbatim  within
    this judgment the arguments which were advanced, but I have had  regard
    when reaching my decision to  everything  which  was  said  during  the
    course of the Hearing and to all the  documents  contained  within  the
    file.

The relevant Rules

12. Paragraph 245DD(g) of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:-

         "(g) The applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
                laws  except  that,  where  paragraph  39E  of  these  Rules
                applies,  any  current  period  of   overstaying   will   be
                disregarded."

13. This wording applies to applications made on or after 24 November 2016,
    the Rules having been changed on 3 November 2016. Previously  the  Rule
    had read that "Any period of overstaying for a period  or  28  days  or
    less will be disregarded".

14. The accompanying explanatory memorandum to HC 667 (which  inserted  the
    change to the Rules) states as follows:

         "Changes to  reform  the  periods  within  which  applications  for
         further leave can be made by overstayers

         7.45 While applications for further leave to remain for many rules-
                  based applications are expected to be made in  time,  i.e.
                  before  any  existing  leave  expires,   any   period   of
                  overstaying for 28 days  or  less  is  not  a  ground  for
                  refusal as far as those applications are  concerned.  This
                  28 day period was originally brought in so that people who
                  had made an  innocent  mistake  were  not  penalised,  but
                  retaining it sends a message which  is  inconsistent  with
                  the need to ensure compliance with  the  United  Kingdom's
                  immigration laws.

         7.46 The 28-day period is therefore to be  abolished.  However,  an
                  out of time application will not be refused on  the  basis
                  that the applicant has overstayed where the  Secretary  of
                  State considers that there is a  good  reason  beyond  the
                  control of the applicant or their representative, given in
                  or with the application, why an in time application  could
                  not be made provided the application  is  made  within  14
                  days of the expiry of leave.

         7.47 Additionally, for those who have  been  present  on  3C  leave
                  (leave extended by Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971)
                  the 28-day period is to be reduced to  14  days  from  the
                  expiry of any leave extended by Section 3C.  Without  this
                  arrangement[pic] the abolition of the 28-day  period  will
                  mean that any further application made by persons in  this
                  position will be out of time.

         7.48 For those whose previous application was in-time  but  decided
                  before their leave expired, or was made out  of  time  but
                  permitted by virtue of the provision outlined in paragraph
                  7.46, the 28-day period will be reduced to within 14  days
                  of:

                  [pic]    The refusal of the previous application for leave

                  [pic]    The expiry of the time-limit for  making  an  in-
                      time application for administrative review or  appeal
                      (where applicable)[pic]

                  [pic]     Any  administrative  review  or   appeal   being
                      concluded, withdrawn or abandoned or lapsing.

         This is to ensure that  individuals  to  whom  these  circumstances
         apply also have 14 days to make a further application."

15. The new wording (with reference and explanation to what  would  now  be
    treated as an "in-time" application) accordingly apply to  applications
    made on or after 24 November 2016 which includes the third  application
    (the refusal of which is currently under challenge) but did  not  apply
    to the second application, which had been made on 9 November 2016, that
    is six days after the change had been inserted into the Rules, but some
    fifteen days before this change came into effect.

16. Paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules provides as follows:

         "Exceptions for overstayers

         39E. This paragraph applies where:

                (1)    the application  was  made  within  14  days  of  the
                    applicant's leave expiring and the  Secretary  of  State
                    considers that there was good reason beyond the  control
                    of the applicant or their representative, provided in or
                    with the application, why the application could  not  be
                    made in-time; or [my emphasis]

                (2)    The application was made:

                    (a)    following the refusal of a  previous  application
                        for leave which was made in-time; and

                    (b)    within 14 days of:

                        (i)    the refusal of the previous application  for
                               leave; or

                        (ii)   the expiry of any leave extended by  Section
                               3C of the Immigration Act 1971; or

                        (iii)  the expiry of the time-limit for making  any
                               in-time   application   for   administrative
                               review or appeal (where applicable); or

                        (iv)   any administrative review  or  appeal  being
                               concluded,   withdrawn   or   abandoned   or
                               lapsing."

The applicant's case

17. The applicant concedes that at the time he made the third  application,
    he had been in the UK without leave for about sixteen months or so.  He
    also  acknowledges  that  by  reason  of  paragraph  245DD(g)  of   the
    Immigration Rules, because he was in breach of the immigration laws  at
    the time he made his application (because he had been without leave for
    this period) unless paragraph 39E of the Rules applies, his application
    had  to  be  refused.  However,  this  was  the  only  reason  why  his
    application failed, and it is his case that paragraph 39E  does  apply,
    because the third application had been made within fourteen days of the
    administrative review of his second application having  been  concluded
    (see 39E(2)(b)(iv)), and that second  application  was  an  application
    which had been made in-time (such that paragraph 39E(2)(a) applied.

18. The reason he says that the second application  was  made  in-time  was
    because at the time that application was made,  which  was  before  the
    change in paragraph 245DD(g), referred  to  above,  came  into  effect,
    paragraph 245DD(g) simply provided that any period of overstaying for a
    period of 28 days or less would be disregarded by  the  respondent  for
    the purposes of  considering  the  application.   Accordingly,  it  was
    submitted, an application made within this specified time period would,
    on a common sense understanding of the language used within the  Rules,
    be "in-time".

19. The interpretation paragraph within the Rules  (paragraph  6)  did  not
    define what was  meant  by  "in-time"  as  used  within  39E(2)(a)  and
    although this issue had not been specifically considered by  any  Court
    of Record, nonetheless the applicant relied on the  guidance  given  by
    the previous President of this Tribunal, Mr Justice McCloskey, in R (on
    the application  of  Bhudia)  v  SSHD  [2016]  UKUT  00025,  where  the
    President had set out guidance on the construction of  the  Immigration
    Rules (referring to previous decisions of the Court of Appeal and House
    of Lords) as follows:

         "In Mahad (And Others) v Entry Clearance Officer  [2009]  UKSC  16,
         Lord Brown, collating and summarising the dicta  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal and recalling the words of Lord Hoffmann in Odelola  v  SSHD
         [2009] 1 WLR 1230, at [4], stated at [10][pic]

             "Essentially it comes  to  this.  The  Rules  are  not  to  be
             construed  with  all  the   strictness   applicable   to   the
             construction of a  statute  or  a  statutory  instrument  but,
             instead,  sensibly  according  to  the  natural  and  ordinary
             meaning  of  the  words  used,  recognising  that   they   are
             statements of the Secretary of State's  administrative  policy
             ...

             [The intention of the Secretary of State] is to  be  discerned
             objectively from the language used, not divined  by  reference
             to supposed policy considerations. Still less is the Secretary
             of  State's  intention  to  be  discovered  from   Immigration
             Directorate Instructions (IDIs) ... issued  intermittently  to
             guide immigration officers in their application of  the  Rules
             ... pursuant to paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the  1971  Act
             ..."

         Further guidance is provided by Iqbal (and Others)  v  SSHD  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 169, at [31],  which  highlighted  that  the  exercise  of
         rewriting any provision of the Rules under the guise  of  purposive
         construction is a forbidden one. It was further  stated,  at  [33],
         that the court:

             "... cannot and should not construe the Secretary  of  State's
             rules to  mean  something  different  from  what,  on  a  fair
             objective ruling, they actually say."

         Finally, we remind ourselves [of] the long established principle of
         statutory interpretation that  the  Court  will  lean  against  the
         construction giving  rise  to  an  absurdity  where  the  words  in
         question are capable of bearing the suggested alternative meaning."

20. The applicant's submission has the attraction of simplicity. The second
    application having been made within 28 days of his appeal rights having
    been exhausted (and his 3C leave having accordingly ceased) that period
    of overstaying was to be disregarded when the  second  application  was
    considered. Accordingly, the time in which that application had  to  be
    made, under the Rules, was within 28 days of when his leave had  ended.
    The application was accordingly "in-time" because that  was  the  time,
    provided for within the Rules, in which  that  application  had  to  be
    made.

21. The third application, with which this Tribunal is  now  concerned,  is
    covered by the provisions of paragraph 39E(2)  (within  that  paragraph
    and alternative to 39E(1)) because  It  had  been  made  following  the
    refusal of a previous application for leave which had been made in-time
    (paragraph 39E(2)(a)), being  the  second  application  and  the  third
    application had been made within fourteen days of the conclusion of the
    administrative review in respect of the second  application  (paragraph
    39E(b)(iv)). Accordingly, because paragraph 39E applied,  the  "current
    period of overstaying" (which in this case  is  the  period  since  his
    appeal rights in respect of the refusal of his  first  application  had
    been exhausted) was to be disregarded.

22. On behalf of the  respondent,  Mr  Malik  maintained  the  respondent's
    position, which was that applications for leave were meant to  be  made
    at a time when an applicant was in the country lawfully, and although a
    period of grace might be given in which the respondent would not refuse
    an application because it had not been made in-time, that was  not  the
    same as saying that the application had been in-time. What  was  to  be
    disregarded was the fact that the application had  not  been  made  in-
    time.

23. Mr Malik referred to the current position, where now it is  made  clear
    from the explanatory memorandum (which I have set out  above)  that  so
    far as applications made on or after 24  November  2016  are  concerned
    "applications are expected to be made in-time, i.e. before any existing
    leave expires". In other words, although a small period of overstaying,
    currently fourteen days, will be disregarded, the application is  still
    not made "in-time". Mr Malik relied on the decision  of  the  House  of
    Lords in Odelola (also referred to above) in which  it  had  been  held
    that the Rules to be applied by a Court or Tribunal are  the  Rules  as
    they are at  the  time  of  decision,  rather  than  when  an  original
    application was made.

24. The applicant's position with regard to what the Rules, as explained in
    the memorandum, currently provide is that these were not the  Rules  at
    the time the second application was made, and so one has to look at the
    position as it was then when considering  whether  or  not  the  second
    application had been made "in-time" and that if it had been, the  Rules
    as they currently are assist this applicant, because they provide  that
    "any" current period of overstaying will be  disregarded,  rather  than
    (as was the position at the time the second application was made)  only
    a period of overstaying for a period of 28 days or less.

Discussion

25. As I have indicated earlier, this is a very narrow point; it  turns  on
    whether or not the second application had been,  technically,  an  "in-
    time" application. I have to decide whether the applicant is correct in
    asserting that the natural meaning  of  a  provision  "disregarding"  a
    period of overstaying (at that time 28 days) when  considering  whether
    or not to grant an  application  for  leave  to  remain  is  that  that
    application does not have to be made until that period  of  overstaying
    has expired, and so  an  application  made  within  that  period  on  a
    sensible  construction  of  the  language  used,  is   "in-time".   The
    respondent's alternative submission is that what  was  provided  within
    the Rules was simply that the fact that the application  had  not  been
    made in-time was to be disregarded; that did not  have  the  effect  of
    making that application in-time. As I have already indicated,  whatever
    decision I make in this case will have  little  if  any  relevance  for
    future applications, because the  explanatory  memorandum  accompanying
    the Rule change makes it clear that the respondent's  present  position
    is that what is now meant by "in-time" is an application  made  "before
    any existing leave expires".

26. In my judgement, the House of Lords decision in Odelola does not assist
    in this case, regarding the construction of the words "in-time"  as  it
    relates to the second application, because it is made  clear  that  the
    Rule change is only to apply for  applications  made  on  or  after  24
    November  2016,  that  is  to  applications  made  after   the   second
    application. While  the  new  Rules  undoubtedly  apply  to  the  third
    application, it is necessary for this Tribunal to decide whether or not
    the second application, that is the application made  before  the  Rule
    change, had been made  in-time,  and  that  turns  on  what  the  Rules
    provided at that time.

27. While I understand the force of Mr Malik's submissions, which were well
    made and are certainly arguable, looking at the  language  used  within
    the Rules as they were at the time  the  second  application  had  been
    made, it was at that time simply provided that  a  period  of  28  days
    after the expiration of an applicant's leave would  be  disregarded  by
    the respondent when consideration was given to that application.  There
    is nothing in the Rules as they were  then  to  suggest  that  such  an
    application would not be "in-time". If at that date, Counsel  had  been
    asked to advise as to the time in which the application for  leave  had
    to be made, he or she would quite properly have  replied  that  it  was
    within 28 days of when that applicant's previous leave had expired.  In
    other words, in  my  judgement,  using  the  language  in  its  natural
    meaning, any application made within 28 days of the expiration of leave
    would, for the purposes of the application, be made "in-time".  An  in-
    time application, in my judgement, is an application  made  within  the
    time limit provided  within  the  Rules  far  that  application  to  be
    considered on its merits; that was within 28 days  of  leave  expiring,
    because that period of overstaying would be disregarded.

28. It follows that when the applicant made his  third  application,  on  4
    March 2017, this application was  made  within  fourteen  days  of  the
    conclusion of the administrative review of the refusal  of  his  second
    application, which was an application which had been made "in time" and
    which application had been concluded (as agreed by both parties) on  18
    February 2017. Accordingly, under the present Rules which apply to  the
    third application,  paragraph  245DD(g)  does  not  apply  because  his
    current period of overstaying will be disregarded under  paragraph  39E
    because 39E(b)(iv) applies, that is to say that the (third) application
    was made following the refusal of his previous (second) application for
    leave which had been made in time (being within the time allowed within
    the Rules for the making of that application) and the third application
    had  been  made  within  fourteen  days  of  the  conclusion   of   the
    administrative review in respect of that (second) application.

29. It follows that in my judgement the respondent's decision  refusing  to
    grant the applicant's third application was unlawful, and that decision
    must be quashed and I will so order. On the basis  of  the  decision  I
    have made, as the application would otherwise have been granted on  the
    merits, the only lawful decision which the respondent can now  make  is
    to grant the application. ~~~~0~~~~





                                        Upper Tribunal Ref:   JR/2254/2019




                             Upper Tribunal
            Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice

                             Notice of Decision


                                B E T W E E N


                                  THE QUEEN
                            On the Application of
                                  WAQAR ALI
                                                                   Applicant


                                     And


                           THE SECRETARY OF STATE
                           FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                    ORDER




                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Craig




           Having  considered  all  documents  lodged  and  following  oral
           submissions on 3 February 2020  by Mr R Ahmed  and  Mr  Z  Raza,
           both of Counsel, instructed by  Marks  &  Marks  Solicitors,  on
           behalf of the Applicant and Mr Z Malik of Counsel instructed  by
           the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent




           IT IS ORDERED THAT


           1. The Applicants claim for Judicial Review be granted.


           2. The Respondent's decisions of 28 January 2019, upheld by way
              of administrative review on 06 March 2019, refusing the
              Applicant's application for LTR as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)
              Migrant, are quashed.


           3. The Respondent shall remake the decision on the Applicant's
              application for LTR as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant in
              accordance with the Upper Tribunal's judgment.


           Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


           Permission is refused because an appeal would have no  realistic
           prospect of success




           COSTS


           The  Respondent  shall  pay  the  Applicant's  costs   of,   and
           associated with this claim for
           Judicial Review, to be subject to  detailed  assessment  if  not
           agreed;

         Reasons accompany this decision notice




                  Signed:


         [pic]

         Upper Tribunal Judge Craig

                        Dated: 10 July 2020



[pic]
Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 17 July 2020
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).



