
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                                JR/2952/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                             29 January 2019

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                   brooks
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Darryl Balroop, Counsel, instructed by Callistes Solicitors, appeared  on
behalf of the Applicant.
Mr Zane Malik instructed by the  Government  Legal  Department  appeared  on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE GLEESON :  The applicant has  been  granted  permission  for  judicial
review of  the  respondent's  decision  of  23  January  2018  refusing  her
indefinite leave to remain and granting 30 months discretionary leave.   The
applicant is a Jamaican citizen.

    2. The applicant came to the United Kingdom as a  visitor  in  December
       1989 and overstayed, using false identity documents in the  name  of
       Sarah Jane Lee.  Two children were born to her in December 1999  and
       December 2004.  On 14 May 2003, her deception having come to  light,
       she was convicted of false accounting, perjury and  facilitating  an
       overstayer, and was sentenced  to  13  months  imprisonment  with  a
       recommendation for deportation. Her sentence ended on 14 June 2004.

    3. On 14 May 2003,  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
       applicant to Jamaica in the  light  of  her  criminal  record.   The
       applicant appealed unsuccessfully and was appeal rights exhausted on
       24 February 2005.

    4. On 31 March 2005, the applicant made an  application  for  leave  to
       remain outside the  Immigration  Rules,  for  herself  and  her  two
       children.  The outcome of that application is not clear to  me,  but
       the applicant did not embark and remained in the United Kingdom.

    5. The applicant made an Article 8 ECHR application on 28 November 2011
       and was granted discretionary leave until 28 November  2014.   On  1
       June 2013, the applicant had another child.  On 14 October 2014, she
       applied for leave to remain but was  granted  further  discretionary
       leave to 29 January 2018.

    6. On 23 January 2018, although it was not 15 years since  the  end  of
       her sentence,  as  paragraph  322(1C)(ii)  requires,  the  applicant
       applied for indefinite leave to remain.  The respondent granted  her
       further  discretionary  leave  for  30  months  with  reference   to
       paragraph 276ADE(1) and exceptional circumstances. It  was  accepted
       that  but  for  her  criminal  history,  the   applicant   met   the
       requirements of paragraph D-LTRPT1.2 with reference to GEN3.2.

    7. That is the decision under challenge.

    8. A judicial review application was issued not promptly but within the
       3-month long-stop period,  on  24  April  2018.   The  core  of  the
       applicant's argument arises out  of  the  respondent's  2015  Asylum
       Policy Instruction  on  Discretionary  Leave  at  10.1  which  makes
       transitional provisions for applicants granted  discretionary  leave
       before 9 July 2012.

    9. The applicant argued that paragraph 322 of the Immigration Rules  HC
       395 (as amended) could not be used to deny her indefinite  leave  to
       remain; that she had a legitimate expectation that indefinite  leave
       to remain would be granted under the transitional provisions in  the
       respondent's  Asylum  Policy  Instruction  on  Discretionary   Leave
       published on 18 August  2015;  and/or  that  she  should  have  been
       granted discretionary leave for 36  months,  not  30  months.    The
       applicant seeks an order  requiring  the  respondent  to  grant  her
       indefinite leave to remain, or discretionary leave for 36 months.

Permission to seek judicial review

   10. On 22 October 2018 permission was granted on oral renewal  by  Upper
       Tribunal Judge Frances. It was the  appellant's  pleaded  case  that
       paragraph 322(1C) was inapplicable as all discretionary leave grants
       to this applicant had been made outside  the  Rules  and  under  the
       respondent's transitional policy.

   11. When granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge  Frances  did  so  on
       rationality grounds.  She considered that the decision was  arguably
       irrational and/or unlawful, noting that on 28  November  2011,  when
       granting discretionary leave, the respondent had not relied  on  the
       applicant's imprisonment for 13 months in April 2003.

   12. It was arguable that the policy  in  force  prior  to  9  July  2012
       remained applicable under the transitional arrangements and that the
       applicant continued to qualify for further leave to  remain  on  the
       same basis as her original grant of  discretionary  leave.   Further
       discretionary leave was granted on 29 January 2015, for  36  months,
       and Judge Frances considered it arguable that paragraph 322(1C)  was
       not applicable, notwithstanding the decision of the Court of  Appeal
       in Edgehill and another v Secretary of State for the Home Department
       [2014] EWCA Civ 402.

Applicant's case

   13. At the hearing, I heard oral submissions from  Mr  Balroop  for  the
       applicant against his very helpful skeleton argument.  Mr  Balroop's
       case is that the treatment of this applicant in terms  of  the  pre-
       July 2012 discretionary leave policy is outside the  'normal'  range
       and that she should therefore have been dealt with under  the  'old'
       policy until settlement,  not  under  the  current  version  of  the
       policy.   The wording of the earlier policy is more rigid  and  more
       helpful to the applicant, using 'they should grant' instead of 'will
       normally'.

   14. The  applicant's  circumstances  had  not  changed  since  her  last
       successful application  and  the  respondent's  departure  from  her
       earlier policy was  irrational  and  unlawful.   Under  the  earlier
       policy, the applicant was entitled to a grant of 3 years (36 months)
       not 30 months as the policies now provided.

   15. In his oral argument, Mr Balroop made the same points and said  that
       it would suffice for the Upper Tribunal to quash the  decision.   He
       accepted that if paragraph 322(1C) applied, the applicant could  not
       succeed.

Respondent's case

   16. The respondent in her  detailed  grounds  of  defence  relied  on  R
       (Alladin and Wadhwa) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
       [2014] EWCA Civ 1334 to the effect that  it  is  a  matter  for  the
       respondent what leave is to be granted  and  for  how  long;  on  TN
       (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2015]
       UKSC 40 as authority for the Upper  Tribunal  not  having  power  to
       direct the Secretary of State to grant indefinite leave  to  remain,
       arguing that by analogy, the Tribunal also does not  have  power  to
       direct the respondent to grant  a  longer  period  of  discretionary
       leave.

   17. The  respondent  argued  that  applying  paragraph  322(1C)  of  the
       Immigration Rules, the indefinite leave to  remain  application  was
       premature as  it  was  not  yet  15  years  since  the  end  of  the
       applicant's sentence.  That date would not be reached until 14  June
       2019.  Paragraph 322(1C) is mandatory.

   18. The respondent argued that 'will normally' allowed for  differential
       treatment in appropriate cases, such as those where there  had  been
       criminality.  The respondent had made no unambiguous representation,
       promise or assurance devoid of any other relevant qualification that
       the appellant would be granted indefinite leave to remain on accrual
       of 6 years' discretionary leave, despite her criminal sentence of 13
       months in 2003/4.

   19. The Secretary of State was entitled to change her  policy  when  she
       considered it to be in the public interest to do so,  and  paragraph
       322(1C) was such a change of policy.  As regards the length of leave
       given, the respondent relied on paragraph 276BE of the  Rules  which
       referred to the grant of limited leave to remain 'for a  period  not
       exceeding  30  months'  and  paragraph  D-LTRPT.1.2  had  the   same
       provision.  The grant of 30 months was lawful.

   20. The respondent submitted that there was no material public law error
       in her decision and that the Upper  Tribunal  should  not  interfere
       with her decision.

   21. Mr Malik in oral argument for the respondent noted that  there  were
       three issues: whether paragraph  322(1C)  applied;  irrespective  of
       that, whether the discretionary leave policy required the respondent
       to grant indefinite leave to remain; and in the alternative, whether
       the applicant should have been given 36 months' discretionary  leave
       rather than 30 months.

   22. Mr Malik relied for the proper approach  to  interpretation  of  the
       Rules on Mahad (previously referred to as  AM)  (Ethiopia)  v  Entry
       Clearance Officer [2009] UKSC 16 at [10]  in  the  opinion  of  Lord
       Brown JSC, with whom Lord Hope JSC, Lord Rodger  JSC,  Lord  Collins
       JSC and Lord Kerr JSC agreed:

      "10.  There is really no dispute about  the  proper  approach  to  the
      construction of  the  Rules.  As  Lord  Hoffmann  said  in  Odelola  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  1  WLR  1230,  1233
      (paragraph 4):

           "Like any other question of construction, this [whether  a  rule
           change applies to  all  undetermined  applications  or  only  to
           subsequent applications] depends upon the language of the  rule,
           construed against  the  relevant  background.  That  involves  a
           consideration of the  immigration  rules  as  a  whole  and  the
           function which they serve in the administration  of  immigration
           policy."

      That is entirely consistent with what Buxton LJ (collecting together a
      number of dicta from past cases concerning the status  of  the  rules)
      had said in Odelola in the Court of Appeal ([2009]  1  WLR  126)  and,
      indeed, with what Laws LJ said (before the House of Lords decision  in
      Odelola) in the present case. Essentially it comes to this. The  Rules
      are not to be construed with all  the  strictness  applicable  to  the
      construction of a statute or  a  statutory  instrument  but,  instead,
      sensibly according to the natural and ordinary meaning  of  the  words
      used, recognising that they are statements of the Secretary of State's
      administrative policy. The respondent's counsel readily accepted  that
      what she meant in her written case by the proposition "the question of
      interpretation is . . . what  the  Secretary  of  State  intended  his
      policy to be" was that the court's task is to discover from the  words
      used in the Rules what the Secretary of State must be  taken  to  have
      intended. After all, under section 3(2) of the Immigration  Act  1971,
      the Secretary of State has to lay the Rules  before  Parliament  which
      then has the opportunity to disapprove them. True, as  I  observed  in
      Odelola (para 33): "the  question  is  what  the  Secretary  of  State
      intended. The rules are her  rules."  But  that  intention  is  to  be
      discerned objectively from the language used, not divined by reference
      to supposed policy considerations. ..."

   23. Mr Malik argued that paragraph 322  was  not  limited  to  leave  to
       remain under the Rules.  If Parliament had intended to do  that,  as
       they had elsewhere in the Rules, they could have said so  expressly,
       but they did not do  so.   Paragraph  322  applied  to  applications
       within and outwith the Rules, including discretionary leave and  the
       application could not succeed because the applicant could  not  meet
       paragraph 322(1C)'s 15-year requirement. The respondent was required
       to deny indefinite leave to remain and Mr Malik asked me to  dismiss
       the application.

   24. In reply, Mr Balroop observed that there was no mention of Part 9 in
       the pre-2012 version of the policy and that the 2015 policy was  not
       applicable  to  the  applicant.   The  applicant's  criminality  had
       already been taken into account  in  the  previous  decisions.   The
       transitional provisions in the 2015 guidance were quite clear.   The
       Secretary of State had referred to Part 9 of the  Immigration  Rules
       both in the separate provisions for the  family  members  of  former
       Gurkha soldiers, and in the discretionary leave  policy.   The  2015
       transitional provisions do not indicate that the previous policy was
       superseded, and the correct view was that the earlier  policy  still
       applied.

   25. If there were any ambiguity  then  he  relied  on  Pokhriyal  v  The
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1568  at
       [42] in the judgment of Lord Justice Jackson, with whom Lord Justice
       Longmore and Lord Justice Vos agreed,:

      "42.  If there is ambiguity in Immigration Rules and the Secretary  of
      State publicly declares  that  he/she  will  adopt  the  more  lenient
      interpretation, then tribunals and courts may hold  the  Secretary  of
      State to that assurance. This is exemplified by the Court of  Appeal's
      decision in Adedoyin v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2010] EWCA Civ 773; [2011] 1 WLR 564. The relevant rule in that  case
      provided that leave to enter would be refused where the applicant  had
      made "false" representations. The relevant minister said in Parliament
      that  "false"  in  this  context  meant  not  merely  incorrect,   but
      deliberately false. There were other public statements  by  Government
      officials to similar effect. The Court of Appeal construed the rule in
      accordance with those assurances. Rix LJ gave  the  leading  judgment,
      with which Longmore and Jacob LJJ agreed. At paragraph 70 Rix LJ  said
      that in a situation of genuine ambiguity, it was legitimate to  derive
      assistance from the executive's formally published guidance, including
      IDI's."

   26. Mr Balroop submitted that the effect of that decision was that where
       there was ambiguity, the respondent  should  be  held  to  the  more
       lenient interpretation.  The revised policy was there because of the
       introduction of Appendix FM: the earlier policy  should  be  applied
       unless there was a good reason not to do so.

Analysis

   27. It is common ground  that  this  application  can  succeed  only  if
       paragraph 322(1C) does not apply to the  applicant's  circumstances.
       Paragraph 322(1C) of the Immigration Rules is in mandatory terms, as
       follows:

      "322.            In addition to the grounds for refusal  of  extension
      of stay set out in Parts 2-8 of these Rules, the following  provisions
      apply in relation to the  refusal  of  an  application  for  leave  to
      remain, variation of leave to enter or remain or,  where  appropriate,
      the curtailment of leave, ...

      Grounds on which leave to remain and variation of leave  to  enter  or
      remain in the United Kingdom are to be refused ...

      (1C) where  the  person  is  seeking  indefinite  leave  to  enter  or
      remain:...

       (ii) they have been convicted of an offence for which they have  been
      sentenced to imprisonment for at least  12  months  but  less  than  4
      years, unless a period of 15 years has passed since  the  end  of  the
      sentence; "

   28. The first point is that this is not a Pokhriyal situation: there  is
       no ambiguity in the Rules themselves.   Mr  Balroop  has  sought  to
       persuade the Upper Tribunal that there  is  ambiguity  in  the  2015
       guidance and its link to the pre-2012 guidance, but  that  does  not
       engage Pokhriyal, which is to the opposite effect, that where  there
       is doubt about the Rules, the respondent's published policy  may  be
       used to assist a Court or Tribunal in interpreting the Rules.

   29. Nor is Mr Balroop's reliance by way of analogy on the Gurkha  family
       policy relevant to  this  applicant.   The  purpose  of  the  Gurkha
       provisions in the Rules is entirely different from  the  purpose  of
       the criminality thresholds: the  first  aims  to  right  a  historic
       wrong,  whereas  the  criminality  thresholds,  in  terms,  seek  to
       reinforce Home Office policy to remove  criminals  from  the  United
       Kingdom.  The application of differential  thresholds  is  therefore
       unsurprising, and no useful analogy can be drawn.

   30. Mr Balroop in effect seeks to treat  the  pre-2012  version  of  the
       discretionary leave policy as binding on the 'active  review'  which
       is undertaken by the respondent's caseworkers  on  any  renewal.  He
       does so in reliance on the Section 10 Transitional  Arrangements  in
       the 2015 policy.  However, the transitional  provisions  cross-refer
       to the exclusion and criminality  provisions  at  3.6  of  the  2015
       policy:

      "3.6. Exclusion and criminality

      In all asylum and non-asylum  cases,  caseworkers  must  consider  the
      impact of an individual's criminal history before granting any  leave.
      ...Where an individual does  not  fall  within  the  restricted  leave
      policy (for example, where they are not excluded under Article  1F  or
      the criminal sentence was less than 2 years' imprisonment) caseworkers
      must consider the impact  of  any  criminal  history  before  granting
      discretionary leave, having regard as appropriate to Part  9  (General
      Grounds for Refusal) and, where an  individual  is  not  liability  to
      deportation, paragraph 353B(i) of the Immigration Rules.  Criminals or
      extremists should not normally benefit from leave on  a  discretionary
      basis under this policy because it is a Home Office priority to remove
      them from the United Kingdom.

      In  cases  where  there   are   exceptional   reasons   for   granting
      discretionary leave to someone with a criminal history  who  does  not
      fall within the restricted leave policy, the duration of leave  to  be
      granted, up to 30 months, will depend on the individual  circumstances
      of the case. ..."

   31. The  transitional  provisions  are  quite  clearly  intended  to  be
       governed by the criminality provisions:

      "Section 10: Transitional Arrangements

      All decisions made on Discretionary Leave on or after 9 July 2012 will
      be subject to the criteria set out in this guidance. ...Those  granted
      DL before 9 July 2012 may apply to extend that leave when their period
      of  DL  expires.   All   such   applications,   including   settlement
      applications under the transitional arrangements, must be made on  the
      appropriate application  form  no  more  than  28  days  before  their
      existing leave expires. Caseworkers must apply the following guidance:



      10.1 Applicants granted DL before 9 July 2012

      Those granted leave under the DL policy in force before  9  July  2012
      will normally continue to be dealt with under that policy  through  to
      settlement if they continue to qualify for further leave on  the  same
      basis as their original DL was granted (normally they will be eligible
      to apply for settlement after accruing  6  years'  continuous  DL  (or
      where appropriate a combination of DL and LOTR, see section 8 above)),
      unless at the date of decision they fall within the  restricted  leave
      policy.

      Caseworkers must consider whether the circumstances prevailing at  the
      time of the original grant of  leave  continue  at  the  date  of  the
      decision. If the circumstances remain the same,  the  individual  does
      not fall within  the  restricted  leave  policy  and  the  criminality
      thresholds do not apply, a further period of  3  years'  discretionary
      leave should normally be granted.  Caseworkers must  consider  whether
      there are any  circumstances  that  may  warrant  departure  from  the
      standard period of leave. ...

      Where an individual has accrued 10 years' lawful residence  under  the
      discretionary leave policy, and applies  for  settlement,  caseworkers
      must consider Part 9 of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  particular,
      paragraph 322(1C)."                    [Emphasis added]

   32. Mr Malik's question  relating  to  the  applicability  of  paragraph
       322(1C) must therefore be answered in the affirmative  and  that  is
       dispositive of this application.  The answer to the second  question
       is not relevant, but for the avoidance of doubt,  both  versions  of
       the policy have discretion at their heart and neither  requires  the
       respondent to grant indefinite leave to remain,  particularly  where
       there is criminality.  In answer to the  third  question,  the  2015
       policy in the Criminality section plainly states  that  the  maximum
       period which can be given is 30 months.  The  respondent  has  moved
       away from the 3 years which was available under the pre-2012 version
       of the policy and there is no sufficiently strong link  between  the
       2015 policy and the earlier policy such that it would  override  the
       provisions in the 2015 policy as  to  the  length  of  discretionary
       leave to be given.

   33. The natural meaning of the language, both in the Rules  and  in  the
       policy, does not amount  to  an  undertaking  or  promise  that  the
       applicant's criminal history will  not  be  taken  into  account  in
       considering the grant of indefinite leave to remain under  the  2015
       policy and its transitional provisions.  In fact,  the  contrary  is
       plainly the case.

   34. The respondent's decision on 23 January 2018 to grant  discretionary
       leave for 30 months and refuse to grant indefinite leave  to  remain
       was unarguably open to her, on the factual matrix as it then  stood.
       Circumstances have changed since then:   on  23  January  2018,  the
       applicant had not reached the 15-year post-sentence date.

   35. There has been a regrettable delay  in  the  handing  down  of  this
       judgment, but in consequence, the applicant is now in a position  to
       apply for settlement even having regard to paragraph 322(1C) because
       it is now more than 15 years since the end of  her  sentence  on  15
       June 2004.  That 15-year date was reached on 15 June 2019  and  this
       application has therefore become academic.

36. This judicial review application is dismissed.

   37. The appellant will pay the respondent's reasonable  costs  of  these
       proceedings, to be assessed if not agreed.

   38. There is no application for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
       Appeal.  I  have  considered  for  myself  whether  I  should  grant
       permission to  appeal.   I  refuse  permission,  because  I  am  not
       satisfied that there is any arguable error of law in the judgment  I
       have given today.   ~~~0~~~~


