

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/2200/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


               The Queen on the application of Muhammad Shoaib
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Mr  M  Biggs  and  Mr  A  Rehman  of  Counsel,
instructed by My Legal Limited Solicitors, on behalf of  the  Applicant  and
Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed by the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,  London  on  30
September 2019.

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

 1. The Applicant, a national of  Pakistan  born  on  25  March  1986,  was
    granted permission to apply for Judicial Review of the notice issued to
    him on 23 January 2019 stating that he has no leave to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and is liable to removal to Pakistan.


 2. The Applicant's immigration and application history is as follows.   He
    first arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 May 2011 with entry  clearance
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student valid to 30 October 2014.  Following  the
    revocation of the sponsor's licence on 20 February 2014, the Respondent
    made a decision on 5 March 2014 to curtail  the  Appellant's  leave  to
    remain to expire on 4 May 2014.


 3. So far as relevant, that decision stated as follows:


    "CURTAILMENT OF LEAVE


    ...


    You were granted leave to enter as  a  Tier  4  General  Student  until
    expiry of 30 October 2014 in order to undertake a course  of  study  at
    International School of Business Studies.


    On 20 February 2013 the sponsor licence  for  International  School  of
    Business Studies was revoked.


    Home Office records have been checked and there is no evidence you have
    made an application to change your sponsor or made a fresh  application
    for entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom in any capacity.


    It is not considered that the circumstances of your case are such  that
    discretion should be exercised in your favour.  The Secretary of  State
    therefore decided to curtail leave to enter  or  remain  as  a  Tier  4
    Migrant so as to expire on 04 May 2014.


    Your leave  has  been  curtailed  under  paragraph  323A(b)(i)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


    Before your current leave to enter or remain expires  you  must  either
    leave the United Kingdom or submit a fresh  application  for  leave  to
    remain.


    ...


    RIGHT OF APPEAL


    You are not entitled to  appeal  this  decision.   Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 does not provide  a  right
    of appeal when Applicant still has leave to  enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom and so is entitled to stay here.


    You are not required to leave the United Kingdom as a  result  of  this
    decision.  You still have leave to enter or remain where  your  current
    conditions continue to apply until 04 May 2014.  Please ensure that you
    understand the conditions of your stay.


    Although you are not required to leave the UK at this time  your  leave
    to enter or remain in the UK is due to expire on 04 May 2014.  You need
    to make arrangements to plan your departure before your leave  expires.
    If you intend to remain in the UK after this time  you  should  make  a
    further application for leave before your current leave expires. ..."


 4. It is not in dispute between the parties that  that  decision  was  not
    physically served on the Appellant when it was made, but at that  time,
    the Respondent's position was that the decision was deemed to have been
    served on the Applicant under Article 8ZA(4) of the Immigration  (Leave
    to Enter and Remain) Order 2000.


 5. On 2 June 2014, the Applicant was encountered, detained and served with
    removal notices; his removal subsequently being  stayed  following  the
    issue of an application for Judicial Review.  On  the  same  date,  the
    Applicant was handed a copy of the decision dated 5 March 2014.


 6. On 18 June 2014, the  Applicant  issued  an  application  for  Judicial
    Review to challenge the deemed service of the decision  dated  5  March
    2014, resulting in the decision of R (Shoaib) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2015] EWHC 2010 (Admin).


 7. In this previous application for Judicial Review, the following matters
    were challenged.  First, the decision to remove the Applicant  dated  2
    June 2014 pursuant to section 10(1)(a) or (b) of  the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999.  Secondly, the removal directions dated 11 June  2014.
    Thirdly, the lawfulness of the Applicant's detention from 2  June  2014
    to 22  August  2014.   Finally,  the  lawfulness  of  the  Respondent's
    decision to serve a notice of curtailment of his leave to remain  dated
    5 March 2014, by hand on 2 June 2014.   The  Applicant's  position  was
    that if the decision to remove dated 2 June 2014 was unlawful, then the
    remaining decisions were also vitiated by material errors of law.


 8. At the  substantive  hearing  of  the  previous  Judicial  Review,  the
    following two grounds of claim were relied upon:


    1) The Defendant failed to serve notice on the Claimant of the decision
       made on 5 March 2014 to curtail his leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  4
       migrant, and was not entitled to rely upon Article  8ZA(4)   of  the
       Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) Order 2000  as  inserted  by
       the Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) (Amendment) Order  2013,
       which provides that notice shall be deemed to have been given.
    2) In the absence of proper notice of the decision  to  curtail  leave,
       the Defendant's decision to detain the Claimant on the 2  June  2014
       was unlawful.

 9. Judgement was handed down by Neil Cameroon QC, sitting as a Deputy High
    Court Judge on 13 July 2015,  granting  the  application  for  Judicial
    Review.  For present purposes the following paragraphs are relevant:

    "28. Mr Harland accepted on behalf of the Defendant that if she was not
    entitled to rely upon the deeming provision in Article  8ZA(4)  of  the
    2000 Order, the decision made under section 10 of the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999 ... that  the  Claimant  be  removed  from  the  United
    Kingdom was unlawful, and therefore his detention pursuant to paragraph
    16(2) of schedule 2 to the 1971 Act was unlawful.


    29. Mr Biggs submitted that the Claimant's detention was unlawful as no
    effective notice had  been  given  curtailing  leave.   Mr  Biggs  also
    submitted that the service of the Decision Notice on  the  Claimant  at
    the time of his detention on 2 June 2014  was  ineffective  as  it  was
    served  after  the  date  on  which  it  was  said  to   take   effect,
    alternatively if it took effect immediately, the consequence  would  be
    that the Claimant's leave to remain would be extended by section 3D  of
    the 1971 Act, as an appeal could be bought under section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


    30.  Given Mr Harland's concession it is not necessary for me to make a
    ruling on the submissions made by Mr Biggs in relation to the effect of
    section 3D of the 1971 Act.  The central matter in  issue  between  the
    Claimant at the Defendant is whether the Defendant was entitled to rely
    on the deeming provisions of Article 8ZA(4) of the 2000 Order."


10. In conclusion, it was found that the Defendant was not entitled to rely
    upon the provisions of  Article  8ZA(4)  of  the  2000  Order,  nor  to
    conclude that it was not possible to give notice  to  the  Claimant  in
    accordance with paragraph (2) of the  same.   For  these  reasons,  the
    first ground of challenge succeeded and as a result the  second  ground
    also succeeded.  The resulting Order included that the decision dated 2
    June 2014 to remove the Applicant from the United Kingdom  pursuant  to
    section 10(1) of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  was  quashed  and
    the Applicant's detention from 2  June  2014  to  22  August  2014  was
    unlawful.  The Order did not contain any reference to  the  curtailment
    decision dated 5 March 2014, handed to the Applicant on  2  June  2014,
    and no remedy was granted in relation to it.


11.  On  23  July  2014,  whilst  in  detention  and  whilst  the  previous
    application for Judicial Review was pending, the Applicant made a human
    rights claim based on his right to respect  for  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom under Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights.  The claim was made on the basis  of  the  Applicant's  claimed
    relationship with a Hungarian national and his private life established
    in the United Kingdom.


12. The Respondent refused and certified the  claim  as  clearly  unfounded
    pursuant to section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002 (the "2002 Act") on 4 August 2014.  First, there was  no  evidence
    that the Applicant was in a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  as
    claimed.  Secondly, the Applicant did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules because he had not  lived  in
    the United Kingdom  for  long  enough  and  there  were  no  particular
    obstacles to him returning  to  Pakistan.   The  Respondent  considered
    whether there were any compassionate  or  compelling  circumstances  to
    warrant a grant of leave to remain outside of the Immigration Rules but
    none were found.  The Applicant has not challenged the decision dated 4
    August 2014.


13. On 10 October  2018,  the  Applicant's  representatives  wrote  to  the
    Respondent, requesting a period of leave to remain for 60  days  within
    which to find a sponsor.  The Respondent's reply on 7 December 2018 was
    to the effect that the Applicant was an overstayer and  would  need  to
    make an application for  leave  to  remain  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  A pre-action protocol letter was sent on 4 January 2019.


14. On 23 January 2019, the Respondent notified the Applicant that  he  had
    no leave to remain in the United Kingdom (his leave  to  remain  having
    ended on 30 October 2014) and was liable to removal to  Pakistan.   The
    Applicant was served with a notice stating that he would not be removed
    for the first seven  calendar  days  after  he  receives  this  notice,
    following which he could be removed for  up  to  three  months  without
    further notice.  The Applicant was  warned  that  he  should  tell  the
    Respondent of any reasons why he should  be  allowed  to  stay  in  the
    United Kingdom as soon  as  possible,  if  not  there  was  a  risk  of
    certification of his claim under section 96 of the 2002  Act.   He  was
    similarly warned that he should identify any reasons why he should  not
    be expected to appeal any human rights refusal after he  had  left  the
    United Kingdom for the purposes of section 94B of the 2002 Act.


15. Also on 23 January 2019, the Applicant was served with a  statement  of
    additional grounds under section 120 of the 2002 Act, inviting  him  to
    set out any reasons why he should be allowed  to  stay  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  As at the date of the substantive oral hearing, the Applicant
    had not substantively responded to this notice, or  otherwise  set  out
    any basis for stay in the United Kingdom outside of the matters  relied
    upon directly in this application for Judicial Review.


16. The present application for Judicial Review is bought on the  following
    three grounds.  First, that the Respondent could not lawfully issue any
    notice of liability to removal to the Applicant because he is  residing
    lawfully in the United Kingdom with continuing leave  to  remain  under
    section 3D of the Immigration Act 1971.  Secondly, that the Applicant's
    removal  from  the  United  Kingdom   would   be   a   disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect  for  private  and  family  life
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   Finally,
    that  the  Applicant's  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  would   be
    substantively unfair.


Applicant's submissions

17. The Applicant's claim on the first ground of challenge is that  he  had
    continuing leave to remain pursuant to section 3D  of  the  Immigration
    Act 1971, such that no notice of liability to removal could lawfully be
    served by the Respondent.


18. Section 3D of the Immigration Act 1971 (the  "1971  Act")  provides  as
    follows:

    "(1) This section applies if a person's leave to enter or remain in the
    United Kingdom -
          a) is varied with the result that he has no  leave  to  enter  or
             remain in the United Kingdom, or
          b) is revoked.
      (2) The person's leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during
      any period when -
          a)  an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
             and Asylum Act 2002 could be bought, while the  person  is  in
             the  United  Kingdom,  against  the   variational   revocation
             (ignoring any possibility  of  an  appeal  out  of  time  with
             permission),
          b)  an  appeal  under  that  section  against   the   variational
             revocation, brought while  the  appellant  is  in  the  United
             Kingdom, is pending (within the meaning of  section  104  that
             Act), or
          c) and administrative review of the variation or revocation -
              i) could be sought,
             ii) is pending.


19. The basis of  the  submission  is  that  the  decision  curtailing  the
    Applicant's leave to remain dated 5 March 2014 was only  legally  valid
    on 2 June 2014 when the Applicant was handed  a  copy  of  it  and  had
    actual knowledge of the decision and could only  take  effect  on  that
    date such as to end the Applicant's leave immediately.   By  virtue  of
    the transitional provisions for decisions made before 6 April  2015[1],
    the rights of appeal  in  Part  V  of  the  2002  Act  were  preserved,
    specifically giving this Applicant a statutory right  of  appeal  under
    section 82(2)(e) of the same, which included within the  definition  of
    "immigration decision", variation of  a  person's  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom if when the  variation  takes  effect  the
    person has no leave to enter or remain.


20. The Applicant's case is that the  decision  to  curtail  his  leave  to
    remain took effect retrospectively, as the decision dated 5 March  2014
    was for the Applicant's leave to remain to be varied to end  on  4  May
    2014, prior to the date on which the decision was validly  served.   It
    was said that the practical effect was therefore that  the  Applicant's
    leave was curtailed immediately on 2  June  2014  once  notice  of  the
    decision was given.  This was therefore an  appealable  decision  under
    section 82(2)(e) of the  2002  Act  because  when  the  variation  took
    effect, the Applicant had no leave to remain.


21. Mr Biggs submitted that there  was  no  restriction  on  the  power  to
    curtail leave to remain such that it could only be prospective.  To the
    contrary, the Respondent enjoyed a broad discretion to vary  or  revoke
    leave to remain in accordance with sections 3A, 3B and 4(1) of the 1971
    Act and the order making powers there under; with  reliance  placed  on
    paragraph 44 of the Supreme Court's decision in  R  (Munir  &  Anor)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] UKSC 32.


22. In any event, Mr Biggs  stated  that  the  statutory  scheme  in  place
    provided adequate protection  for  individuals  against  any  prejudice
    caused by the retrospective effect of curtailment of leave  to  remain,
    primarily through the extension of a person's leave to remain  pursuant
    to section 3D of the 1971 Act and a statutory  right  of  appeal.   The
    fact that a retrospective decision to curtail leave to remain would  be
    draconian does not mean that the Respondent has no power to make such a
    decision, but rather that the  consequences  and  impact  of  this  are
    considered and a person is protected by public law  and  the  statutory
    scheme in place.


23. It is the Applicant's case that the decision of 5 March  2014  must  be
    given some effect once validly served in accordance with  the  doctrine
    of regularity and the effect it should be given, in accordance with the
    primary intention of the decision, is to curtail the Applicant's  leave
    to remain, or at least to curtail his leave  to  remain  by  a  certain
    date.   Mr  Biggs  accepted  that  it  could  also  be  said  that  the
    Respondent's intention was to give the Applicant 60 days' notice of the
    curtailment of his leave to  remain,  but  this  was  not  the  primary
    intention and as a secondary matter was not sufficient  to  render  the
    curtailment a nullity in its entirety.


24. The final part of the submission on the first ground  of  challenge  is
    that leave to remain continues to be extended under section 3D  of  the
    1971 Act and time has not yet started to run for the Applicant to bring
    an appeal because he has not yet been served with  a  valid  notice  of
    appeal in relation to the decision of 5 March 2014.  Although  accepted
    that the Applicant could in any event waive the requirement to be given
    a valid notice of appeal, he is not required to do so and  is  entitled
    to continue to rely on the absence of a legally valid notice of  appeal
    to extend his  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  potentially
    indefinitely.  Mr Biggs submitted that the Applicant's extended  period
    of inaction does not alter the legal position by  which  his  leave  to
    remain has been extended.  In any event, it has always been open to the
    Respondent to serve a notice of a right of appeal on the Applicant.


25. The second and third grounds of challenge were taken together  on  half
    of the Applicant  and  in  the  alternative  to  the  first  ground  of
    challenge.  In essence, Mr Biggs submitted that  given  the  length  of
    time the Applicant has spent in the United Kingdom since 2011,  he  has
    inevitably established private life that would engage Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights and that the Respondent was under a
    duty to carefully consider this prior to removal and in particular,  to
    take into account the consequences for the Applicant of the  illegality
    by the Respondent in 2015, established in the previous application  for
    Judicial Review.  It was submitted that the Respondent is under a  duty
    to take appropriate steps to unwind the historic  injustice  caused  to
    the Applicant before any steps to remove him are taken.  The  Court  of
    Appeal's decisions in Ahsan and Ors v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 (at paragraph 86 to  88  and  120)  and
    Balajigari and Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]
    EWCA Civ 673 (at paragraph 80 and 83-91) were specifically relied upon.


26. Further, the Respondent was required to  acknowledge  and  address  the
    failure to provide the Applicant with a 60 day period in which to  find
    a new sponsor, which caused him prejudice,  before  seeking  to  remove
    him.  The prejudice was said to be the Applicant being deprived of  the
    opportunity to find an alternative sponsor.  It is submitted  that  the
    Respondent has not taken  into  account  or  considered  any  of  these
    factors.


27. In oral submissions, Mr Biggs did not advocate any particular  disposal
    or course of action which the Respondent should adopt  to  resolve  the
    historic injustice the Applicant  claims,  merely  that  these  matters
    should have been considered prior  to  removal  action  and  that  this
    encompassed a procedural obligation under Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights as well as a  substantive  aspect.   It  was
    acknowledged that the Applicant has not put forward any evidence of his
    private (or indeed family) life in the United  Kingdom,  but  Mr  Biggs
    suggested that the letter from  the  Applicant's  solicitors  dated  10
    October 2018 amounted to a human rights claim which would  need  to  be
    determined in any event.


28. I asked Mr Biggs whether the Applicant was inviting the Upper  Tribunal
    to determine the Applicant's substantive claim that his  removal  would
    breach his right to respect for private and family life under Article 8
    of the European Convention on Human  Rights,  or  only  the  procedural
    aspects more specifically relied upon  in  oral  submissions.   It  was
    accepted that it could be for the Upper Tribunal to make the assessment
    in this case, but in the first instance it was submitted that it should
    be for the  Respondent  to  decide  the  appropriate  redress  for  the
    historic injustice in this case.  It  was  not  accepted  that  in  the
    absence of any evidence at all from the Applicant as to the  nature  or
    quality of his private and or/family life in the United Kingdom, such a
    claim would  be  substantively  unable  to  succeed  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal or the Respondent.


29. In relation to the third ground of challenge, Mr  Biggs  accepted  that
    there is no concept of a ground of substantive unfairness  in  Judicial
    Review proceedings following the Supreme Court's decision in R (on  the
    application of) Gallaher Group Ltd & Ors v The Competition and  Markets
    Authority [2018] UKSC 25, nor was there any claim made as to procedural
    unfairness.

Respondent's submissions

30.  The  Respondent's  position  is  that  the  decision  to  curtail  the
    Applicant's leave to remain dated 5 March 2014 was not effective in law
    because, as held by the  High  Court  in  a  previous  application  for
    Judicial Review, there was no effective service of it.  The Appellant's
    leave to remain therefore continued and  expired  on  30  October  2014
    pursuant to his last grant of leave to remain.  There were four  points
    in response to the Applicant's construction  to  the  contrary  of  the
    effect of the decision dated 5 March 2014.


31. First, Mr Malik submitted that the argument  now  relied  upon  by  the
    Applicant is directly contrary to the primary argument he made  in  his
    previous application for Judicial Review, that  the  decision  dated  5
    March 2014 was ineffective as it was served after the date on which  it
    was said to take effect.  It was  submitted  that  the  fact  that  the
    decision was handed to the Applicant on 2 June 2014 was too late for it
    to have any legal effect (once found that it did not  comply  with  the
    deemed service provisions) because this was after  the  date  on  which
    curtailment would have taken effect and it is not possible for leave to
    be curtailed retrospectively.


32. Secondly, it cannot be said that the primary or only intention  of  the
    Respondent was to curtail the Applicant's  leave  to  remain.   It  was
    never intended that the Applicant's leave to remain would be  curtailed
    with immediate effect, it was an integral part of the decision that the
    Applicant  would  have  a  further  60  days  leave  to  remain  before
    curtailment.  This is entirely consistent with the Respondent's  policy
    to give such a period of time before curtailment takes  effect  and  in
    accordance with the findings in Patel (revocation of sponsor licence  -
    fairness) India [2011] UKUT 211  (IAC).   On  this  basis  and  in  the
    alternative, the earliest that effect could  have  been  given  to  the
    notice of curtailment  if  valid  at  all,  would  be  to  curtail  the
    Applicant leave to remain to end on 1 August 2014, i.e. 60  days  after
    service.


33. Thirdly, even if, contrary to the Respondent's position, section 3D  of
    the 1971 Act benefited  the  Applicant  from  2  June  2014,  Mr  Malik
    admitted that it would be absurd to suggest that the Applicant's  leave
    to remain had been extended for an indefinite period and  continued  to
    the date of the oral hearing and beyond, some five years later.  On the
    Applicant's case, he could simply continue  to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom indefinitely because time has not yet  started  to  run  on  an
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision.  This would  be
    contrary to the statutory scheme in sections 3C and 3D of the 1971  Act
    which seek to prohibit indefinite extensions of leave to remain.


34. Mr Malik submitted  that  the  words  "could  be  brought"  in  section
    3D(2)(a) of the 1971 Act, does not exclude  a  person  who  knows  that
    there is a right of appeal, but decides not to appeal so as to  prolong
    his residence in the United Kingdom  for  an  indefinite  period.   The
    Applicant could have appealed the curtailment decision at any  time  on
    or after 2 June 2014.


35. Fourthly, the mere fact that the Respondent gave the Applicant  a  copy
    of the decision dated 5 March 2014 on 2 June 2014 did not and could not
    change the character of the decision to become  one  to  curtail  leave
    with immediate effect and therefore make it an appealable decision.   A
    curtailment decision cannot be made retrospectively given  the  extreme
    consequences for an individual.


36. Finally in  relation  to  the  first  ground  of  challenge,  Mr  Malik
    suggested that it would be necessary to look  at  whether  the  outcome
    would be highly likely to be the same, whether or not a valid notice of
    appeal was given when the decision was handed to  the  Applicant  on  2
    June 2014.  He submitted that there was nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    Appellant would have pursued an appeal at that time, nor  that  he  had
    any prospect of success on appeal either.  The Applicant has never  put
    forward any basis upon which he  could  or  would  have  challenge  the
    substance of the curtailment decision and he has never  challenged  the
    refusal and certification of his human rights claim in 2014.  In  these
    circumstances, it was submitted that there was  no  proper  basis  upon
    which an Article 8 claim by the Appellant could have succeeded in 2014,
    nor in the absence of any evidence at all from  the  Applicant  to  the
    Respondent or before the Upper Tribunal, could it succeed now.


37. In relation to the second and third  grounds  of  challenge,  Mr  Malik
    highlighted that the Applicant has  not  put  forward  any  substantive
    Article 8 claim at all, either to the Respondent in response to the one-
    stop  notice  given  to  him,  or  otherwise  in  the  course  of  this
    application for Judicial Review.  He has not, other than  the  argument
    pursued in ground one, put forward any substantive basis upon which  he
    should be granted leave to remain in the United Kingdom, despite  being
    given the opportunity to do so and being issued with a one stop notice.
     The letters from the Applicant's legal representatives at the  end  of
    2018 and beginning of 2019, do not raise any of the  Article  8  claim,
    nor any of the  historic  injustice  points  now  relied  upon  by  the
    Applicant.


38. The Applicant's belated request on 10 October 2018 for the issue  of  a
    60 day letter for  him  to  find  a  new  sponsor,  was  misplaced,  as
    confirmed by the Court of Appeal in R (on the application  of  Raza)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 36,  such  a
    letter was only available to those who  had  leave  to  remain  at  the
    relevant time, which the Applicant did not.  It  was  perfectly  proper
    for the Respondent to reply to this letter inviting  the  Applicant  to
    make an application for leave to remain or apply to the one-stop notice
    given to him.


39. Mr Malik submitted that there was no unfairness  to  the  Applicant  in
    this case, no historic injustice given that there has  never  been  any
    challenge to the substance of the curtailment decision,  no  breach  of
    any procedural obligations  and  in  any  event  the  outcome  for  the
    Applicant is inevitable in circumstances where there is no evidence  at
    all from him as to private and/or family life actually  established  in
    the United Kingdom.  For these reasons it would not be appropriate  for
    relief to be granted in this application for  Judicial  Review  in  any
    event.


40. In reply, Mr Biggs submitted that if  the  Applicant  succeeds  on  the
    first ground of challenge, relief cannot be denied on  the  basis  that
    the outcome would be the same.  If the application is granted  on  this
    basis it would be material as it would mean that the Applicant  is  not
    liable to removal from the United Kingdom.  Further  it  was  submitted
    that any appeal would not inevitably fail because  of  the  much  wider
    rights of appeal that would  still  apply  to  the  Applicant,  to  the
    contrary, the appeal would be bound to succeed as the decision would be
    contrary to the findings in Patel and the Respondent's own guidance  to
    give a period of 60 days' notice prior to curtailment.


Discussion

Ground 1

41. The key issue in the first ground of challenge is what is  the  effect,
    if any, of the decision to  curtail  leave  the  Applicant's  leave  to
    remain dated 5 March 2014?  It is somewhat unfortunate that this  issue
    was raised in the previous application for  Judicial  Review,  but  not
    determined,  even  though  this  decision  was,  at  least   initially,
    specifically challenged as part of those proceedings with the arguments
    now relied upon by the Applicant raised, at least in  the  alternative,
    in those proceedings.


42. There is no dispute between the parties that, following the findings in
    a previous application for Judicial Review, the decision dated 5  March
    2014 to curtail the Applicant's leave to remain so as to  expire  on  4
    May 2014, was not validly served at the time and was not  effective  on
    or after 5 March 2014, up to the point at which the Applicant leave  to
    remain was to expire.  The parties differ as to whether  the  Applicant
    being handed a copy of  the  decision  on  2  June  2014  gave  it  any
    subsequent legal effect, and if so, what effect.


43. The Respondent's primary position  is  that  service  of  a  notice  of
    curtailment after the  date  upon  which  it  was  to  have  effect  is
    ineffective, such that there was  no  valid  decision  to  curtail  the
    Applicant's leave to remain, such that it expired on 30 October 2014 in
    accordance with the previous grant of leave to remain.  A  decision  to
    curtail leave to remain cannot be taken retrospectively.


44. To the contrary, the Applicant's position is that a decision to curtail
    leave to remain can be taken retrospectively, however it  can  only  be
    legally effective once the decision  is  served,  at  which  point  the
    primary intention of the decision, to curtail leave to  remain,  should
    be given immediate effect.


45. First, although as the Supreme Court confirmed in Munir, the Respondent
    has a broad power to grant, vary or refuse leave to remain, that cannot
    be read as including a power to take action retrospectively.  The issue
    has in any event being  directly  addressed  in  NM  (No  retrospective
    cancellation of leave) Zimbabwe [2007] UKAIT 00002, which confirms that
    leave which has been granted and is current may be curtailed, but  only
    with prospective effect.  This is entirely in  accordance  with  normal
    public law principles against retrospective action, which are  all  the
    more important given the severe consequences for a person of being left
    without any leave to remain in the United Kingdom.  Although  Mr  Biggs
    submitted  that  the  statutory  scheme  provided  adequate  protection
    against such adverse consequences, that submission only holds good  for
    the time at which the decision under challenge was made  and  would  no
    longer apply given the changes to appeal rights brought  about  by  the
    amendments to Part V of the 2002 Act in 2014.  As a matter  of  general
    principle, the previous existence of a right of appeal on the  specific
    facts of this case does not support the submission that a  decision  to
    curtail leave to remain can be taken retrospectively.


46.  Secondly,  even  if  the  decision  dated  5  March   2014   was   not
    retrospectively valid when handed to the Applicant on 2 June  2014,  on
    the Applicant's case, it was in any event prospectively valid from  the
    date of actual service  to  curtail  leave  to  remain  with  immediate
    effect.  However, I do not accept that it is possible to  separate  out
    from the Respondent's decision dated 5 March 2014  a  distinct  primary
    intention to curtail leave to remain which  can  and  should  be  given
    effect in isolation from a secondary intention  to  give  a  period  of
    notice for a future date for curtailment.  A decision to curtail  leave
    to remain  with  immediate  effect  is  of  a  fundamentally  different
    character to a decision to curtail leave to remain on  a  future  date.
    The latter includes a period of notice to the individual to  get  their
    affairs in order, either by making a further application for  leave  to
    remain or making arrangements to leave the United Kingdom  voluntarily,
    whereas  the  former   places   immediate   and   significant   adverse
    consequences upon an individual.  As is highlighted by  the  nature  of
    the arguments in this application for Judicial Review, there  was  also
    at the time of decision a fundamental  difference  in  consequences  in
    that the former gave rise to a statutory right of  appeal  whereas  the
    latter did not.


47. Further, the circumstances of the curtailment decision in  relation  to
    this Applicant relate to what was at the time a common scenario  of  an
    individual who had leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  student  but  whose
    sponsor had lost their licence, through no fault of the individual.  In
    such  cases,  in  accordance  with  the  decision  in  Patel  and   the
    Respondent's own guidance, as  a  matter  of  procedural  fairness,  an
    individual was usually  given  a  period  of  60  days'  notice  before
    curtailment of leave to remain took effect,  within  which  they  could
    seek a new sponsor to continue their studies, or  otherwise  put  their
    affairs in order.


48. In this context, it cannot be inferred or deduced that the Respondent's
    primary intention was only to curtail the Applicant's leave to  remain,
    as to do so would be contrary to her own policy and the requirements of
    procedural fairness and for that reason would  not  conflict  with  any
    doctrine of regularity, even if it could be said  that  it  applied  in
    this case.   The decision to curtail the Applicant's  leave  to  remain
    dated 5 March 2014 can only be viewed as a  whole,  as  a  decision  to
    curtail leave with a  period  of  notice  before  leave  to  remain  is
    actually curtailed and clarity is provided by the  decision  letter  by
    giving the end date upon which leave would expire.


49. Where a decision to curtail leave to remain with  notice  of  a  future
    date of curtailment has not been validly served on an individual before
    the date upon which leave to remain is due to expire, that decision has
    no effect.  I find that in the present case the  decision  of  5  March
    2014, was not effective on the date  it  was  made,  in  the  following
    period after the date upon which leave to remain was to expire on 4 May
    2014, or at any time on or after 2 June 2014.  The fact that a copy  of
    the decision was handed to the Applicant on a date after which it would
    have already curtailed his leave to remain,  if  it  had  been  validly
    served originally, does not create a  valid  or  effective  curtailment
    decision on different terms to that which are contained  on  its  face.
    The effect for this Applicant is that his leave  to  remain  was  never
    curtailed and therefore expired on 30 October 2014 in  accordance  with
    his previous grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdom.


50. The conclusions set out above are consistent with the decision in R (on
    the application of Mizanur Rahman) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2019] EWHC 2952 (Admin), in which the validity  of  service
    of a notice of curtailment was in issue.  The conclusion in  that  case
    was as follows:


      "23.  The Claimant became aware of the curtailment letter on or  about
      30 March 2016 on receipt of a further letter from the Defendant  dated
      24 March 2016. It was at that point that the  curtailment  letter  was
      given to the Claimant and he became aware that  his  Leave  to  Remain
      expired on 3 April 2016.
  24. Taking all of those  factors  together,  my  view  is  that  when  the
      Defendant became aware of all that had occurred, the proper conclusion
      was that the curtailment notice had not been 'given' to  the  Claimant
      until 26 March 2016 (two days after the letter was  posted  -  article
      8ZB(1)(a)(i)). At that point it was unreasonable to determine that the
      Claimant's Leave to Remain would expire 8 days later on 3  April  2016
      and a new curtailment notice should have been issued  extending  Leave
      to Remain for 60 days from the date of issue of the new letter."


51. In Rahman, the Applicant  was  served  with  a  notice  of  curtailment
    including a 60 day notice period only shortly before the expiry of that
    period and even in those circumstances, it was not given effect and the
    finding made that the Respondent should have issued a  new  curtailment
    notice including a further 60 day notice period.  In the present  case,
    by the time the first application for  Judicial  Review  had  concluded
    resolving the issue of whether the notice had been validly served,  the
    Respondent could not issue a new curtailment notice as the  Applicant's
    leave to remain as originally granted had already expired.


52. For the reasons set out above, there was no valid or effective decision
    to curtail the Applicant's leave to remain with immediate effect (or in
    fact at all) and therefore no statutory right of  appeal  exists  under
    section 82(e) of the 2002 Act.  The Applicant cannot therefore  benefit
    from section 3D of the 1971 Act and has been  an  overstayer  since  30
    October 2014.


53. As I have found that section 3D of the 1971 Act does not apply to  this
    Applicant, it is not necessary in  relation  to  the  first  ground  of
    challenge to go on to consider in any detail the further arguments from
    the parties about whether section 3D of the 1971 Act could apply for an
    indefinite period in the absence of a valid  notice  of  appeal  rights
    given to an individual or whether the  Applicant  could  reasonably  be
    expected to have waived his right of appeal given that this  was  first
    raised as an issue in 2014, no action at all was taken by the Applicant
    until it was raised again in correspondence with the Respondent in late
    2018 and in the absence of any explanation at all for this in action.


Grounds 2 and 3


54. The second and third grounds of challenge  relate  to  the  Applicant's
    right to respect for private (and potentially family) life protected by
    Article 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  to  a
    significant extent on the Applicant's history and the findings  in  his
    previous application for Judicial Review that the  decision  to  remove
    him on 2 June 2014 was unlawful, as was a period of detention from that
    date; to which can be added  that  there  was  no  legal  or  effective
    decision to curtail his previous leave to remain.

55. These are however issues which are raised  as  a  matter  of  principle
    and/or procedural rights rather than ones  which  contain  any  factual
    substance whatsoever.  The Applicant, for reasons  which  are  entirely
    unexplained in these proceedings, has chosen not  to  put  forward  any
    evidence at all about his private or family life in the United  Kingdom
    to the Upper Tribunal in the course of these  proceedings,  or  to  the
    Respondent since his last application on 23 July 2014.  This is despite
    being served with a one-stop notice and being invited by the Respondent
    to set out his case and  despite  the  Applicant's  contention  in  the
    current proceedings  that  his  removal  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with his right to respect  for  private  and  family  life
    contrary to Article 8, a  matter  which  Mr  Biggs  accepted  could  be
    substantively  determined  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in   the   present
    proceedings (albeit preferable to be considered by  the  Respondent  in
    the first instance).


56. In the absence of any evidence at all  from  the  Applicant,  Mr  Biggs
    invited the Upper  Tribunal  to  assume  that  Article  8  was  engaged
    primarily because of the length of time that the Applicant has been  in
    the United Kingdom.  Reliance for such a proposition was placed on  the
    decisions in Ahsan and Balajigari.  However, in Ahsan, it was  accepted
    that Article 8 was engaged in relation to each of  the  appellants  and
    the Court only went so far as accepting that earlier authorities on the
    Article 8 rights of students found that persons admitted to the  United
    Kingdom to pursue a course of study are likely, over time, to develop a
    private life of sufficient depth to engage Article 8, but the mere fact
    that a student is part-way through a course leading to  a  professional
    qualification is not sufficient of itself.  Whilst it  can  readily  be
    accepted that in most cases, a person  would  develop  some  degree  of
    private life over the passage of time, that  is  not  to  say  that  it
    exists in every case, nor that it should be  automatically  assumed  to
    have been established for the purposes of engaging  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  That is consistent with paragraph
    86 of the decision  in  Balajigari  in  which  Lord  Justice  Underhill
    stated:


      "86. Pausing there, once those arguments are disposed of it  seems  to
      us inescapable that, as Mr Biggs submitted, in the generality of cases
      a T1GM ILR applicant is likely to have built up a  sufficient  private
      life for his or her removal to engage article 8; and we  will  proceed
      on that basis.  But that must  be  subject  to  the  caveat  that  the
      engagement of article 8 is of its nature a  question  of  fact  to  be
      determined on the facts of the particular case, and there may be cases
      in which for particular  reasons  that  general  conclusion  does  not
      apply."


57. The only matters known about the Applicant in this  case  are  that  he
    entered the United Kingdom on 1 May 2011 with valid entry clearance  as
    a Tier 4 (General) Student and that he  had  ceased  studying,  at  the
    latest, on 20 February 2013 when his sponsor's licence  was  curtailed.
    The Applicant was working in a butchers in June 2014  when  encountered
    by the Respondent.  The Applicant has not provided any  information  on
    what he has been doing in the United Kingdom since 2014 or  as  to  his
    current circumstances.


58. As at 4 August 2014, the Respondent found that the Applicant was not in
    a relationship nor did he have any children in the United  Kingdom  and
    he did not meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration
    Rules.  In consideration of compassionate and compelling circumstances,
    there is nothing recorded in the  decision  letter  to  show  that  the
    Applicant had established family or any significant private life in the
    United Kingdom and in fact, the claim was considered to be  so  lacking
    in merit that it was bound to fail  and  was  certified  under  section
    94(2) of the 2002 Act.  The Applicant did not challenge that decision.


59. It is on these very limited facts and the time that the  Applicant  has
    been in the United Kingdom (over eight years) that the  Upper  Tribunal
    is invited to assume that Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights is engaged at all.  I find that in accordance with paragraph  86
    of Balajagari set out above, this is one of those cases  which  on  the
    facts, the general conclusion that Article 8 is likely  to  be  engaged
    does not apply.  There is simply no  information  relied  upon  by  the
    Applicant which could lead to even  an  inference  that  Article  8  is
    engaged.  Further, there is no rational, or in fact any explanation  at
    all by or on behalf of the Applicant as to why he has not set  out  any
    substantive human rights claim to the Respondent or the Upper  Tribunal
    since the summer of 2014 and it is reasonable to infer that if  he  had
    established private or family life, he  would  have  responded  to  the
    express invitations made to him by the  Respondent  to  set  this  out;
    particularly given the risk of certification of a future  human  rights
    claim under section 96 of the 2002 Act for not raising such a claim  at
    an earlier date.  The application for Judicial  Review  on  the  second
    ground of challenge fails for this reason alone.


60. As in Ahsan and Balajagari, the Court of Appeal has recognised that the
    determination of disputed issues of fact and human  rights  matters  is
    generally better determined on appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    that the Upper Tribunal can, if it has to, determine  the  matter.   In
    the present case, for whatever reason,  the  Applicant  has  failed  to
    avail himself of any of the options to pursue his  human  rights  which
    would have generated a right of appeal; including, on his case that the
    curtailment decision was appealable, waiving his right to a  notice  of
    appeal and lodging the same with the First-tier  Tribunal;  challenging
    the refusal and certification of his claim in 2014; responding  to  the
    one-stop notice; raising any human rights grounds against the notice of
    liability to removal (save for the  limited  submissions  made  in  the
    course of these proceedings) and perhaps most pertinently;  not  making
    any human rights (or any other) application in over  five  years.   For
    the avoidance of doubt, the letter  dated  10  October  2018  from  the
    Applicant's solicitors did not expressly or  impliedly  raise  a  human
    rights claim on his behalf.


61. In all of these circumstances, including that that  the  Applicant  has
    specifically challenged the decision on the basis that his  removal  is
    contrary to Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  in
    these proceedings, it is appropriate to consider whether in any  event,
    even if Article 8 were engaged, relief could have been granted on  this
    basis.


62. Even if on the facts set  out  above  this  Applicant  has  established
    sufficient private life in the United Kingdom to engage Article  8,  it
    is impossible  to  see  how  his  removal  could  in  any  event  be  a
    disproportionate interference with the right to respect the same on the
    facts relied on by him.   At  its  highest,  it  is  assumed  that  the
    Applicant has established private life  through  historic  studies  and
    some work in the United Kingdom over five years ago and having been  in
    the United Kingdom for more than eight years.  In 2014,  the  Applicant
    did not challenge the decision that  his  human  rights  claim  was  so
    lacking in merit that it was bound to fail  and  there  is  no  further
    information as to his circumstances since then other than  the  passage
    of time.  On any view, that is a very weak human rights claim.  Even if
    one gets to the proportionality balancing exercise for the final Razgar
    question and attaches weight to the claimed historic injustice  to  the
    Applicant for the unlawful decision to remove and  detention  in  2014;
    the Applicant's right to respect for a very weak private life could not
    possibly outweigh the public interest in his removal in accordance with
    the factors in section 117B of the 2002 Act and taking into account all
    of the circumstances.


63. As to the claimed  historic  injustice,  it  is  difficult  to  see  in
    substance what detriment the Applicant has suffered in this case  (save
    for matters already remedied in the previous application  for  Judicial
    Review, in particular for the unlawful detention) or what action  could
    or should be taken to restore him to the position he would have been in
    had there not been a failure to serve the  notice  of  curtailment;  an
    unlawful removal decision and unlawful detention in 2014.  Absent those
    events, the Applicant's leave to remain expired in October 2014 and  he
    would have been required to take some steps to regularise his  stay  in
    the United Kingdom.  That is essentially what has happened and there is
    nothing to suggest that he has, because of events in 2014, been  unable
    to make any further application for leave to remain nor been unable  to
    secure, for example, a CAS to pursue further studies; nor that  he  has
    otherwise been prejudiced or suffered any detriment at all in  relation
    to his ongoing status in  the  United  kingdom.   There  is  simply  no
    evidence in support of the Applicant's proposition,  nor  that  in  any
    event, a historic injustice would strengthen his Article  8  claim  nor
    even arguably reduce or outweigh the public interest in removal.


64. The Applicant's challenge on the basis that  his  removal  would  be  a
    disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private and
    family life under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  rights
    is therefore dismissed.  That of course does not preclude the Applicant
    from making a full  application  to  the  Respondent  on  human  rights
    grounds which sets out  his  current  circumstances  and  any  proposed
    consideration by the Respondent in that context of the claimed historic
    injustice; it is simply that on the facts as they have  been  presented
    to the Upper Tribunal to date, there is no basis  upon  which  a  human
    rights challenge could succeed.  For the same reasons, nor is there any
    basis upon which, in accordance  with  section  31(2A)  of  the  Senior
    Courts Act 1981, relief could be granted for the  Respondent's  failure
    to expressly consider Article 8 or the claimed historic injustice prior
    to issue of the notice of liability to  removal  as  the  result  would
    inevitably be the same.


65. The  Applicant  did  not  pursue  any  separate  claim  of  substantive
    unfairness that would amount to unreasonableness as originally set  out
    in the third ground of  challenge;  properly  accepting  that  no  such
    ground can  legitimately  be  pursued  following  the  Supreme  Court's
    decision in the Gallaher Group case.


Order


I order, therefore, that the judicial review application be dismissed.


Costs

The  Applicant  shall  pay  the  Respondent's  reasonable  costs   of   this
application, summarily assessed in the sum of 5092.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

The Applicant sought permission to appeal on two  grounds,  first,  that  it
was  procedurally  unfair  for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  rely  on  NM   (No
retrospective cancellation of leave)  Zimbabwe  [2007]  UKAIT  00002  and  R
(Mizanur Rahman) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2019]  EWHC
2952 (Admin) which were not cited by the parties nor referred to during  the
hearing; and secondly, that the Upper Tribunal erred  in  finding  that  the
curtailment decision dated 5 March 2014 did not have retrospective, or  even
immediate effect once served.

First, the additional authorities  referred  to  were  not  central  to  the
reasons for the application being dismissed but were merely consistent  with
the findings made and reasons  given  for  them,  such  that  there  was  no
procedural unfairness in the reference made to them.

Secondly, it is  unarguable,  in  accordance  with  the  previous  statutory
scheme, the doctrine of irregularity or otherwise, that the  Respondent  has
power to retrospectively curtail leave to remain.

For these reasons, permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  is  refused
because there is no arguable error of law in the decision above.




                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


        Dated:         15th November 2019



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/2200/2019
                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







               The Queen on the application of Muhammad Shoaib
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson




                                    Order


Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Mr  M  Biggs  and  Mr  A  Rehman  of  Counsel,
instructed by My Legal Limited Solicitors, on behalf of  the  Applicant  and
Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed by the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent,  at  a  hearing  at  Field  House,  London  on  30
September 2019.


IT IS ORDERED THAT:


   1. The Applicant's application for Judicial Review be dismissed.


   2. The Applicant shall pay the  Respondent's  reasonable  costs  of  this
      application, summarily assessed in the sum of 5092.


   3. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused.




                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


        Dated:         15th November 2019



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.


-----------------------
[1] Article 9(1)(d) of the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No. 3,
Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/2711) as amended by
the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No.4, Transitional and Saving
Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 (SI 2015/371).

