

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR 2438 2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                The Queen on the application of Dawit Mehari
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins

            Application for judicial review: substantive decision
                 AMENDED PERSUANT TO RULE 42 OF THE TRIBUNAL
                   PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008.

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms  G  Ward  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Joint
Council for the Welfare of Immigrants on behalf of the Applicant  and  Mr  M
Aslam of Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf
of the Respondent, at a hearing at  Field  House,  London  on  16  September
2019.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted


 1) For the reason given in the extempore judgement appended hereto  I  find
    that the respondent should not have decided on 6 February 2019 that  the
    applicant's further submissions are not a fresh claim.

Order

 2) I therefore make an Order quashing the  Respondent's  decision  dated  6
    February 2019.

Costs

 3) The  Secretary  of  State  shall  pay  the  applicant's  costs  of  this
    application subject to assessment and Civil  Legal  Aid  Regulations  of
    2013.





Signed:
      Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins
Dated:      30 March 2020
Re Dated:   4 May 2020









Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/2438/2019

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                           16 September 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                dawit mehari
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


                 THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE perkins


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms G Ward, instructed by Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants
appeared on behalf of the applicant.

Mr M Aslam, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


    JUDGE perkins:

1.    This is a challenge to a decision of  the  Secretary  of  State  on  6
    February 2019 that the applicant's further submissions are not a  fresh
    claim.  The applicant has on an earlier occasion sought asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom.  It was the basis of his claim that he was an  Eritrean
    who would be persecuted in the event of return to Eritrea.  It is  also
    right that he was disbelieved in very emphatic terms when  he  appealed
    the decision of the Secretary of State refusing his application.

2.    The further submissions leading to the decision  presently  complained
    of were based on different facts.   They  were  based  on  his  alleged
    attempt  to  assert  Ethiopian  nationality  being  frustrated  by  the
    Ethiopian Embassy refusing to entertain his application for a passport.

3.    I have been reminded, and I remind myself  because  it  is  important,
    that my function here is to determine the rationality of  the  decision
    of the Secretary of State on the material that was before her when  the
    decision was made.  The important matter in  this  case,  the  area  of
    dispute, is whether the Secretary of State  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the applicant had raised a hopeless case,  and  that  is  that  no
    independent decision-maker might have reached a different conclusion on
    the same facts.  I do not think it is asserted that the decision in all
    respects is inherently irrational in the sense that it was not open  to
    the Secretary of State to make it. The dispute is whether it was  right
    to say that it could not be a fresh claim.

4.    The important part of the decision letter is set out on  page  171  in
    the bundle.  It refers to the case of ST (Ethic Eritrean -  nationality
    - return) Ethiopia CG [2011] UKUT 00252 (IAC) and then continues:-

         "It is not accepted that you have demonstrated that you have  taken
         all reasonable steps to re-document yourself.  You state  that  you
         attended the Embassy, which you  have  included  as  part  of  your
         submissions, but you have provided no response or proof that it was
         ever considered by the embassy.  Within Miss Tanin's statement  she
         states that you both attended the embassy but she  was  told  there
         was no person available to deal with your application and that  you
         should come back the next day. You have provided no  evidence  that
         you returned to the embassy.  Therefore, it is  not  accepted  from
         the information you have provided demonstrates that you  have  made
         all reasonable  attempts  to  be  re-documented  by  the  Ethiopian
         embassy.  You have  not  provided  any  letters  from  the  embassy
         stating that your claim has been rejected or that they see you as a
         'foreigner'.  Any official applications will have a paper trail and
         you have not submitted this, so it cannot be seen you have done all
         you can to re-document yourself at the Ethiopian Embassy."

    There are  really  two  points  there.   The  second  is  there  is  no
    documentary trail confirming any attempt to re-assert nationality.   Ms
    Ward dealt with this  in  appropriately  withering  terms.   The  whole
    essence of the complaint is that the Ethiopian Embassy would not engage
    with the application.  That contention by the Secretary of State really
    is profoundly unhelpful.


5.    I am more taxed by the first point which is that, in  the  opinion  of
    the Secretary of State, the applicant has not done all  that  he  could
    have done to establish his nationality.  The test that  there  must  be
    all reasonable steps taken is, in my judgement, an entirely appropriate
    summary of the law.  The  interesting  question  is  whether  what  has
    happened here can be described as "all reasonable attempts" or not.

6.    The way it is put in the paragraph that I have just set out makes  the
    position clear.  It is that there is more  that  could  be  done.   The
    applicant could have gone back the next day as he was instructed to do.
     The applicant said today that he did not have the resources to go back
    the next day but that was never put to the Secretary of  State  and  Ms
    Ward was reduced to suggesting that it should have been obvious to  the
    Secretary of State because of the funding commitments.  I do not accept
    that there is merit in that.

7.    What I am not happy about is whether the summary given in that  letter
    is in fact a fair summary of what happened.  I make it plain that  when
    I first read the papers I was attracted to that argument.   Looking  at
    it again it seems rather different.  The applicant has  the  difficulty
    of  being  profoundly  disbelieved  and  it   is   therefore   entirely
    appropriate that he based his case not  on  what  he  set  out  to  the
    embassy but on what is said  by  somebody  who  could  be  trusted  and
    certainly a caseworker with  the  Joint  Council  for  the  Welfare  of
    Immigrants is somebody who I would trust completely.   She  says  there
    were some difficulty getting into the embassy and she had to vouch  for
    the identity of  the  applicant  before  they  were  allowed  into  the
    embassy.  I do not think very much follows from  this  but  this  is  a
    record of what happened on that occasion  and  it  certainly  does  not
    follow from that that the presence of a particular representative  from
    the Joint  Council  for  the  Welfare  of  Immigrants  is  a  necessary
    prerequisite to entering the embassy.  The fact is they both  got  into
    the embassy.

8.    She then introduced herself  as  a  person  who  appeared  to  be  the
    appropriate employee and then there  was  a  conversation.   The  first
    thing, according to paragraph 10, is that she was told that the manager
    was not there to deal with the application and that they should  return
    the next day.  However matters do not  stop  there.   According  to  Ms
    Tanin's statement she, as would be expected, reminded or  drew  to  the
    attention of the person dealing with her that they  had  made  previous
    enquiries and were told that no appointment was necessary and that they
    should just turn up, which is precisely what they had done.

9.    That was an invitation for further explanation from the embassy.   The
    embassy could have said, for example, "well that is normally right  but
    the appropriate person just isn't here today.  You  are  unlucky,  come
    back", or some explanation of that kind.   But  that  is  not  what  is
    recorded.  What is recorded is a change of tack by  the  embassy.   The
    embassy official then said not "come back tomorrow" but "we can't  deal
    with this" and there is a  further  reference  to  "he  has  to  go  to
    immigration".  I do not know  what  that  means.   It  was  said  in  a
    speculative submission that it  might  be  a  suggestion  that  it  was
    thought that there was some return scheme that had to  be  engaged  but
    that does not get anybody anywhere.  The fact is we do not know.

10.   But what is clear on Ms Tanin's evidence is  that  she  was  told  "we
    can't deal with this" and then was told to leave the  embassy.   It  is
    regrettable with the benefit of hindsight,  which  is  always  a  great
    counsellor, that Ms Tanin did not press further and asked if there  any
    point in coming back tomorrow.  The answer  to  that  could  have  been
    determinative of this application but the question was never asked.

11.    I  am  not  satisfied  from  reading  this  that  the  only  possible
    construction of these events is that the applicant did not do all  that
    could have been done.  I am satisfied from  reading  this  that  it  is
    possible that a properly directed judge would take the view  that  this
    was somebody not being invited to return on a third occasion but fobbed
    off by the embassy, and in that event it seems to  me  possible  for  a
    judge to decide rationally that the person  has  tried  to  assert  his
    Ethiopian nationality unsuccessfully.   It  follows  therefore  that  I
    grant judicial review in this case.

Order


12.   I therefore make an order quashing the respondent's decision  dated  6
    February 2019.

Costs

13.    The  Secretary  of  State  to  pay  the  applicant's  costs  of  this
    application subject to assessment and Civil Legal  Aid  Regulations  of
    2013.  ~~~~0~~~~

