
                                    [pic]

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Claim Number: JR/3432/2019

IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


|Heard at Field House                         |
|On 8, 11 and 21 November 2019                |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                                  The Queen
                         (on the application of BT)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                            MILTON KEYNES COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Miss A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Instalaw
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Underwood, QC, instructed by Milton Keynes
                    Council Legal Department

                                  JUDGMENT


 1. The applicant is a citizen of Eritrea.  He  arrived  in  this  country,
    clandestinely, on 18 February 2019. He claims that he was  born  on  23
    June 2002, meaning he would have been 17 years old at  the  time.  That
    claim is disputed by the respondent, Milton Keynes Council, which, in a
    so-called "eyes on" assessment ("the  eyes  on  assessment")  conducted
    shortly after his arrival, concluded that the applicant  was  over  the
    age of 18, although did not attribute a specific age.  On 19  September
    2019, shortly before the fact finding hearing originally  scheduled  in
    these proceedings on 8 and 9 October 2019, the respondent  conducted  a
    full,  Merton-compliant  age   assessment   ("the   age   assessment"),
    concluding that the applicant's date of birth was 23 June 1994,  giving
    him an age of 25.


 2. On 29 May 2019, Kate Gallafent, QC, sitting as a Deputy  Judge  of  the
    High  Court,  granted  the  applicant  permission  to   challenge   the
    respondent's eyes on assessment by way of judicial review, and directed
    that the application be transferred to the Upper Tribunal, pursuant  to
    section 31A(2) of the Senior Courts Act 1981.  Thus,  the  matter  came
    before me for the applicant's age to be determined.


Applicant's case


 3. The applicant claims that he was born on 23 June 2002 in  Eritrea.   He
    knows his age, he claims, because his parents told  him  from  a  young
    age. They would celebrate his birthday each year with baked bread and a
    number of candles corresponding to his age. The  applicant's  childhood
    was, he claims, characterised by tragedy. At the age of five, in  2007,
    he left Eritrea with his  mother  because  his  father,  a  Pentecostal
    Christian, had been killed by the government. He had no siblings.  They
    moved to Sudan to live with his aunt and uncle.  This was the beginning
    of what the applicant views as his 12 year journey to this country.  He
    did not go to  school  in  Sudan,  although  he  did  play  with  other
    children.


 4. The applicant's case is that when he was nine, in  2011,  he  moved  to
    Ethiopia, where he lived for around five years. He claimed  experienced
    difficulties in Ethiopia, due to racial animosity towards  people  from
    Eritrea. He says he was prevented from playing with other children  and
    called names. In 2016, aged 13 but nearly 14, he returned to Sudan.


 5. The applicant claimed to have returned only  briefly  to  Sudan  before
    taking a flight to Turkey, arranged by his aunt and uncle. His case  is
    that he stayed in Turkey for two months, before travelling to Greece by
    sea, initially landing in Lesbos, where he  stayed  for  a  few  weeks,
    before sailing to Athens.  He claims the boat was  intercepted  by  the
    authorities, and that he was fingerprinted and asked his date of birth.
    He says he stayed in Greece for around two and a half to three years  -
    he cannot remember exactly - before moving to Belgium, and  onwards  to
    France. He made his way to "the Jungle" in Calais before taking a lorry
    to England.  He claims his aunt and uncle in Sudan arranged his  travel
    through an agent.  While he was in  Greece,  the  agent  spoke  to  the
    applicant's  aunt  and  uncle  by  telephone.   They  said   that   the
    applicant's mother had  died  while  he  had  been  travelling  through
    Europe.  She had been ill  before  he  started  his  long  journey,  he
    claims.


 6. The lorry made its way to a service station  on  the  M1,  near  Milton
    Keynes, where the applicant was  arrested  upon  disembarking.  He  was
    taken to a police  station,  where  he  was  assessed  by  the  custody
    sergeant to be in the region of 23 to  24  years'  old.  Following  two
    days' detention in police cells, the  applicant  was  assessed  by  two
    social workers employed by the respondent to have been born on 23  June
    1994. They did not consider it necessary to  conduct  a  full  "Merton-
    compliant" age assessment, they later wrote to the applicant,  as  they
    considered  him  to  be  "significantly"  over  the  age  of   18   and
    consequently  had  "no  doubt  that  the  Children  Act  1989  has   no
    application here."


 7. The respondent's case is that there has been a  consistent  attribution
    of age to the applicant of substantially more than 18 years. This began
    with the custody sergeant, the social workers who conducted the eyes-on
    assessment, and those  who  conducted  the  full  age  assessment.  The
    respondent claims  the  appropriate  adult  appointed  by  the  Refugee
    Council to support the applicant during the  age  assessment  interview
    process, Collin Ocaya, conceded to one of the assessing social  workers
    that he thought the applicant was significantly over 18.


 8.  The  respondent  submits  that  there  can  be  no  criticism  of  the
    methodology of the full age assessment. The respondent also  points  to
    conflicting accounts provided by the  applicant  of  his  age  and  his
    travels through Eritrea and Sudan, which I  shall  explore  below.  The
    respondent contends that the account the applicant has provided of  his
    travel to Turkey, through Greece, Belgium and France  is  "incoherent".
    The applicant had no visible  means  of  support  throughout  his  long
    journey through Europe and on to the United Kingdom, yet he was able to
    amass E390 in cash, which he had on his person upon his arrest  at  the
    service station on the M1.  The respondent submits  that  that  is  not
    conduct indicative of the applicant being a child.


 9. The applicant obtained interim relief from the High  Court  to  require
    him to be treated as a child.  As such, he has been placed  into  semi-
    independent living, supported by a keyworker.  He receives a  financial
    allowance.  He is supported by the respondent's social services team as
    though he were a child, for the time  being,  pending  the  outcome  of
    these proceedings.


Procedural background


10.  This  matter  has  an  unfortunate  procedural  background,  and   the
    respondent has failed at several key junctures in its  responsibilities
    towards the Tribunal.  It is not necessary to outline the  failures  in
    further depth at this stage, other  than  to  highlight  the  following
    significant events.


11. First, the respondent informed a different constitution  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal at a Case Management Review  that  it  had  not,  and  had  no
    intention to, undertake a full "Merton-compliant" age assessment.  That
    was incorrect and misleading, as such an assessment  was  already  well
    underway, as those representing the respondent should have  known.  The
    fact finding hearing  listed  at  that  hearing  had  to  be  adjourned
    subsequently.  The solicitors  with  conduct  for  the  matter  in  the
    respondent's legal department were directed  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker  to  provide  a  full  explanation  for  the  delay.   A  written
    explanation  dated  19  September   2019   was   provided   by   Opheas
    Shiridzinodya and Nicola Monerville, the  solicitor  with  day  to  day
    conduct of the matter and principal solicitor respectively.


12. Secondly, and  against  that  background,  on  the  first  day  of  the
    adjourned fact finding hearing, it emerged that the respondent had  not
    informed its own witnesses, who all featured on  the  timetable  agreed
    between counsel on both sides, that they would be  required  to  attend
    the tribunal on that day. This necessitated last-minute changes to  the
    agreed timetable, and the wasting of a considerable amount of  judicial
    time on the first day.


13. Thirdly, despite  having  purported  to  have  complied  with  all  its
    disclosure duties to the applicant, it emerged during evidence  on  the
    second day of the fact  finding  hearing  (in  particular,  during  the
    evidence of Ms Cann and Ms Ali: see below) that there was  a  range  of
    further  relevant  materials  that  had  not  been  disclosed  by   the
    respondent. These were disclosed to the applicant's legal  team  during
    the proceedings, with only minutes to go before the  scheduled  closing
    submissions  pursuant  to  the  agreed  timetable.  Understandably,  Ms
    Benfield was not in a position to consider the potential impact of  the
    late material, which exceeded 100 pages in  length.  This  necessitated
    the introduction of further delay  into  the  proceedings,  as  closing
    submissions were adjourned until 21 November 2019.


14. At  the  conclusion  of  the  fact  finding  hearing,  I  directed  the
    respondent  to  provide  a  further  explanation  for  the   additional
    disclosure failings, in the form of a witness statement. Ms  Monerville
    provided a statement dated 28 November 2019,  in  which  she  explained
    that the council faced funding pressures,  and  that  all  material  in
    possession of the legal department had been disclosed to the  tribunal.
    It is not necessary for the purposes of my fact finding task to outline
    the contents of that statement in further depth, other than to  observe
    that the explanations provided in the  statement  were  unsatisfactory.
    The duty of candour applies to the parties to  litigation,  not  simply
    their legal representatives.  Funding challenges are no excuse for non-
    compliance with litigation duties.  It was readily apparent from a  few
    straightforward questions put to Ms  Cann  and  Ms  Ali  during  cross-
    examination that there were additional  materials  that  had  not  been
    disclosed, such as records  of  visits  to  the  applicant,  and  other
    records on his file.  What is less apparent is how the  in-house  legal
    team at the council had failed to take steps to elicit  such  materials
    during  the  disclosure  exercise.   Parties  to  litigation  in   this
    jurisdiction should ensure that systemic failures of  this  nature  are
    unable to occur.  The failings in this case were unacceptable.





THE LAW


15. The Children Act 1989 imposes certain duties upon local authorities  in
    relation to children within their area who are  "in  need".   See,  for
    example, section 17, which  imposes  a  general  duty  on  every  local
    authority to safeguard and promote the welfare of  children  in  within
    their area who are in need by providing a range and level  of  services
    appropriate to those children's needs.  Section 20 obliges every  local
    authority to provide accommodation for any child in need  within  their
    area who appears to require accommodation as a result of there being no
    person who has parental responsibility for  the  child  (amongst  other
    factors).  A paradigm example of the  practical  application  of  these
    duties arises in the case of  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  children.
    They have no one else to look after them, nowhere to go, and no way  to
    support themselves.  The Children Act 1989 obliges local authorities to
    act in such cases.


16. Difficulties arise when it is not clear whether a person is a child  or
    not.  By section 105(1) of the 1989 Act, "'a child' means...  a  person
    under the age of eighteen".  The common law has evolved such  that  the
    task of determining factual disputes between  those  who  claim  to  be
    children and local authorities is to be resolved by an application  for
    judicial review on a precedent fact basis.  Applications are brought in
    the Administrative Court and, by convention,  are  transferred  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.


17. In R (A) v London Borough of Croydon [2009]  UKSC  8  [2009]  1  W.L.R.
    2557, Lady Hale held that the issue of whether a person is a  child  or
    not is a question of fact, for the court to decide upon an  application
    for judicial review.  Having considered the value judgements to be made
    by local authorities when addressing the question as to whether a child
    is "in need" or not, she said, at [27]:


         "But the question whether a person is a "child" is a different kind
         of question. There is  a  right  or  a  wrong  answer.  It  may  be
         difficult to determine what that answer is. The decision-makers may
         have to do their  best  on  the  basis  of  less  than  perfect  or
         conclusive evidence. But that is true of  many  questions  of  fact
         which regularly come before the courts. That does not prevent  them
         from being questions for the courts rather than for other kinds  of
         decision-makers."


    In his concurring opinion, Lord Hope said, at [51]:


     "It seems to me that the question whether or not a person  is  a  child
         for the purposes of section 20 of the 1989 Act  is  a  question  of
         fact which must ultimately be decided by the  court.  There  is  no
         denying the difficulties that the social worker is likely  to  face
         in  carrying  out  an  assessment  of  the  question   whether   an
         unaccompanied asylum seeker is or is  not  under  the  age  of  18.
         Reliable documentary evidence is  almost  always  lacking  in  such
         cases. So the process has to be one of  assessment.  This  involves
         the application of judgment on a variety  of  factors,  as  Stanley
         Burnton J recognised in R  (B)  v  Merton  London  Borough  Council
         [2003] 4 All ER 280, para 37. But the question is not  whether  the
         person can properly be described as  a  child...  The  question  is
         whether the person is, or is not, under  the  age  of  18.  However
         difficult it may be to resolve the issue, it  admits  of  only  one
         answer. As it is a question of fact,  ultimately  this  must  be  a
         matter for the court."


18. There is no burden of proof in age assessment cases: see R (CJ  by  his
    litigation friend SW) v Cardiff City Council [2011] EWCA  Civ  1590  at
    [21]  ("...once  the  court  is  invited  to  make  a   decision   upon
    jurisdictional fact it can  do  no  more  than  apply  the  balance  of
    probability to the issue without resorting to the concept of  discharge
    of a burden of proof...").  As this Tribunal held in R (AM) v  Solihull
    Metropolitan Borough Council (AAJR) [2012] UKUT 00118 (IAC) at [12]:


         "There is no hurdle which the claimant  must  overcome.  The  court
         will decide whether, on a balance of probability, the claimant  was
         or was not at the material time a child. The  court  will  not  ask
         whether the  local  authority  has  established  on  a  balance  of
         probabilities that the claimant was  an  adult;  nor  will it ask
         whether the claimant has established on a balance of  probabilities
         that he is a child."


19. There can be difficulties in assessing the age of a putative child.  In
    R (B) v London Borough of Merton  [2003]  EWHC  1689  (Admin),  Stanley
    Burnton J (as he then was) held at [28]:


         "Given the impossibility of any decision maker being able  to  make
         an objectively verifiable determination of the age of an  applicant
         who may be in the age range of, say, 16 to 20, it is  necessary  to
         take a history from him or her with a view to  determining  whether
         it is true. A history that is accepted as true  and  is  consistent
         with an age below 18 will enable the decision maker in such a  case
         to decide that the applicant is a child.  Conversely,  however,  an
         untrue history, while relevant, is not necessarily indicative of  a
         lie as to the age of the applicant. Lies may be  told  for  reasons
         unconnected with the applicant's case as to his age, for example to
         avoid his return to his country of  origin.  Furthermore,  physical
         appearance and behaviour cannot be isolated from  the  question  of
         the veracity  of  the  applicant:  appearance,  behaviour  and  the
         credibility of his account are all matters  that  reflect  on  each
         other."


    At [37], he said:


     "...except in clear cases, the  decision  maker  cannot  determine  age
         solely on the basis of the appearance of the applicant. In general,
         the decision maker must seek to elicit the  general  background  of
         the applicant, including his family circumstances and history,  his
         educational background, and his activities during the previous  few
         years. Ethnic and cultural information may also  be  important.  If
         there is reason to doubt the applicant's statement as to  his  age,
         the  decision  maker  will  have  to  make  an  assessment  of  his
         credibility, and he will have to ask questions designed to test his
         credibility."


20. This was developed in R  (AM)  v  Solihull  MBC.   At  [15],  the  Vice
    President of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) said:


         "...almost all evidence of physical characteristics is likely to be
         of very limited value. That is because, as pointed out  by  Kenneth
         Parker J in R (R) v Croydon [2011] EWHC 1473 (Admin)  there  is  no
         clear relationship between chronological age and physical  maturity
         in respect of most measurable aspects of such maturity."


    At [16] he added:


         "...individuals who raise questions of the assessment of their  age
         typically have  a  history,  or  claimed  history,  beginning  with
         childhood and  early  youth  in  a  country  of  relative  poverty,
         continuing with a long and arduous journey that is claimed to  have
         taken place during their mid-teens, and concluding  with  a  period
         living in a country  of  relative  affluence  such  as  the  United
         Kingdom. So far as we are aware, no, or  no  sufficient,  work  has
         been done to identify what affect such  a  history  might  have  on
         their physical maturity at various dates. In  particular  (although
         we accept that we are relying more on instinct than anything  else)
         physical maturity may be attained  more  slowly  in  conditions  of
         poverty and malnutrition and that on arrival such a person may look
         less physically mature than his chronological  age  might  suggest.
         After his arrival it may be that physical changes take  place  more
         quickly than they would otherwise do, but it may (or  may  not)  be
         that a person with such a history is less  physically  mature  than
         anybody might expect for his age."


21. The Vice President addressed  the  relevance  of  mental  maturity  and
    demeanour at [19]:


         "So far as mental development is concerned, it  is  very  difficult
         indeed to see how any proper assessment can be made from a position
         of ignorance as to the individual's age. Most assessments of mental
         development  are,  in  essence,  an  assessment  of   whether   the
         individual is at average,  or  below  or  above  average,  for  his
         chronological age."


22. He continued:


         "So far as demeanour is concerned, it seems to us that there may be
         value to be obtained from observations of demeanour and interaction
         with others made over a long period  of  time  by  those  who  have
         opportunity to observe an individual going about his ordinary life.
         But we find it difficult to see that  any  useful  observations  of
         demeanour or social interaction or maturity  can  be  made  in  the
         course of a short interview between an  individual  and  a  strange
         adult. There may of course be  cultural  difficulties  in  such  an
         interview but there are the ordinary social difficulties as well."


23. The views of social workers gleaned from formal  interactions  with  an
    applicant are unlikely to mitigate those difficulties:

         "20. The asserted  expertise  of  a  social  worker  conducting  an
         interview is not in our judgement sufficient  to  counteract  those
         difficulties. A person such as a teacher or even a  family  member,
         who can point to consistent attitudes, and a number  of  supporting
         instances over a considerable period of time, is  likely  to  carry
         weight that observations made in the artificial surroundings of  an
         interview cannot carry."

24. There  must  be  no  "predisposition,  divorced  from  information  and
    evidence available to the local authority, to assume that an  applicant
    is an adult, or conversely that he is a child..."  Physical  appearance
    and demeanour are only likely to be relevant in an "obvious"  case,  in
    the absence of compelling evidence to  the  contrary.   See  Merton  at
    [38].


25. In an age assessment judicial review application, the role of the Upper
    Tribunal is to arrive at  an  assessment  of  the  applicant's  age  by
    reference to all material  and  evidence  in  the  case,  applying  the
    balance of probabilities standard of proof. In contrast to conventional
    judicial review proceedings, the  focus  of  my  consideration  is  not
    whether the respondent reached a decision which was unlawful on  public
    law grounds, but rather  to  find,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  what  the
    applicant's age is.


DISCUSSION

26. At the outset of my analysis, it is necessary to recall that this is  a
    case in which the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.  2  of  2010  is
    engaged.  The applicant is a vulnerable  individual  who  has,  on  any
    view, endured a journey to the United Kingdom, which is likely to  have
    been highly stressful, if not traumatic.  As well as having agreed with
    the representatives at the hearing what steps would be necessary during
    the hearing itself to accommodate the needs of the applicant, I  direct
    myself that it may be necessary  to  calibrate  my  assessment  of  the
    applicant's evidence by reference to his potential vulnerabilities.  In
    cases involving age assessments, this is particularly important, as the
    applicant may be a child.

Background materials


27. The respondent has not challenged the applicant's  account  of  how  he
    travelled to Europe via Turkey, or his claimed Eritrean nationality.  I
    see no reason not to accept these aspects of the applicant's  narrative
    for the purposes of my analysis.  The focus of my decision will be  the
    events the applicant claims to have taken place in Europe.


Eyes-on assessment


28. The initial "eyes-on" assessment is a brief document. It is the primary
    decision under challenge  in  this  judicial  review  application.   It
    records the opinions of the two assessing social workers, Emily  Hutton
    and Gemma Tarrant that the applicant is "significantly"  over  18.  The
    handwritten notes produced during the assessment recorded the applicant
    as having a "short but stocky build", with "thick dark curly hair"  and
    a "heavily lined forehead." It notes the opinion  of  the  unnamed  (in
    this document) custody sergeant that the applicant is "23/24 years"  of
    age. A written summary of the assessment was provided to the  applicant
    which features the following operative wording:


         "It is very clear that you are significantly over  the  age  of  18
         years and we have no doubt  that  the  Children  Act  1989  has  no
         application here. Even if  given  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  the
         requirements of the Merton age assessment procedure  are  satisfied
         by the above statement.


         In this instance, on the basis  of  a  visual  assessment  of  your
         appearance, demeanour and a brief enquiry with the assistance of an
         interpreter, it is our  opinion  that  your  presentation  strongly
         suggests that you are significantly  over  18  years  of  age.  The
         rationale for this judgement is based on the information  contained
         within the eyes on assessment you have also  been  provided  with."
         (See the letter at tab 27, first bundle)


29. As may be seen, the eyes on  assessment  was  based  primarily  on  the
    appearance and demeanour of the applicant. As I  have  set  out  above,
    physical appearance and demeanour can be an unreliable guide to the age
    of an individual.  This  is  especially  so  where  the  assessment  of
    physical appearance and  demeanour  is  based  only  on  a  very  brief
    impression gained from  a  short  meeting.  I  also  recall  that  this
    assessment took place following the applicant's detention in  a  police
    cell, after he had been apprehended emerging from his clandestine entry
    to the United Kingdom. On the applicant's case, he had been  living  in
    the most precarious of circumstances in continental  Europe,  including
    most recently in the "jungle" in Calais. That is an experience that, at
    least in the immediate aftermath of the journey  and  police  detention
    (even if the lengthy pre-Calais phase of the claimed  journey  had  not
    taken place), has the potential to give an impression of age  which  is
    older than an individual is in reality.


30. In  isolation,  therefore,  the  eyes  on  assessment  provides  little
    qualitative assistance in my task of determining the applicant's age.


Full age assessment


31. The full age assessment eventually produced by the respondent  extended
    to 23 pages. Much of the document recites the narrative provided by the
    applicant across the course of the four  meetings  conducted  with  the
    applicant prior to the report being  written,  ahead  of  a  "feedback"
    meeting conducted on 25 September 2019.  Some of the meetings had to be
    aborted as the applicant became upset. The report  concludes  that  the
    applicant is "significantly over the age of 18  years  old",  with  the
    date of birth of 23 June 1994.


32. The operative findings of the report are based on (i)  the  applicant's
    physical appearance; (ii) the apparent inconsistency between aspects of
    the applicant's description of his upbringing  in  Eritrea,  Sudan  and
    Ethiopia and the likely cultural context within which he grew  up,  and
    (iii) the level of the applicant's independence, which exceeded that of
    a child.


33. The report considers the  applicant's  physical  attributes  place  him
    significantly over his claimed age of 17. It describes  his  "prominent
    stubble" on his upper lip, jawline, chin and upper part of his neck. It
    contrasts these physical attributes with the applicant's  account  that
    he has only recently begun shaving, and that he only has "two or  three
    small hairs" on either side of his  cheeks.   It  makes  some  comments
    about the likely progress of puberty by that stage.


34. The assessment comments that the applicant's physical build,  which  is
    described as "stocky", is consistent with the metabolism rate of  adult
    males over the age of 25 years when compared to the applicant's  intake
    of food, according to NHS sources  (unspecified).  This,  suggests  the
    report, implies that the applicant is over the age  of  a  teenage  boy
    with a large appetite and high metabolism rate.  Given the  applicant's
    account of having travelled to the United Kingdom over a long period of
    time with very little to eat, "his weight gain towards the end  of  the
    journey is difficult to explain."


35. As accepted in the Solihull case, assessments  of  physical  appearance
    and demeanour, especially those conducted by social  workers  over  the
    course of a limited number  of  formal  interactions  with  a  putative
    child, are unreliable. Having had the benefit of seeing  the  applicant
    give evidence and attend the three days  of  the  hearings  before  the
    tribunal, I accept that there is an appearance of maturity  about  him.
    To the  extent  that  the  age  assessment  describes  the  applicant's
    physical appearance, it appears to do so  largely  correctly.  However,
    physical appearance is an unreliable guide to the  assessment  of  age.
    In Merton at [28], the court observed that  young  people  in  the  age
    bracket of 16 to 20 can be difficult  to  assess  with  any  degree  of
    accuracy.  Some boys of 16 or 17 do look much older.   Others  who  are
    much older can look much younger.  When one factors in  the  conditions
    the applicant claims to have  endured  during  his  journey  throughout
    Europe, it is necessary to calibrate the assessment of the  applicant's
    physical appearance yet further.  It follows, therefore, that  the  age
    assessment's analysis of the physical appearance and demeanour  of  the
    applicant, is, in isolation,  a  factor  which  attracts  only  neutral
    weight.  As Stanley Burnton J put  it,  "it  is  necessary  to  take  a
    history from him or her with a view to determining whether it is true."


36. The  age  assessment's  analysis  of  the  applicant's  claimed  family
    composition features some weaknesses.  It states, at page 20, that  the
    applicant's claimed small family size is  "uncommon"  for  the  region.
    African culture prizes large families and extensive  interactions  with
    neighbours and the community, the  authors  contend.   The  applicant's
    case, by contrast, was that he grew up knowing only his aunt and uncle,
    and his mother.  He records no siblings  or  cousins.   The  difficulty
    with this analysis is several fold.  The assessment generalises generic
    "African" culture, without considering matters - or background evidence
    - specific to Eritrea, or to Eritrean families living in exile in Sudan
    and Ethiopia.  While I accept that the family unit and extended  family
    are often highly prized and emphasised in "African" culture, it  is  by
    no means clear that such generalised assumptions can  automatically  be
    applied  to  the  narrative  that  underpins  the  applicant's  claimed
    departure from Eritrea, and subsequent residence in Sudan and Ethiopia.
      There may be many reasons why families only have one child, including
    their willingness and ability.


37. As the applicant would have been a young child at the times he  claimed
    to have moved to Sudan and then to Eritrea, it is difficult to see  how
    it is "unusual... that [the applicant] does not know this information",
    as the assessment contends.  The respondent's analysis assumes  that  a
    young (even on his assessed age), largely uneducated, boy who  was  the
    only son to a single mother, would know why his aunt and uncle did  not
    have any children, and why he had no siblings.  These  are  significant
    expectations to impose on a putative child.


38. The above observations  do  not  lead  me  necessarily  to  reject  the
    respondent's analysis in its entirety. Nor do they lead  me  to  accept
    the applicant's case.  I cite  these  concerns  at  this  stage  of  my
    analysis as part of my holistic review of the evidence in the round.


The applicant's account


39. The applicant's account of his age and journey to  the  United  Kingdom
    has evolved over time.  It continued to do so under  cross-examination.
    Of course, when assessing the evidence of someone who may be  a  child,
    and who in any event is vulnerable  as  outlined  above,  a  degree  of
    evolution and some inconsistencies are to be expected.  Changes are not
    necessarily fatal.


40. In his first witness statement, the applicant said that, "for  as  long
    as I can remember, I have always known my date  of  birth  and  age.  I
    can't remember the first time I was told my date of birth, but I  think
    it must have been my parents." He described  celebrating  his  birthday
    every year with his family, stating that his mother and aunts  (plural)
    would bake bread (para 5).   That statement was dated  16  April  2019,
    around two months after the eyes on age assessment. During  the  course
    of the  brief  discussion  conducted  as  part  of  that  process,  the
    applicant said that he was "four years old" when he was told  his  age.
    Plainly, there is an inconsistency between the two answers.  In  cross-
    examination, the applicant provided a further account. He said that  he
    had never been asked that question, but when his statement was  put  to
    him, he accepted that he had said that. He was unable to  provide  much
    by way of further details as to his childhood. He  said  he  could  not
    remember his life in Eritrea, as he was a child then.  Similarly,  when
    asked whether he was able to look after himself, dress himself and keep
    clean for himself while he was in Eritrea and Sudan, he  said  that  he
    could not remember, again because he was a child.


41. The applicant was able to recall attending school in Eritrea, from,  he
    says, the ages of four to five, at a mainstream school.  See page 9  of
    the age assessment.  As the age assessment later  states  at  page  21,
    school only becomes compulsory  in  Eritrea  from  the  age  of  seven;
    schooling at an earlier stage would have to be privately  arranged  and
    funded.  The  applicant  did  not  provide  background  information  to
    counter that assertion.  The applicant's case is  that  he  attended  a
    "mainstream" school, which suggests  that  it  was  not  a  private  or
    specialist school.  This presents a credibility concern.   Quite  apart
    from the fact the applicant's narrative is at  odds  with  the  age  at
    which schooling commences in  Eritrea  (pursuant  to  the  unchallenged
    country information at page 21 of the report), his family circumstances
    were such that his attendance at private school is likely to have  been
    difficult if he was the son of a single mother who, on  his  case,  was
    shortly to flee the country due to the death of his father.


42. The age the applicant purports to have been when he attended school  in
    Eritrea is a significant factor in my overall assessment;  one  feature
    of this case is that there are few "anchor" events in  the  applicant's
    narrative.  His recollection of his time in Eritrea onwards during  the
    age assessment interviews was characterised by his inability to  recall
    specific details, and the provision of answers which  did  not  address
    the questions asked.  The interviewing social workers record how,  when
    asked probing questions, the applicant would become emotional and would
    often get upset, leading to two of the  interviews  being  stopped  and
    resumed on later dates.  Yet the  applicant  claims  to  have  attended
    school, from the ages of four to five.  If he  attended  at  that  age,
    that would support his version of events.   If,  by  contrast,  he  was
    seven when he attended school, that would have meant that he was eight,
    not five, when he left Eritrea in 2007, with  the  ensuing  significant
    consequential impact on my assessment of his date of birth.


43. The applicant could remember some details of his life in Eritrea, Sudan
    and Ethiopia in his age assessment; at page 12, he remembered that  his
    mother attempted to register him for school in Ethiopia when he was "10
    or 11."  Under cross-examination, he clarified this,  saying  he  meant
    that his mother attempted to register him at school when he was  nearly
    11. She made only a single attempt, he said, and  they  stayed  in  the
    country for a total of five years before they left when he was 13 years
    old.  There are clear discrepancies in the  timings  presented  by  the
    applicant; his case was that he arrived in the country when he was aged
    nine, and that he stayed there for five years. That would  put  him  at
    age 14 upon his departure. Yet he claims to have been 13 years old when
    he left. In cross-examination,  the  applicant  claimed  that  what  he
    actually said was that he was "nearly 14", however there is no  support
    for  that  account  in  the  age  assessment,   or   the   accompanying
    contemporaneous notes.  He did add in the age assessment, however, that
    he would round ages up or down, which may explain  any  inconsistencies
    as to dates.  The applicant said in the age  assessment  that  he  left
    Ethiopia for Sudan aged 13, and remained there for approximately 12  to
    13 days, before his mother told him that he had  to  travel  to  Turkey
    with an unnamed man, pursuant to arrangements  made  by  his  aunt  and
    uncle.  This would have been in 2016, on the applicant's  account:  see
    paragraph 13 of his first witness statement.


44. It is the applicant's case that he travelled  to  Turkey  on  documents
    provided by the agent, the Sudanese man through whom his aunt and uncle
    arrange to travel. The applicant claims that he was detained in  Turkey
    for around 15 days, along with a number of other people. He  said  that
    he was asked for his name in the detention camp but was not  asked  for
    fingerprints.


45. The applicant has provided a vague and partially  inconsistent  account
    of finding out how his mother died.  He claimed to have  found  out  by
    telephone while in Turkey.  In the age assessment, he said he gave  his
    mother's telephone number to the agent he was travelling with, who made
    a call on his behalf, and informed him that his mother  was  dead.   In
    cross-examination, the applicant said that he was allowed  to  use  the
    phone himself.  He then distanced himself from the description  of  the
    person as an "agent", claiming that it was simply a man he lived  with,
    and that he did not live with just "a man", as there were so many.   He
    lost the number, he said in cross-examination, when he was at sea in an
    accident.


46. The applicant described travelling from Turkey to  Greece  (Lesbos)  by
    boat.  He said the conditions were horrific.  Some boats attempting the
    crossing at the same time did not make it.  He saw  people  drown.   He
    was soaked up to his waist at one stage.  Upon arrival in Greece, there
    were riots.  He struggled with his asthma from the smoke from the riots
    and was treated in an ambulance.


47. The main  difficulties  with  the  applicant's  narrative  from  Turkey
    onwards arise from the lack of detail in his age assessment  interview,
    which compounds the concerns raised by the respondent  in  relation  to
    his account of what happened from that point.  I direct myself that one
    should always be careful when assessing accounts by  reference  to  the
    assumed inherent likelihood of claimed events having  taken  place,  or
    their assumed probability;  as  a  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal,  my
    experience is so far removed from those in  this  applicant's  position
    that I should be  careful  when  addressing  the  plausibility  of  his
    account.   On  the  other  hand,   the   authorities   concerning   the
    difficulties with assessing the inherent likelihood  of  matters  which
    are said to have taken place in a very different cultural  context  are
    in the context of protection appeals, and the lower standard of proof -
    reasonable likelihood - which applies to such  proceedings.  The  lower
    standard of proof is capable of admitting matters which seem inherently
    unlikely.  The balance of probabilities standard to which  my  findings
    are subject is  a  higher  standard  of  proof  which,  by  definition,
    requires more evidence to justify findings.


48. Against that background, I have concerns at the lack of  depth  in  the
    accounts the applicant has provided of the  period  in  excess  of  two
    years for which he claimed to be living in Greece (see paragraph 15  of
    his first statement, "...two and a half or three years...").


49. The applicant claims to have slept rough in Lesbos  with  a  number  of
    other migrants as they sought to travel  to  Athens.   In  Lesbos,  the
    applicant says that he and an unspecified number of other migrants were
    able to survive day to day because "church people" and charities  would
    provide food for them. This stopped when the migrants started to attack
    the aid providers.  He then claims that he ran off into  the  mountains
    as so many riots were taking  place.  His  account  of  living  in  the
    mountains does not feature in his witness statements, nor how  long  he
    was there for, and nor does he address  how  he  was  able  to  survive
    without the claimed handouts from the church.  The narrative  does  not
    explain how the applicant made his way back from the mountains - or why
    - in order to be moved onto Athens.


50. I turn to Athens.  The applicant provides  no  details  as  to  how  he
    arranged the travel by boat which took him. He did  not  know  who  the
    people were who facilitated his travel, although  did  not  think  they
    were "aid people", as the police were present. It  is  the  applicant's
    case that he lived in a church house in Athens for at least two  years,
    and that he was given all he needed to eat and wear.   He  provides  no
    details of any reception processes in Athens, or  further  interactions
    with the authorities, other than to say he  was  fingerprinted  at  one
    point.   This part of the applicant's narrative is characterised  by  a
    lack of detail.  I have credibility concerns with the  suggestion  that
    the applicant, as a claimed child, was able to live undocumented and on
    handouts from undetailed churches and unspecified charities for such  a
    long period of time, having been put on another boat by persons wearing
    some form of official uniform for the relatively lengthy crossing  over
    the Aegean Sea.  The suggestion that aid agencies  would  have  engaged
    with him, as a child, yet done nothing to provide him with longer  term
    assistance or support is not credible.  On  the  applicant's  case,  he
    would have been much younger when he arrived in Greece.   That  further
    compounds my concerns with this aspect of his  account.   When  pressed
    for further details in his  age  assessment  interview  concerning  the
    details of his crossings  and  his  accommodation  and  experiences  in
    Greece,  the  applicant  found  it  difficult  to  talk   about   them,
    necessitating the interview to be  suspended.  Although  the  applicant
    claims to have endured great hardship during his journey to the  United
    Kingdom, and he is a vulnerable individual, the pattern that  seems  to
    emerge  in  his  interviews  was  that  whenever  difficult   questions
    requiring a specific answer about a key aspect of his  chronology  were
    put to him, he was unable to give a specific answer.


51. I have additional concerns arising from the applicant's claim that  the
    unspecified church leaders and his supporters in  Athens  provided  the
    funds and documents to facilitate his onward flight  to  Belgium.   His
    case is that he was taken to the airport, able to navigate  immigration
    and customs checks despite people around him  being  turned  back,  and
    collected at the airport in Belgium, to be taken to - and left in  -  a
    park. There is an inconsistency between what the applicant claims  took
    place in Greece - where the applicant claims  he  was  housed  for  two
    years, provided documents and tickets - and  his  arrival  in  Belgium,
    where he claims he was taken to a park, and left to fend  for  himself.
    Irregular migration over international borders is  expensive.    If  it
    were the case that his Greek benefactors were arranging and funding his
    travelling this way, I do not consider  it  to  be  credible  that  the
    assistance provided would stop such  an  abrupt  manner,  had  it  been
    provided as he claims, or even that they would enable  a  child  to  be
    treated in this way.


52. Under cross-examination, the applicant appeared to minimise the  amount
    of money that he was found to have in his possession upon  his  arrival
    in this, E390. In his age assessment, he had said  that  he  was  given
    some money for "tea and coffee" in Greece and Belgium. He  additionally
    maintained that he had no reason to spend the money that  he  had  been
    provided with; he did not buy a train ticket for his journey to Calais,
    and when he was in the "jungle", there was no way to  spend  the  money
    that he had. As I will outline, those who know the  applicant  in  this
    country all comment on his ability  to  manage  his  financial  affairs
    well, to budget, and to  save  money,  all  independently.  It  is  not
    consistent  with  the  clear  financial  prudence  the  applicant   has
    demonstrated while living here for him to suggest that he did not  have
    a lot of money on him upon his  arrest  in  this  country.   In  cross-
    examination, he sought to deflect questions on this basis ("How do  you
    mean a lot of money?").  In my view, taken with the  wider  credibility
    concerns arising from the account the applicant has provided concerning
    his living and financial arrangements in Greece, I do not  consider  he
    has revealed the full picture arising from his journey  from  Sudan  to
    mainland Europe and onto this country.  This presents wider credibility
    concerns to which I will return.


Social workers' evidence


53. Ms Cann has been the applicant's social worker since 30 May  2019.  Her
    statement describes the circumstances in which the  applicant  came  to
    the attention of  Milton  Keynes  social  services,  and  outlines  the
    applicant's health, education, emotional and  behavioural  development,
    family information, social relationships and presentation and self-care
    skills of the applicant. Ms Cann's statement appears to be a summary of
    the different  entries  in  the  respondent's  records  concerning  the
    applicant, which did not  necessarily  involve  Ms  Cann,  as  well  as
    recording some of her own observations from the  two  statutory  visits
    she conducted.


54. Ms Cann's written evidence describes a number of her colleagues forming
    the view that the applicant is an adult. She notes the  conclusions  of
    the two social workers who conducted the  "eyes-on"  assessment  on  19
    February 2019. She notes that a childcare review meeting  conducted  on
    17 June 2019 was attended by an independent  reviewing  officer  and  a
    different social worker, Ashley Edwards.  Mr  Edwards  is  recorded  as
    having said that, "in my professional opinion [the applicant] presented
    as significantly over the age of 18."


55. At paragraph 9.2 of her statement, Ms Cann writes:


         "I have carried out two statutory visits to  see  [the  applicant].
         His body language and demeanour is in my opinion that  of  somebody
         who is confident. [His] facial features  are  in  my  opinion  that
         [sic] of an adult. It is my assessment  that  he  is  significantly
         older than 18 years of age. An age  assessment  is  underway  which
         will explore [his] background journey, journey to the UK and gather
         other relevant information to form a conclusion on his age."


56.  In  cross-examination,  there  were  some   details   concerning   the
    applicant's case that Ms Cann was unable to recall.  She noted that the
    details would be "on the file" but  was  unable  to  remember  specific
    details and declined to attempt to reconstruct what had happened on the
    basis of her memory alone.  I  make  no  criticism  of  her  for  this,
    especially given the failure of the respondent to  put  her  on  notice
    that she was required to give evidence; she was one  of  the  witnesses
    who had not been  informed  she  needed  to  attend,  and  consequently
    attended the hearing at the minute, seemingly having dropped everything
    in order to do so, without having had the chance to consult  her  notes
    beforehand.


57. Ms Cann could not remember the dates of her  statutory  visits  to  the
    applicant, nor the content of those visits. She was able to recall that
    the applicant had had to  move  accommodation  since  being  under  the
    respondent's care but could not recall when.  She  could  not  remember
    how many "other" children lived with the applicant in his current "semi-
    independent" accommodation.  She did not know whether the accommodation
    was specifically for 17 to 18 year olds.  Ms Cann  accepted  that  such
    accommodation would normally not be for people over the age of 18.  She
    did not know who else was living at  the  accommodation,  although  did
    know that he gets on well with his current housemates, that he gets  on
    well with staff, and that there had been no reported concerns with  his
    behaviour, conduct or ability to respect boundaries.  Ms Cann  recalled
    that the  feedback  from  the  accommodation  was  that  the  applicant
    demonstrated a high level of independence, and only  needed  assistance
    in securing a bus pass to travel locally.


58. The overall opinion of Ms Cann as to the age of the applicant  appeared
    primarily to be based upon his appearance, demeanour, and  her  summary
    of the views of her colleagues, in particular the  two  social  workers
    who conducted the eyes-an assessment, and Mr Edwards.


59. I find that Ms  Cann's  evidence  is  largely  neutral  as  regards  my
    assessment of the applicant's age. While, as I have set  out  above,  I
    have no reason to doubt her sincerity or credibility, it is plain  that
    she could recall  only  basic  details  about  the  applicant's  living
    arrangements and interactions with those around him, and was unable  to
    recall many details about the statutory visits she  paid  to  him.  She
    did, in fairness, remember that his room seemed a  little  untidy,  but
    the depth of her evidence appeared to be hampered by virtue of the fact
    she had not been able to refresh her memory from the file. In  addition
    to this, I note that Ms Cann had only paid two statutory visits to  the
    applicant. When asked whether the applicant  demonstrated  a  level  of
    independence and overall behaviour which could be consistent with  that
    of a 17-year-old, Ms Cann  said  that  such  behaviour  can  vary.  She
    accepted that his overall behaviour is consistent with that of  the  17
    year old but added that her personal opinion was that he is older. When
    pressed in relation  to  the  applicant's  independence,  she  candidly
    accepted that that was not a question that she had considered. She  had
    not spoken to the accommodation provider about the applicant's age, but
    did not support, in general terms, that the fact he gets on  well  with
    people who  are  aged  16  to  17  does  not  necessarily  support  the
    contention that that is the age bracket  within  which  his  age  sits.
    Rapport is not reflective of age, she added.


60. As noted in the Solihull case, it  is  unlikely  that  observations  of
    demeanour and behaviour made in the course of two short visits such  as
    that can be reliable indicators of an individual's age. Ms Cann clearly
    has broad experience of working  with  adults  and  young  people.  She
    explained that, prior to becoming a social worker, she used to work  as
    a probation officer with the youth  offending  team  and  has  received
    formal training in the conduct of age assessments. She has a  range  of
    experience which I do not wish to dismiss lightly. However, it is clear
    that the recollection of the individual meetings that she had conducted
    with the applicant was limited, and her operative reasoning leading her
    to conclude that the applicant was  significantly  over  18  was  based
    extensively on the unreliable indicators of demeanour and behaviour.


61. Huma Ali was one of the two social workers who conducted the  full  age
    assessment interviews and drafted the report.  She provided two witness
    statements. In her first statement, she wrote that one of  the  sources
    of information she relied upon in order to reach  her  considered  view
    that the applicant was an adult was  the  personal  opinion  of  Collin
    Ocaya, the appropriate adult  assigned  to  represent  the  applicant's
    interests in the age assessment process.  Ms Ali said at paragraph 6:


         "Collin Ocaya (Refugee Council) informed me that his personal  view
         was that he felt [the applicant] was an adult and not  the  stating
         years. Mr Ocaya had asked for his views not to be included  in  the
         age assessment."


62. Mr Ocaya denied having informed Ms Ali that he  said  anything  of  the
    sort.  He  asked  her  for  an  earlier,  draft,  version  of  the  age
    assessment to omit any references to his views.  This dispute led to  a
    satellite issue in the proceedings, whereby both Mr Ocaya  and  Ms  Ali
    were invited to make written statements on the topic  of  the  disputed
    conversation and were directed to attend to be  cross-examined  on  the
    point. It is necessary for me to avoid the temptation to  become  side-
    tracked with a peripheral issue. But, given  the  dispute  between  the
    parties on a potentially material piece of evidence,  it  is  necessary
    that I resolve whether or not Mr Ocaya did express his  personal  views
    to Ms Ali.


63. I find that Mr Ocaya did confide in Ms Ali privately that his  personal
    view was that the applicant was over the age of 18. However,  taken  at
    its highest, I do not consider that Mr Ocaya's personal  views  attract
    weight.  My reasons for this are as follows.


64. Ms Ali gave a clear and detailed account of  a  conversation  she  held
    with Mr Ocaya in the margins of the final age assessment  meeting  with
    the applicant, which was what she termed a "clarification meeting".  It
    took place on 24 September 2019. Her evidence was that as she  escorted
    Mr Ocaya out of the building  and  the  two  of  them  were  alone,  he
    confided in her that his view was the applicant was over the age of 18.
     Ms Ali gave a clear and compelling account of Mr Ocaya saying that age
    assessment cases potentially raise safeguarding  issues,  and  that  he
    added  that,  as  the  father  of  daughters,  these  matters  were  of
    particular concern to him.  In her second statement, dated  24  October
    2019, Ms Ali describes Mr Ocaya having approached her with the  request
    that his views be removed from the report. This Ms  Ali  did,  although
    her initial statement for these proceedings records that she  took  his
    view into account.


65. Mr Ocaya gave a statement dated 29 October  2019  in  which  he  denied
    having ever revealed his views to Ms Ali. At paragraph 4, Mr Ocaya said
    that, although he had been asked by Ms Ali for his views, he refused to
    reveal them, as it was not compatible with his role of being present as
    an independent adult. In cross-examination, Mr  Ocaya  maintained  this
    approach. He was adamant that on 25 September 2019, he emailed  Ms  Ali
    denying that he had ever revealed his personal views,  saying  that  he
    specifically pointed out that he had not said that his  view  was  that
    the applicant was an adult. Mr Ocaya did not provide  a  copy  of  that
    email himself, but it was one of the documents which was  disclosed  in
    the batch of materials provided shortly before closing submissions.


66. The email is consistent with Ms Ali's evidence and undermines  what  Mr
    Ocaya wrote in his statement and said under cross-examination. Mr Ocaya
    wrote:


         "I have gone through [the draft age  assessment]  and  I  am  happy
         [sic] that in paragraph 14 I am quoted as saying that my views were
         that BT was not a minor.


         I would like to advise that the views mentioned  were  my  personal
         views and should not be included in the report.


         So can I request that the statement be deleted from the report.


         I can also remember mentioning that whatever views I had cannot and
         should not be included in the report.


         Please let me know when it has been done..."


67. Plainly, Mr Ocaya's email supports the evidence of Ms Ali that  he  did
    make the personal observation that he considers  the  applicant  to  be
    significantly over the age of 18. There appears to be a mistake  in  Mr
    Ocaya's first sentence, in that he appeared to have been  anything  but
    "happy" for his personal views to be recorded in  the  age  assessment.
    There must be a missing "not". However, it is clear that his  view  was
    that the applicant was not a minor, and that his main concern was  that
    his personal view was not relevant for inclusion in the report: see the
    second sentence.  Mr Ocaya must, at the very least, have been  mistaken
    in his recollection of the conversation when he  prepared  his  witness
    statement and in cross-examination.  Certainly, his evidence was  vague
    at times, and in marked contrast to the clarity and force with which Ms
    Ali gave her account of the conversation.  I find  that  Mr  Ocaya  did
    confirm to Ms Ali that his personal views were that the  applicant  was
    not a child.


68. Turning to the impact of Mr Ocaya's views, I  find  they  attract  only
    marginal weight.  His presence at the age assessment interviews was the
    full extent of his interactions with the applicant, although it appears
    from the age assessment (e.g. page  12)  that  he  spent  some  of  the
    applicant's breaks with him, meaning that he has  had  the  benefit  of
    spending time with the applicant alone outside the  formal  interviews,
    rather  than  exclusively  within  the  context   of   the   interviews
    themselves.  I have noted above how the views of the  assessing  social
    workers as to the applicant's  demeanour,  physical  presentation,  and
    narrative are likely to be limited by the constraints inherent  to  the
    circumstances in which their  assessment  was  taking  place:  see  the
    Solihull case.   It  follows  that,  although  Mr  Ocaya  revealed  his
    personal views to Ms Ali,  and  although  those  views  were  that  the
    applicant was over the age of 18, they attract  only  marginal  weight,
    given the limited number of interactions he had with the applicant, and
    the absence of any insight or reasoning  accompanying  his  views.   Mr
    Ocaya's evidence, therefore, adds little to my  overall  analysis  (but
    little weight is not no weight, and I do not suggest  that  Mr  Ocaya's
    personal views are completely devoid of merit for the purposes of  this
    analysis).


69. The final witness I heard from was Ola Oloyd.  He  is  the  applicant's
    support  worker  at  the  semi-independent  accommodation   where   the
    applicant lives.  In his statement dated 18 September  2019,  Mr  Oloyd
    writes that, having known the applicant for three months at that stage,
    he had no opinion as to his age (para 9).  He said the  applicant  acts
    like a baby sometimes (para 10), and described the  applicant  becoming
    emotional when thinking about his mother or his journey to  the  United
    Kingdom.  Under cross-examination, Mr Oloyd  was  consistent  with  his
    written evidence, and gave little  additional  amplification.  He  said
    that the applicant does not talk about his age, and that any references
    to the applicant's age in case notes  he  had  completed  were  to  his
    claimed date of birth, which the social workers had  revealed  to  him.
    On one occasion, the applicant became upset about his age and Mr  Oloyd
    advised him to calm down and assured him "everything will be fine".


70. Although being one of the best-placed witnesses to assess the demeanour
    and behaviour of the applicant, given he  sees  the  applicant  at  the
    applicant's home, Mr Oloyd purported to have no opinion as to his  age.
    Under cross-examination, Mr Oloyd said that he had not been trained  in
    age assessments and was reluctant to offer a view as to the applicant's
    age.  Mr Oloyd was  not  being  asked  under  cross-examination  for  a
    formal, considered view, expressed against a background of  appropriate
    training.  He was simply being asked for his own personal  opinion.   I
    have some doubts that a support worker at a children's residential home
    would not form a personal view as to the age of a resident.   While one
    may expect someone in Mr Oloyd's position to have  formed  a  personal,
    private view, he maintains that he had not.  The evidence of  Mr  Oloyd
    is neutral in the overall balance.


71. The applicant was referred to the Home  Office  to  make  a  claim  for
    asylum shortly after he was arrested.  An initial  screening  interview
    took place on  20  February  2019.   He  awaits  a  substantive  asylum
    interview.  Significantly for present purposes, the screening interview
    record ("the SCR") completed by the Home Office featured  the  date  of
    birth of "01/01/2001", with the handwritten annotation that it had been
    "provided by social services".  I am aware that 1 January is often used
    as a generic date of birth when the actual day and month within a  year
    is not known.  What is significant, is that the year  given  was  2001.
    Mr Underwood for  the  respondent  contends  that  that  date  was  not
    provided by Milton Keynes, and its provenance is unknown.  However,  it
    must have come from somewhere.   Given  the  respondent's  difficulties
    with disclosure in this case, it is hard to have a  significant  degree
    of confidence in the respondent's contentions that  the  date  did  not
    originate with it, especially given the form has been competed  on  the
    basis that the date of birth was, "given by social services."  There is
    an additional suggestion that a "BP7" form was signed.   Neither  party
    were able to assist me with what a "BP7" form may have been.


72. The potential significance of the date  of  birth  on  the  SCR  is  as
    follows.  The applicant claims to have  been  born  on  23  June  2002,
    giving him an age of 16 upon his arrival in February 2019.  However, if
    the year assigned by the SCR is correct, or closer to the truth, it may
    provide me with a degree of assistance.  This is because  it  is  clear
    from use of 1 January as the day and month that it was a notional date,
    as is common where  dates  of  birth  are  not  otherwise  known.   The
    applicant was not cross-examined as to the point in the year  at  which
    he celebrated his  birthday;  the  respondent  did  not  challenge  his
    allocation of a June date.  Indeed, pursuant to  the  respondent's  own
    analysis, the applicant's day and month of birth was 23  June.   It  is
    common ground, therefore, between the parties that  the  applicant  was
    born on 23 June.  Adopting the inquisitorial approach I am required  to
    adopt in these proceedings, I see no reason to depart from  the  common
    ground between the parties on the issue of the in-year  timing  of  the
    applicant's day and month of birth.


73. Of course, simply because the SCR assigned the applicant  the  year  of
    birth 2001 does not mean that there is any accuracy in that assignment.
     The provenance of the assignment is not clear.  I have set  out  above
    the credibility concerns arising from the applicant's  account  of  his
    journey to this country: the confusion over whether he  did,  in  fact,
    reveal to the social workers when he first learned of his date of birth
    and age; the lack  of  clarity  concerning  what  happened  in  Turkey,
    Greece, Belgium and France; the inconsistencies between the applicant's
    claimed poverty existence during his travels,  and  the  large  sum  of
    money on  his  person  upon  his  arrival  in  this  country;  and  the
    incredibility of the suggestion that he was housed, paid, and  had  his
    journey  facilitated  by  unspecified  churches  and  other  charitable
    persons, in relation to whom the  applicant  has  provided  no  details
    whatsoever.  The applicant's account of hearing of his  mother's  death
    lacks detail and featured degrees of internal inconsistency.  The  only
    assessments of the applicant's physical appearance and demeanour I have
    been provided with have been from people who have considered him to  be
    significantly over the age of 18.  Mr Oloyd, the only  person  who  has
    seen the applicant at length on a number of occasions, had no  view  on
    his age.  Mr Underwood described the applicant's ability to look  after
    himself as "unchildlike".


74.  The  question  for  my  consideration,  therefore,  is   whether   the
    credibility concerns I have outlined above are such that, put simply, I
    cannot believe a word of what the applicant has said, or  alternatively
    whether  -  as  is  common  in  many  different  areas  of  litigation,
    especially  litigation  in  this  jurisdiction  -  he  has  overlooked,
    misremembered or even exaggerated his account, but that  at  its  heart
    lies a kernel of truth.  As noted by Stanley Burnton  J  in  Merton  at
    [28], lies are not necessarily indicative of an applicant not  being  a
    child, as they may be told for a variety of reasons.


75. I recall that, for the purposes  of  these  proceedings,  there  is  no
    dispute concerning the broad thrust of chronology  of  the  applicant's
    departure from Eritrea to  Ethiopia  and  Sudan.   The  respondent  has
    highlighted the inconsistencies in the ages provided by  the  appellant
    for when he moved to from Sudan to Ethiopia, and I have outlined  these
    at paragraph 43, above.


76. As Ms Benfield pointed out in her closing  submissions,  the  operative
    reasoning of the age assessment is  based  primarily  on  the  physical
    characteristics and demeanour of the applicant, and such considerations
    can be unreliable when based on limited interactions with a person of a
    very different culture, in the formal and artificial setting of an  age
    assessment interview.  The  material  disclosed  concerning  Ms  Cann's
    visits to the applicant reveal that no discussion took place about  his
    background, claimed age, journey to the United Kingdom, or family.


77. I reject Mr Underwood's submissions that Mr Ocaya's unguarded  remarks,
    which he later claimed not to have made,  attract  significant  weight.
    There is no evidence that he spent any more  time  with  the  applicant
    than the assessing social workers, still less that he sought to  engage
    with the  applicant's  history  and  narrative.   His  evidence,  which
    featured a signed statement of truth, was clearly inaccurate.   He  was
    at the very least confused as to what he had said to Ms Ali.  I do  not
    know what made him think that the applicant was over the age of 18.


78. There is one individual who met the applicant outside the  confines  of
    the formal age assessment process who did not  consider  the  applicant
    necessarily to be an adult.  Giles Matthews is the drop-in  manager  of
    the Harbour Project, a Swindon-based  refugee  project.   In  a  letter
    dated 18 April 2019, he  writes  that  the  applicant  arrived  at  the
    Harbour Project on 3 April 2019.  His letter states:


         "I am aware that Milton Keynes Council has assessed [the applicant]
         as clearly and obviously  over  18.   Since  his  arrival,  he  has
         attended every day and from my point of view, I would not say  that
         it is clear and obvious, from his appearance and behaviour that  he
         is over 18."


    Mr Matthews' letter, which was written 15 days after he had  first  met
    the applicant, does not say why he concludes that  he  would  "not  say
    that it is clear and obvious" that  the  applicant  is  an  adult.   Mr
    Matthews does not state that he considers the applicant to be a  child,
    but simply states that it  is  "not...  clear  and  obvious"  that  the
    applicant is an adult.  His view lends some support to the  applicant's
    case.  It is, of course, not "clear and obvious" that the applicant  is
    a child, or an adult: that is  why  the  Administrative  Court  granted
    permission to bring judicial review proceedings.


79. I find that the assignment of the year 2001 as the applicant's year  of
    birth on the SCR attracts some weight.  It was the  formal  basis  upon
    which the Home Office began to process the  applicant's  asylum  claim.
    Whatever the provenance of the date of birth  within  the  respondent's
    organisation, the fact that the Home Office recorded the date of  birth
    as being in 2001 sheds some light on my analysis. It  was  a  date  and
    year of birth which rendered the applicant an adult for the purposes of
    his asylum claim, but only just.  When the "common  ground"  month  and
    day of birth - June 23 - is factored into the assigned date  of  birth,
    that gives the applicant a date of birth of 23 June 2001.


80. If I were to prefer the respondent's approach to the likely date of the
    applicant, it would be necessary for me to place a  significant  degree
    of reliance on the very  factors  which  the  authorities  suggest  are
    unreliable, namely demeanour and physical  appearance.  I  accept  that
    there are a range of significant credibility concerns arising from  the
    applicant's claimed journey to this country,  following  his  departure
    from Sudan. I take those into account. Considering all factors  in  the
    case, in the round, to the balance of possibilities  standard,  I  find
    that the concerns I have outlined above do not operate to  deprive  the
    applicant of all credibility. He may have been mistaken in  aspects  of
    his recollection of his history.   However,  he  has  not  given  me  a
    credible account of what took place in and from Greece onwards.  It  is
    not credible that a child could exist for such  a  period  of  time  in
    those conditions.


81. The fact that the respondent social services and the Home  Office  were
    willing, in principle, to proceed on the basis that the  applicant  was
    born in 2001 is a factor of some significance.  In  my  view,  2001  is
    closer to reality than 1994 as assigned by the respondent.


82. I return to my analysis of the chronology provided  by  the  applicant.
    His recollection in re-examination of how he knew how old he  was  when
    he attended school in Eritrea is that his mother told him  how  old  he
    had been, when he used to sit at her feet while she talked to him.   As
    set out above, the unchallenged background position summarised  in  the
    age assessment is that compulsory school commences at  seven  years  of
    age in Eritrea.  The applicant has consistently said  that  he  was  at
    school for a year before he left Eritrea.  That  would  mean  that,  in
    2007 when he claims to have moved to Sudan, he would have  been  eight,
    assuming he attended the "mainstream" school he described  in  the  age
    assessment, meaning he was born in 1999.  That is closer  to  the  date
    that the SCR records social services as having been willing  to  assign
    to him when facilitating his initial asylum claim.


83. The chronology provided by the applicant of how old he was when  moving
    from Sudan  to  Ethiopia  and  back  again  featured  inaccuracies.   I
    consider these inaccuracies  arise  from  the  fact  the  applicant  is
    attempting to claim that he was younger than he was at those stages.  I
    accept that the applicant moved to a new country when he said  he  did;
    namely that he left Eritrea in 2007 for Sudan, that in 2011 he moved to
    Ethiopia, and that in 2016 he left for Turkey.  I will  return  to  the
    significance of those findings shortly.


84. I place little weight on the account provided by the applicant  of  his
    journey through Europe.  At key  junctures,  when  probed  for  further
    information in the age assessment, he declined to provide it,  becoming
    upset and requiring the interview to be suspended.  I recall  that  the
    applicant is a vulnerable individual, even if  not  a  child.   On  any
    view, he has had a traumatic experience.  However, his  assertions  are
    not supported by anything approaching the level of detail that it would
    be reasonable to expect the applicant to provide, even allowing for his
    vulnerability.  I accept that  he  travelled  through  Turkey,  Greece,
    Belgium and France.  I do not accept that he was in Athens for "two and
    a half or three years" (first witness statement, at [15]) from the  age
    of 14, nor that he was provided with the support that  he  claims  from
    the unspecified churches and charities, despite (as he claims  was  the
    case in Lesbos: see page 14 of the age assessment) the  fact  that  the
    "refugees" set fire to the aid vehicles.  He could not  remember  which
    season of the year it was when he left  Athens  (age  assessment,  page
    15), stating that he did know the difference between summer and  winter
    clothing, and that he did not have a choice  about  what  he  wore,  as
    everything was provided for him  -  despite,  on  his  case,  the  same
    benefactors giving him the relatively significant  sum  of  E390.   The
    applicant's explanation for this when pressed was that what he meant to
    say was that he did not know the difference between summer clothes  and
    winter clothes.  That is hard to believe, given  the  intense  heat  of
    Greek summers, coupled with the temperature drop over the winters.  The
    picture that emerges from the applicant's evidence is of  one  who  was
    not the young child he claimed to be upon his arrival in Greece,  given
    he claimed to be around  13  to  14  years  old.   I  accept  that  the
    applicant spent as long in Greece as he claims, but not that he was  as
    young as he claims to have been when he lived there.  He may have  been
    on the threshold of the age of majority upon his arrival  there.   That
    the applicant cannot remember the seasons,  or  account  even  for  the
    clothes he wore at different times of the year,  is  significant.   The
    account he has provided is  not  credible,  for  the  reasons  outlined
    above.  He was not, as he claims, some years away from the  age  of  18
    upon his initial arrival in Greece.  He has sought to cover up for  the
    gap in his evidence through vague assertions and evasiveness concerning
    his lengthy period there.  He arrived in Greece when he was  nearly  18
    and stayed there for two and a half to three years, attaining  the  age
    of 18 before he arrived in this country.


85. I consider that the applicant was fully aware of  the  significance  of
    having E390 upon being found  in  this  country,  given  the  financial
    prudence and  independence  he  has  demonstrated  since  his  arrival.
    Precisely because he was aware of the significance of that sum, and the
    need to ensure his narrative was consistent with his case that he was a
    child  living  off  handouts  from  unspecified  church   leaders   and
    charities, in his age assessment he said  that  it  was  for  "tea  and
    coffee", and sought to minimise the amount under cross-examination.   I
    find that the applicant in his narrative has exaggerated his account of
    being a young child fending for himself in Greece.  I find that he  was
    not as young as he claims to have been when he arrived in Europe.   For
    the reasons set out above, I find the cursory allocation of a  year  of
    birth in the SCR to be closer to the truth.  While Mr  Matthews  states
    that it is "not... clear and obvious" that the applicant is  an  adult,
    when assessed to the balance of probabilities standard, I find that  he
    is an adult, and was when he arrived here in February 2019.


86. Having considered all the evidence in the case in  the  round,  to  the
    balance of probabilities standard, doing the best I can,  I  find  that
    the applicant was born on 23 June 1999.  He attended school aged  7  in
    Eritrea for a year, before leaving in 2007 aged 8.  He moved to  Sudan,
    where he stayed from the ages of 8 to 12, before moving to Ethiopia  in
    2011, where he stayed for another five years, before  setting  off  for
    the United Kingdom via Europe  in  2016.   Upon  his  arrival  here  in
    February 2019, the applicant was 19 years of age.


SUMMARY OF DECISION


87. It is determined that the applicant's date of birth is 23 June 1999  so
    that on arrival in the United Kingdom on 18 February 2019,  he  was  19
    years of age.





    Signed        Stephen H Smith                Date 23 January 2020


    Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith



Upper Tribunal                          JR/3432/2019
Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Judicial Review Decision





The Queen on the application of

BT (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

versus

MILTON KEYNES COUNCIL


BEFORE UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH
SITTING AT Field House, 15 Breams Buildings, London, EC4A 1DZ

ON 23 JANUARY 2020






UPON HEARING Ms A Benfield, Counsel for the applicant and  Mr  A  Underwood,
QC, for the respondent on 8, 11 and 21 November 2019;

AND UPON the Tribunal having heard oral evidence from the applicant,  Nicola
Cann, Huma Ali, Collin Ocaya and Ola Oloyd, and  the  Tribunal  having  read
the witness  statements  and  evidence  contained  in  the  Judicial  Review
Bundle;

AND UPON Upper Tribunal Judge Coker awarding the applicant the costs of  his
application dated 11 September 2019 and the costs of the attendance  of  the
applicant's solicitor and counsel at the hearing on 16 September 2019 on  an
indemnity basis, on 18 September 2019;

AND UPON Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith  ordering  that  the  respondent
pays the applicant's costs of making the application of  20  November  2019,
to be assessed if not agreed, on 20 November 2019;

AND UPON the applicant and respondent having  made  written  submissions  in
relation to costs upon sight of a draft, embargoed copy of the judgment;

AND UPON THE TRIBUNAL handing down judgment on 23  January  2020  and  there
being no appearance by or on behalf of  the  applicant  and  the  respondent
when judgment was handed down;


IT IS DECLARED THAT


1. The applicant's date of birth is 23 June 1999, and that on  his  arrival
   in the United Kingdom on 18 February 2019 he was 19 years of age


Costs


1. The costs orders made by Judge Coker  and  Judge  Stephen  Smith  on  18
   September 2019 and 20 November 2019 respectively remain in force;
2. The applicant be  awarded  his  reasonable  costs  incurred  between  11
   November 2019 and 21 November 2019, to be assessed if not agreed;
3. I make no order as to costs for the respondent's costs.

REASONS

   1. The events set out at [10] to [14] of the substantive judgment of  the
      Upper Tribunal highlight the procedural  difficulties  encountered  in
      this application due to the unsatisfactory conduct of the  respondent.
      The  respondent's  failure  to  disclose  relevant  material  in   its
      possession until the afternoon of the second (and final)  day  of  the
      fact finding hearing on 11 November 2019 necessitated reconvening  the
      Tribunal to hear closing submissions on 21 November 2019.   All  costs
      incurred by the applicant in connection with  the  reconvened  hearing
      are  directly  attributable  to  the  respondent's  failure  to   make
      disclosure  in  a  timely  manner,  against  a  background  of   prior
      disclosure failings on the part of the respondent.

   2. While the applicant would had to have considered the  late  disclosure
      materials in any event, had disclosure taken place on a  timely  basis
      in accordance with the directions of the Tribunal, such  consideration
      would have taken place in  the  context  of  the  applicant's  overall
      preparation for the fact-finding  hearing.   Timely  disclosure  would
      undoubtedly have enabled the applicant's  consideration  of  the  late
      disclosure materials to have been more efficient, and taken less time,
      than the additional time taken to consider those  same  matters  after
      the fact finding hearing.  A significant amount  of  additional  costs
      had to be incurred due to the conduct of the respondent.

   3. I have  considered  whether  it  is  possible  to  reduce  the  amount
      recoverable by the applicant from 11 November onwards to  reflect  the
      fact that at least some of the costs then  incurred  would  have  been
      incurred prior to the fact-finding hearing, and thus  would  not  have
      been recoverable under normal costs principles. I do not consider that
      that would be practicable, nor would doing so be proportionate to  the
      judicial time that would inevitably be required  in  the  event  of  a
      dispute.

   4. In light of the respondent's overall conduct of the case, as  outlined
      at [10] to [14] of the substantive judgment, I do not consider that an
      order for costs in favour of the respondent is appropriate.  As  such,
      I disallow the respondent's costs, as I consider that it is consistent
      with the overriding objective of the Upper Tribunal to do so.

PERMISSION TO APPEAL

There was no application for permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal
and accordingly I refuse permission.  There is no arguable case that I  have
erred in law or there is some other reason that  requires  consideration  by
the Court of Appeal.

           Stephen H Smith

         Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

           23 January 2020

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).



