

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Case No:  JR/3571/2019

                                                                    Court 11

                                                                 Field House
                                                      15-25 Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1DZ

                                                              6 January 2020

                                   Before:

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


B E T W E E N:

                                  magUtuza

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT



Mr PHIL HAYWOOD appeared on behalf of the Applicant
Mr NICHOLAS OSTROWSKI appeared on behalf of the Respondent


APPROVED JUDGMENT


UTJ GLEESON:  The applicant has permission to seek judicial  review  of  the
   respondent's decision on 2 July 2019 to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation
   order and to refuse to treat his further submissions as a  paragraph  353
   fresh claim.

2. The applicant is a citizen of Zimbabwe and a long-term  overstayer.   The
   applicant has legal aid in these proceedings with effect from 14  October
   2019.

3. He arrived in the United Kingdom on 5 May 2000, on  a  visit  visa  which
   was varied, in time, to a student visa, but has not had extant  leave  to
   remain since 30 September 2001.  The applicant asserts  that  he  claimed
   asylum on arrival at Gatwick Airport but  thereafter  he  absconded,  and
   that claim did not proceed beyond the initial screening interview.

4. Between October 2002 and August 2018, the applicant was convicted  of  31
   criminal offences on 16 occasions, including offences against the person,
   property offences, fraud and kindred offences, public disorder  offences,
   offences relating to police, courts or prisons, and  other  miscellaneous
   offences.  In April 2009, he was convicted of assault occasioning  actual
   bodily harm, for which he was sentenced to 6 months' imprisonment.

5. On 20 September 2010, the applicant was convicted of assault  occasioning
   grievous bodily harm with intent,  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  32
   months' imprisonment. The applicant is therefore a foreign  criminal  and
   sections 32 and 33 of the Borders Citizenship and  Immigration  Act  2009
   apply to him.  On 29 May 2012, the respondent made a  deportation  order.
   The applicant appealed unsuccessfully against that decision,  but  on  24
   October 2012, his appeal against that decision was dismissed.

6. On 24 October 2012, the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Kingston  Crown
   Court dismissed the applicant's appeal  against  the  deportation  order.
   The applicant's offender manager had  raised  the  possibility  that  the
   applicant might be suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder.  First-
   tier Judge Jhirad and Sir Jeffrey James  KBE  CMG  (a  non-legal  Member)
   found the applicant to be an unreliable witness who  had  not  discharged
   the paragraph 339L burden of establishing the facts on which  he  relied.
   No weight was placed on the offender manager's opinion as she was  not  a
   psychiatrist, psychologist, or general practitioner and  had  not  stated
   how she had reached her conclusion or what tests,  if  any,  she  carried
   out. They were not prepared to assume in the applicant's favour  that  he
   would be unable to demonstrate loyalty to the regime in Zimbabwe,  simply
   because the applicant asserted it.

7. In 2014, following further submissions, the respondent again  refused  to
   revoke  the  deportation  order  and  refused  international  protection,
   relying on the previous finding by the 2012 Tribunal that  the  applicant
   was not a reliable witness, based on inconsistencies  and  contradictions
   in the account given in 2012, and his failure  to  claim  asylum  at  the
   earliest opportunity.

8. The applicant appealed  again  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier
   Judge Landes on 2 April 2015 dismissed his  appeal.   The  applicant  did
   rely on having previously been  arrested  and  tortured  because  of  his
   refusal to carry out an assassination order while working for the CIO  in
   Zimbabwe.  At [34], the 2015 Tribunal noted that the applicant  had  been
   formally diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder, in a brief letter
   dated 15 February  2013  from  Dr  Al-Asadi  at  the  Oxford  Health  NHS
   Foundation Trust and another letter from Dr  Ashraf  at  the  Westongrove
   Partnership  dated  27  December  2012  confirming  the  diagnosis.   The
   applicant was in the care of the Healthy Minds service, to  whom  he  had
   been referred in December 2012.

9. In addition, the applicant had produced  arrest  warrants  from  Zimbabwe
   and a letter from a Zimbabwe MP, Mr Chihota, saying that  he  was  to  be
   prosecuted; and he said that  that  his  brother  had  been  arrested  in
   Zimbabwe in December 2014 because the authorities discovered that he  was
   communicating with the applicant.

10. The Tribunal set out the discrepancies in the applicant's oral  evidence
   and  his  asylum  interview  and  found  that   there   were   'so   many
   inconsistencies in the account the [applicant] gave to  different  people
   at different times about his family members.  Taken  together  it  is  an
   indication that the applicant says whatever he feels is  most  convenient
   at the time about his family members, regardless of  whether  it  is  the
   truth'.

11. Even having regard to the mental health evidence, and giving  weight  to
   the delay in claiming asylum, the Tribunal  found  that  the  applicant's
   core account  lacked  credibility.   The  Tribunal  then  discounted  the
   Zimbabwean documents on the basis that the  applicant  had  already  been
   found not to be a credible witness.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
   direct itself expressly as  to  the  guidance  set  out  in  the  starred
   decision of the Immigration Appeal Tribunal in Secretary of State for the
   Home  Department  v  D   (Tamil)   [2002]   UKIAT   00702   (Devaseelan).
   Observations at [54] may indicate  that  the  Judge  was  aware  of  that
   responsibility.   The applicant's account was dismissed in  its  entirety
   and the appeal failed.

12. On 7 October 2018, the applicant was detained under  immigration  powers
   at the end of a custodial sentence of 12 weeks' imprisonment for battery.

13. In November 2018,  the  applicant  was  interviewed  by  the  Zimbabwean
   authorities to obtain a travel  document  and  on  4  January  2019,  the
   respondent served notice of arrangements for deportation.  The  applicant
   challenged  that  by  judicial  review:  the  respondent  cancelled   the
   deportation   arrangements   and   agreed   to   consider   his   further
   representations, including new medical evidence.   The  further  evidence
   was as follows:

        i) A Rule 35 report by Dr Qusai Arsiwala dated 1 September 2014;

       ii) A Rule 35 report by Dr G Hillman, Consultant Psychiatrist, on 15
           October 2015;

      iii) A medico-legal report by Dr Thelma  Thomas  of  Medical  Justice
           dated 10 December 2015;

       iv) A psychiatric report prepared by Professor Cornelius  Katona  of
           the Helen Bamber Foundation, former Dean of the Royal College of
           Psychiatrists dated 4 December 2016, supplemented by an addendum
           psychiatric report from the same author on 24 March 2017; and

        v) The applicant's witness statement dated 14 December 2018.

14.  On  17  May  2019,  the  respondent  refused  to  treat   the   further
   representations as a fresh claim and declined to revoke  the  deportation
   order.  That is the decision against which this judicial review claim  is
   made.

15. Permission for judicial  review  was  granted  on  the  basis  that  the
   respondent had arguably erred in concluding that the new material  before
   her  was  not  significantly  different  from  the  evidence   previously
   considered.  On 18 September 2019, the respondent filed detailed  grounds
   of defence offering to reconsider the application and pay the applicant's
   reasonable costs, arguing that the application had been rendered academic
   by her offer.  The consent order was never sealed.   It appears that  two
   different case workers took different views on  whether  to  defend  this
   application: on 2 October 2019, the  respondent  withdrew  her  offer  to
   reconsider, having concluded that 'the case can and should be defended'.

16. Both parties have assisted the Upper Tribunal with  written  submissions
   before the substantive hearing, as well as a substantial bundle of agreed
   documents.

The applicant's case

17. For the applicant, Mr Haywood relied on the summary of the  fresh  claim
   evidence at [1]-[38] of his  21  October  2019  skeleton  argument.    He
   argued that at the second First-tier Tribunal appeal in 2015,  there  was
   some very limited psychiatric evidence before  the  First-tier  Judge,  a
   short letter indicating that the applicant had a presentation  consistent
   with post-traumatic stress disorder, but no evidence  at  all  about  the
   likely causation of scarring, now provided in Dr Thomas' report.

18. The First-tier Tribunal in 2015 also did not have  the  benefit  of  the
   evidence  of  Professor   Katona   that   the   applicant's   psychiatric
   presentation might well be relevant in evaluating the manner in which  he
   gave his evidence, and the possibility of  consistency  and/or  omission,
   when credibility was assessed.  The evidence of Professor Katona included
   an indication that the applicant might present as a risk of self-harm  or
   suicide if returned.

19. The new evidence presented was relevant and cogent,  and  having  regard
   to the modest test identified by Lord  Justice  Buxton  (with  whom  Lord
   Justice Jonathan Parker and Lord Justice Moore-Bick agreed) in WM (DRC) v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ  149,  it  was
   incumbent on the respondent's decision maker in the 17 May 2019 letter to
   deal with that evidence so as to demonstrate that it  had  been  properly
   considered and scrutinised.  At [4] in his skeleton argument, Mr  Haywood
   set out a number of respects in which the applicant  contends  that  this
   did not happen and that the respondent's  refusal  letter  lacks  anxious
   scrutiny.

20. Mr Haywood also contended that the respondent substituted her own  views
   on the merits of the new evidence, rather than considering how  it  might
   fare before an  immigration  judge.   The  respondent's  views  were  not
   determinative and in treating them as such, the respondent had  erred  in
   law (see WM (Democratic Republic of the  Congo)  at  [11]).   Mr  Haywood
   argued that a putative immigration judge would not be bound to reject the
   credibility of the applicant's evidence when considered in the context of
   all the evidence now available, nor to regard the applicant as a liar and
   place no weight on his evidence. The Rule 35  reports  were  prepared  in
   circumstances of urgency, but by doctors employed by the respondent.

21. Dr Thomas' report  was  prepared  to  the  demanding  Istanbul  Protocol
   standard.  He was not required to consider, as a likely  cause  that  had
   always to be actively discounted, the possibility of  self-infliction  by
   proxy (see KV (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
   [2019] UKSC 10 at [34]-[35] in the opinion of Lord Wilson JSC, with  whom
   Lady Hale, President of the Supreme  Court,  and  Lady  Black  JSC,  Lord
   Briggs JSC and Lord Kitchin JSC agreed.  Nor was it Dr  Thomas'  role  to
   try to establish why the applicant  had  delayed  in  making  his  asylum
   claim.

22. Similarly, Professor Katona's reports contained a careful evaluation  of
   the applicant's  psychiatric  presentation  with  the  Istanbul  Protocol
   clearly in mind.  He did not accept the applicant's account uncritically.
    The treatment in the refusal letter of the medical evidence  was  flawed
   and unsustainable.

23. The respondent's 2 September 2015 letter concerned  a  different  issue,
   the maintenance of detention, and did not take account of Dr  Thomas'  or
   Professor Katona's  reports.  Mr  Haywood  submitted  that  overall,  the
   respondent's  refusal  letter  lacked  anxious  scrutiny  and  should  be
   quashed.

24. It was not necessary to call on  Mr  Haywood  to  amplify  his  skeleton
   argument at the hearing.

The respondent's case

25. On 26 November 2019, the respondent filed amended  detailed  grounds  of
   defence, with leave, which were settled by Mr Ostrowski, who has appeared
   throughout in this application.  Mr Ostrowski reminded the Upper Tribunal
   of the negative credibility findings in the two previous decisions, which
   would form the Devaseelan starting point for any future immigration judge
   considering an appeal by this applicant.  Mr Ostrowski  argued  that  the
   case now advanced was essentially the same  as  that  which  the  earlier
   decisions had considered.  The respondent had been entitled  to  conclude
   that the new medical evidence did not advance the applicant's case, given
   the negative credibility findings in 2012 and 2015.  The  respondent  had
   been entitled to have regard to her letter of 2 September 2015, of  which
   the applicant and his solicitors were aware, which dealt with one of  the
   Rule 35 reports in the context of whether it was appropriate to  maintain
   detention.

26. Mr Ostrowski contended that the respondent did not  err  in  failing  to
   refer in  the  decision  letter  to  the  applicant's  19  December  2018
   statement or to the element of the further submissions which  related  to
   the applicant's interview with a Zimbabwean official,  nor  to  the  2015
   First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   Both  the  statement  and  the  further
   submissions  were  'predicated  on  the  premise  that  the   applicant's
   statements are capable of belief' and the failure to consider whether the
   statement or the  further  submission  regarding  the  interview  with  a
   Zimbabwean official should lead to a different credibility conclusion was
   immaterial.   The  April  2015  decision  was  'utterly  damning  to  the
   applicant' and omitting to refer to it was  neither  a  lack  of  anxious
   scrutiny, nor material.

27. The respondent was plainly aware of the new evidence and  summarised  it
   in her decision letter.  She  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  new
   evidence 'does not offer proof of [the applicant's] credibility'  and  to
   reject it.

28. In the alternative, if there was a failure to exercise anxious  scrutiny
   in the respondent's  decision  letter,  there  was  no  evidence  of  its
   materiality.  Mr Ostrowski argued that it  was  highly  likely  that  the
   outcome for the applicant would not  have  been  substantially  different
   even if anxious scrutiny had been  applied  as  the  adverse  credibility
   findings would always  have  been  fatal  to  consideration  of  the  new
   evidence.

29. Mr Ostrowski argued that the Upper Tribunal could not  interfere  unless
   her view that the applicant's further submissions would have no  prospect
   of success before an immigration judge was  so  bad  that  no  reasonable
   Secretary of State could have reached that conclusion.   If the Secretary
   of  State's  view  of  the  further  submissions   was   not   Wednesbury
   unreasonable at that level, the Upper Tribunal's reviewing  function  was
   not engaged, and the judicial review claim must fail.

30. In his skeleton argument, and in oral argument, Mr Ostrowski  relied  on
   the detailed grounds of defence.  Much of his argument  in  the  skeleton
   argument and oral submissions has been rehearsed above in setting out the
   amended detailed grounds of defence. I have had regard to the contents of
   that skeleton argument, and to the oral submissions  which  Mr  Ostrowski
   made at the hearing.

31. Mr  Ostrowski  relied  on  the  negative  credibility  findings  in  the
   previous decisions, and on  Devaseelan.   He  accepted  that  Dr  Thomas'
   report was prepared to the Istanbul Protocol standard and that  he  found
   the applicant's body scarring to be 'highly consistent', while  Professor
   Katona  found  the  applicant's  post-traumatic   stress   disorder   and
   depression 'congruent with' the account he gave.  Mr Ostrowski  continued
   to argue that the question was whether the Secretary  of  State  got  the
   balance so wrong  that  her  decision  could  neither  be  explained  nor
   maintained, and that the expert evidence, while strong, was not  perfect.
   The respondent's position did not require  a  detailed  exegesis  as  the
   findings of fact and negative credibility were so  poor  that  no  expert
   evidence could result in the applicant's credibility being accepted now.



Legal framework

32. I reserved judgment, which I now give.  I begin by reminding  myself  of
   the test for a fresh claim in paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration  Rules
   HC395 (as amended):

      "353. When a human rights or protection  claim  has  been  refused  or
      withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of these  Rules
      and any appeal relating to  that  claim  is  no  longer  pending,  the
      decision maker will consider any further submissions and, if rejected,
      will then  determine  whether  they  amount  to  a  fresh  claim.  The
      submissions will amount to a fresh claim  if  they  are  significantly
      different from the material that has previously been  considered.  The
      submissions will only be significantly different if the content:

          (i)     had not already been considered; and

          (ii)    taken together with the  previously  considered  material,
           created a realistic prospect  of  success,  notwithstanding  its
           rejection.  This  paragraph  does  not  apply  to  claims   made
           overseas."

33. In WM (DRC), the parties were in broad agreement about the Secretary  of
   State's twofold task, to identify whether  the  material  had  previously
   been considered, and then  go  on  to  consider  paragraph  353(ii),  the
   prospect  of  success  being  that  before  an  immigration  judge,   not
   necessarily what the respondent herself thinks of the  new  material,  in
   the context of previous decisions.   The  question  of  previous  adverse
   credibility findings is considered at [6] in the opinion of Lord  Justice
   Buxton:

      "The task of the Secretary of State

      6.    ... To set aside one point that was said to be a matter of  some
      concern, the Secretary of State, in assessing the reliability  of  new
      material, can of course have in mind both how the material relates  to
      other material already found by an adjudicator  to  be  reliable,  and
      also have in mind, where that is relevantly probative, any finding  as
      to the honesty or reliability of the applicant that was  made  by  the
      previous adjudicator. However, he must also  bear  in  mind  that  the
      latter may be of little relevance when, as is alleged in both  of  the
      particular cases before us, the new material does not emanate from the
      applicant himself, and thus cannot be said to be automatically suspect
      because    it    comes     from     a     tainted     source.     ..."
       [Emphasis added]

34. At [7] and [9]-[10], Lord Justice Buxton defined the role of  the  court
   in reviewing the respondent's decision on a fresh claim application:

      "7.    The  rule  only  imposes  a  somewhat  modest  test  that   the
      application has to meet before it becomes a fresh  claim.  First,  the
      question is whether there is a realistic prospect  of  success  in  an
      application before an [immigration judge], but  not  more  than  that.
      Second, as Mr Nicol  QC  pertinently  pointed  out,  the  [immigration
      judge] himself does not have to achieve certainty, but only  to  think
      that there is a real risk of the applicant being persecuted on return.
      Third, and importantly, since asylum is in issue the consideration  of
      all the decision-makers, the Secretary of State, the  adjudicator  and
      the court, must be informed by the anxious scrutiny  of  the  material
      that is axiomatic in decisions that if made incorrectly  may  lead  to
      the applicant's exposure to persecution. If authority  is  needed  for
      that proposition, see per Lord Bridge of Harwich in Bugdaycay  v  SSHD
      [1987] AC 514 at p 531F. ...

      The task of the court

      9. ...Accordingly, a court when reviewing a decision of the  Secretary
      of State as to whether a fresh claim exists must address the following
      matters.

      10.   First, has the Secretary of  State  asked  himself  the  correct
      question? The question is not whether the Secretary of  State  himself
      thinks that the new claim is a good one or should succeed, but whether
      there is a realistic prospect of an adjudicator, applying the rule  of
      anxious scrutiny, thinking that the applicant will  be  exposed  to  a
      real risk of persecution on return: see �7  above.  The  Secretary  of
      State of course can, and no doubt logically should, treat his own view
      of the merits as a starting-point for that enquiry; but it is  only  a
      starting-point in the consideration of a question that  is  distinctly
      different from the exercise of the Secretary of State  making  up  his
      own mind. Second, in addressing that question, both in respect of  the
      evaluation of the facts and in respect of the legal conclusions to  be
      drawn from those facts, has  the  Secretary  of  State  satisfied  the
      requirement of anxious scrutiny? If the court cannot be satisfied that
      the answer to both of those questions is in the  affirmative  it  will
      have to grant an application for review of the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision."           [Emphasis added]

Analysis

35. In this application, both the 2012 and 2015 decisions were made  without
   proper medical evidence being placed before the Tribunals.  It  is  right
   that the applicant's allegations of  torture  were  made  late,  and  the
   allegation of rape even later.  If this matter were  to  come  before  an
   immigration judge, that Judge would have to begin his deliberations  with
   the credibility findings of the 2015 panel as set out in Devaseelan.    I
   remind myself that at guideline (6), the Devaseelan Tribunal said this:

      "(6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant  relies  on  facts
      that are  not  materially  different  from  those  put  to  the  first
      Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by what is  in  essence
      the same evidence as that available to the Appellant at that time, the
      second Adjudicator should regard the issues as settled  by  the  first
      Adjudicator's determination and make his findings in  line  with  that
      determination rather than allowing the matter to be  re-litigated.  We
      draw attention to the phrase 'the same evidence as that  available  to
      the Appellant' at the time of the first determination. We have  chosen
      this phrase not only in order to accommodate guidelines  (4)  and  (5)
      above, but also because, in respect of evidence that was available  to
      the Appellant, he must be taken to have made his choices about how  it
      should be presented.  An  Appellant  cannot  be  expected  to  present
      evidence of which he has no knowledge: but if (for example) he chooses
      not to give oral evidence in his first appeal, that does not mean that
      the issues or the available evidence in the second appeal are rendered
      any different by his proposal to  give  oral  evidence  (of  the  same
      facts) on this occasion."

36. In this case, the evidence of the doctors was  evidence  which  was  not
   before the First-tier Tribunal in 2015, although it was available to  the
   applicant.  Two of the respondent's own  doctors  indicated  in  Rule  35
   decisions that they had seen marks on the applicant's body indicative  of
   possible torture in the past.  There were three medical reports which  Mr
   Ostrowski accepted had been made by reference to  the  Istanbul  Protocol
   standard and in which Dr Thomas found that the marks on  the  applicant's
   body were 'highly consistent' with his account, while at  [6.4]-[6.5]  in
   his first report, Professor Katona said that  the  applicant's  scarring,
   physical and mental health  problems  are  'highly  consistent  with  the
   account he gave' and his responses and demeanour during the  consultation
   were 'congruent with his account'.

37. The marks found on the applicant's body listed  in  Dr  Thomas'  opinion
   were numerous. Many of them the 42 scars recorded are  said  to  be  from
   football injuries.  There are however 11 scars rated as highly consistent
   with being cut with a knife during ill treatment, three scars which might
   either be a knife or being hit with a hard  edged  object,  two  sets  of
   scars (no 15 and no 40) which were said to be a  deliberate,  distinctive
   pattern intended to identify ex-CIO officers who had  rebelled,  so  that
   they would always be recognisable if they survived,  5  scars  consistent
   with or typical of cigarette burns, and handcuff scars on the applicant's
   left wrist.   The applicant has flashbacks meeting the ICD 10  diagnostic
   criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder.

38. At [6.5] in Dr Thomas' report, she noted that he gave a mostly  coherent
   and consistent account, but was hesitant and less clear  when  describing
   some of the more traumatic-sounding experiences. At [6.6] she noted  that
   discrepancies in reporting sexual abuse are not  uncommon,  referring  to
   research by Dr Juliet Cohen MA MB BUSINESS DipRCOG MRCGP of  the  Medical
   Foundation in 2001,  entitled  Errors  of  Recall  and  Credibility:  Can
   omissions and discrepancies in successive statements reasonably  be  said
   to undermine credibility of testimony and a  report  from  D  Bogner  and
   others,  entitled Impact of Sexual Violence  on  disclosure  during  Home
   Office interviews published in the British Journal of Psychiatry in 2007.



39. In his main report, Professor Katona also  relied  on  the  work  of  Dr
   Cohen, and on a report by Jane Herlihy and Stuart Turner entitled  Asylum
   claims and Memory of Trauma: sharing  our  knowledge,  published  in  the
   British Journal of Psychiatry in 2007.   There is no  indication  in  the
   refusal letter that the respondent  considered  whether  the  applicant's
   mental state could have affected his evidence in  the  ways  set  out  in
   these research reports.

40. There is no consideration at all of the applicant's 2018 statement.

41. If an immigration judge were to consider this evidence, he would err  in
   law if he dismissed the new evidence solely by reference to the  negative
   credibility findings in the previous decision (see Mibanga v Secretary of
   State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 367  at  [24]-[25]  in  the
   judgment of Mr Justice Wilson, with  whom  Lord  Justice  Ward  and  Lord
   Justice Buxton agreed), without evaluating all of the evidence now before
   him.

42. That, however, is precisely what this respondent's refusal letter  does.
     At [53], she says this:

      "53.  Furthermore, it is noted that [the applicant] was found  not  to
      be a credible witness or a witness of truth and his account of  events
      had contradictions and inconsistencies.  The evidence provided in your
      submissions  of  7  January  2019  does  not  offer  proof   of   [the
      applicant's] credibility.  They do  not  make  a  strong  argument  to
      negate the findings of the  appeal  in  the  First-tier  determination
      promulgated on 24 October 2012, where the immigration judge gave  full
      consideration to [the applicant's] torture and  mental  health  claims
      and found that his claim was not credible as he was not  considered  a
      witness of truth.

      54.    After  assessing  the  supporting   evidence   provided,   [the
      applicant] is still not considered to be a witness of truth."

43. The respondent has not addressed the observation in WM  (DRC)  that  the
   reliability of the applicant as a witness of  truth  'may  be  of  little
   relevance when, as is alleged in both of the particular cases before  us,
   the new material does not emanate from the applicant  himself,  and  thus
   cannot be said to be  automatically  suspect  because  it  comes  from  a
   tainted source'.  The new material here is not so tainted: there are  two
   reports from the respondent's own doctors, and three  prepared  with  the
   demanding Istanbul Protocol standard in mind, the reliability of which Mr
   Ostrowski does not challenge.

44. If an immigration judge were to consider the medical  evidence  reports,
   and the applicant's latest statement,  properly  directing  himself  with
   reference to Devaseelan, it cannot be said that  there  is  no  realistic
   prospect that the immigration judge would diverge from  the  decision  of
   the 2015 Tribunal, which had only one rather vague report before it.

Order

45. The parties having reached agreement on all ancillary matters on  Friday
   17 January 2020, the Upper Tribunal ORDERS that:

   1) The respondent's decision of 2 July 2019 is quashed.

   2) The  respondent  shall  reconsider  whether  the  applicant's  further
      representations constitute a fresh claim, pursuant to paragraph 353 of
      the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended),  and  whether   it   is
      appropriate to revoke the deportation order in force against him.

   3) The respondent shall issue a fresh decision letter, not later  than  3
      months from  the  sealing  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's  order  in  this
      application.

   4) The applicant is legally aided with effect from 14 October  2019.   It
      is unnecessary to make an order under section 26  of  the  Legal  Aid,
      Sentencing  and  Punishment  of  Offenders  Act  2012,   because   the
      respondent has agreed to pay his costs in these proceedings.

   5) The respondent will pay the  applicant's  reasonable  costs  of  these
      proceedings, to be subject to detailed assessment if not agreed.  This
      order includes the direction given at the November 2019  hearing  that
      the respondent pay the costs of that hearing.

Appeal

46. Neither party has made an application for permission to  appeal  to  the
   Court of Appeal.  In the  absence  of  any  such  application,  and  with
   reference to paragraph 44(4B) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
   Rules 2008 (as amended), I have  considered  whether  I  should  give  or
   refuse permission to appeal.

47. I refuse permission to appeal because I am not satisfied that  there  is
   any arguable error of law in the judgment I have given.

                  ----------------------------------------

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/3571/2020


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                  The Queen on the application of magutuza
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Phil Haywood of Counsel, instructed by  Haris
Ali Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and  Mr  Nicholas  Ostrowski,  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 6 January 2020.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

1) The applicant has permission to seek judicial review of the  respondent's
   decision on 2 July 2019 to refuse to revoke a deportation  order  and  to
   refuse to treat his further submissions as a paragraph 353  fresh  claim.
   He is a citizen of Zimbabwe.

2) For the reasons set out in my judgment, I have quashed  the  respondent's
   decision.  The applicant's further submissions and application to  revoke
   the deportation order remain before the respondent for a lawful decision.

Order


3) I therefore make an Order quashing  the  Respondent's  decision  dated  2
   July 2019.

4)  The  respondent  shall  reconsider  whether  the   applicant's   further
   representations  and  supporting  evidence  constitute  a  fresh   claim,
   pursuant to paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules  HC395  (as  amended),
   and whether it is appropriate to revoke the deportation  order  in  force
   against him.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

5)  There  was  no  application  for  permission  to  appeal.   Pursuant  to
   paragraph 44(4B) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
   (as amended), I have considered whether to grant permission to appeal  to
   the Court of Appeal.

6) I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  because  I  am  not
   satisfied that there is any error of law in my judgment.


Costs

7) The applicant is legally aided with effect from 14 October 2019.   It  is
   unnecessary to  make  an  order  under  section  26  of  the  Legal  Aid,
   Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, because  the  respondent
   has agreed to pay his costs in these proceedings.

8) The respondent  will  pay  the  applicant's  reasonable  costs  of  these
   proceedings, to be subject to detailed assessment if not agreed.

           Judith A J C Gleeson
Signed:     Upper Tribunal Judge  Gleeson            Dated:      20  January
2020


Home Office Ref:                        Decision(s) sent  to  above  parties
on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------------

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).


