

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/3273/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                  The Queen on the application of Venu [D]
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr J Gajjar of Counsel, instructed on  a  direct
access basis by the Applicant and Mr Z Malik of Counsel, instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at  a  hearing  at
Field House, London on 8th March 2019.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

 1. The Applicant, a citizen of India born on 22 January 1973, was  granted
    permission to apply for Judicial Review of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision dated 5 February 2018 refusing his application for  indefinite
    leave to remain in United Kingdom as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, and to
    the decision maintaining that on administrative review dated  21  March
    2018.


 2. The Applicant's application indefinite leave to remain was  refused  by
    the Respondent on two grounds, first that it was not desirable for  the
    Applicant to be granted indefinite leave to remain due to his character
    and conduct under  paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  and
    secondly, that  the  Applicant's  claimed  current  earnings  were  not
    genuine under paragraph 19(i) of Appendix A to the  Immigration  Rules.
    The factual bases behind both reasons for refusal,  was  in  essence  a
    discrepancy between the earnings  that  the  Applicant  claimed  in  an
    earlier application for leave to remain as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant
    and the earnings that he had declared to HMRC for the corresponding tax
    year.


 3. The application for Judicial Review was  pursued  on  four  grounds  as
    follows.  First, the refusal under paragraph 322(5) of the  Immigration
    Rules was procedurally unfair, having  been  made  without  any  proper
    notice or opportunity for the Applicant to make submissions in relation
    to the substance of the decision.  Secondly, it was  irrational  and/or
    procedurally unfair for  the  Respondent  not  to  have  permitted  the
    Applicant to submit additional evidence that the Administrative  Review
    stage.  Thirdly,  the  decision  under  paragraph  322  (five)  of  the
    Immigration Rules was irrational and the Respondent  did  not  properly
    exercise  her  discretion.   Finally,  the  decision  to   refuse   the
    application under paragraph 19 of Appendix A the Immigration Rules  was
    irrational, a proper assessment  not  having  been  undertaken  by  the
    Respondent.


 4. The substantive hearing of this application  for  judicial  review  was
    heard on 8 March 2019 and prior to the hand down of  judgement  in  the
    present application, the Court of Appeal handed down its  judgement  in
    Balajigari v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA civ
    673.  The four appeals heard together by the Court of Appeal  concerned
    the meaning of paragraph  322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    approach that should be taken to the application of that  paragraph  in
    the case of this kind, with a focus on the requirements  of  procedural
    fairness in the making of a  decision.   Whatever  the  merits  of  the
    application for  judicial  review  prior  to  this,  that  decision  is
    accepted by both parties as being  relevant,  binding  and  essentially
    determinative of the key issues in the present application for Judicial
    Review in the Applicant's favour such  that  the  application  must  be
    granted and the decisions under challenge quashed.


 5. The parties were given the opportunity to  make  submissions  following
    the decision in Balajigari and given the agreement that this is one  of
    the cohort of cases to be determined in accordance with that  decision,
    were given an opportunity to agree a form of consent and/or   order  to
    dispose of the present proceedings.  The parties have  been  unable  to
    reach agreement and therefore this decision is  being  handed  down  in
    relatively  short  form  to  bring  an  end  to  proceedings  with   an
    appropriate order.


 6. The application for  Judicial  Review  is  granted,  primarily  on  the
    grounds of procedural fairness and for the reasons given by  the  Court
    of Appeal in Balajigari.  The Respondent  has  not  made  any  specific
    submissions in relation to this application for judicial  review,  save
    for accepting that it is one of the cohort  of  cases  covered  by  the
    decision in Balajigari and the Respondent's submissions in  that  claim
    and the other three heard together with it, have been relied upon as to
    the Secretary of States position generally in relation to such cases.


 7. Those submissions proposed that in this cohort of cases,  the  decision
    under challenge would be withdrawn (or in the present case  quashed  as
    no agreement has been reached  for  withdrawal),  following  which  the
    application for leave to remain would be  reconsidered  in  an  orderly
    manner amongst the cohort.  Submissions were made as  to  a  number  of
    ancillary matters, including costs, permission  to  work,  leave  under
    section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971, declarations or letters  as  to
    dishonesty, provisions for future human  rights  claims  and  right  of
    appeal against a  future  adverse  decision  and  the  consequences  of
    voluntary departure.  Some but not all  of  these  issues  remained  in
    dispute between the  Applicant  in  the  present  proceedings  and  the
    Respondent; in addition to which there is a dispute as to the timescale
    for reconsideration of the application.


 8. The two areas of dispute  between  the  parties  remaining  immediately
    prior to hand down of this judgment were in relation to the  timing  of
    actions by the Respondent in relation to  the  reconsideration  of  the
    Applicant's application and as to costs.  The Respondent submitted that
    there should be no timescale for the sending of  a  "minded  to  refuse
    letter" and that a new decision should be made within three  months  of
    any response  from  the  Applicant  to  such  a  letter.   However,  no
    substantive reasons have been given in support of  this  position.   In
    light of the delays and repeated failure of the  Respondent  to  comply
    with directions in this case  following  the  decision  in  Balajigari,
    together with the lack of reasons for the timescales  proposed  by  the
    Respondent, it is appropriate to include in the order below an  initial
    deadline for the "minded to refuse letter" and for a new decision to be
    made within two months of any response.


 9. As to costs, the Respondent accepts that she  is  responsible  for  the
    Applicant's reasonable costs but only from 13 September 2018  when  the
    Applicant applied to amend his grounds of challenge, the claim prior to
    that date being unarguable.  Although the original grounds of challenge
    were poor, they did raise substantive challenges  in  relation  to  the
    basis of  the  refusal  under  paragraph  322(5)  and  ultimately,  the
    Applicant has been successful in the remedy  sought  for  the  decision
    under challenge to be quashed.  In these circumstances,  the  Applicant
    is  awarded  his  costs,  not  limited  to  the  period  following  the
    application to amend his grounds.


Order


 i) The Applicant's application for Judicial Review is granted.

ii)  The  Respondent's  decisions  dated  5  February  2018  refusing   the
    Applicant's application for indefinite leave to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant; dated 21 March 2018  maintaining  that  decision  on
    administrative review are quashed.


iii) Upon reconsideration of the Applicant's application, if the  Respondent
    has concerns with the same, she shall send to the Applicant  a  "minded
    to refuse letter" within 21 days of the date of this Order, giving  the
    Applicant the opportunity to respond to the Respondent's concerns.


iv) The Applicant's response in (iii) above shall be sent within 14 days of
    receipt of the "minded to refuse" letter.


 v) On receipt of the Applicant's response in (iv) above (or upon expiry of
    the 14 day time limit if no  such  response  is  received  within  that
    period), the Respondent shall reconsider  the  Applicant's  application
    within two months, absent special circumstances.

vi) The Respondent shall pay  the  Applicant's  reasonable  costs  of  this
    application, to be summarily assessed if not agreed.

vii) Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused.






                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


        Dated:         21st November 2019



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.

