
                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                                JR/3527/2017


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                               Heard on: 23rd September 2019


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH

                                   Between


              The Queen (on the application of Mohammad Alamin)


                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


    R Jesurum, Counsel, instructed by Zahra Solicitors, appeared on behalf
    of the Applicant
    E Wilsdon, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department
    appeared on behalf of the Respondent.
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
      The application


        1) The applicant applied on 18 April 2017 for  judicial  review  of
           the respondent's decision of  18  February  2017,  following  an
           administrative review process, to maintain her earlier  decision
           on 17 January  2017  (the  'Decision').   The  Decision  is  the
           substantive decision under  challenge,  rather  than  the  later
           decision in February 2017.


        2)  In  the  Decision,  the  respondent  refused  the   applicant's
           application for an extension of leave to remain  in  the  United
           Kingdom (the 'UK') under the 'points based system' of Tier 2  of
           the Immigration Rules.


       The basis of the Decision


        3) The gist of the respondent's refusal was that she believed  that
           the applicant had participated in obtaining an English  language
           certificate or 'TOEIC,' by way of deception, specifically by the
           use of a proxy test taker, at tests  undertaken  on  18  October
           2011. He had then used the TOEIC to apply on  28  November  2011
           for leave to remain, which was granted.


        4) The respondent had partly  based  her  conclusions  on  analysis
           carried out  by  a  third-party  provider,  Educational  Testing
           Service, or 'ETS.' ETS provided an analysis  both  of  the  test
           centre at which the applicant took the test, Elizabeth  College,
           at which wide-spread cheating had taken place; and also  a  test
           analysis or 'look up' result  for  the  applicant  specifically,
           indicating that the applicant's test was 'invalid'  (as  opposed
           to 'questionable').  In addition, the respondent referred to  an
           interview with the applicant on 17 August  2015,  to  which  the
           applicant had been invited by a letter  of  20  July  2015.  The
           letter of invitation had referred to the respondent  considering
           curtailment of the applicant's leave to remain in  the  UK.   At
           that interview, the applicant was asked about various aspects of
           the circumstances of his taking the  English  language  test  in
           2011. The interviewer concluded that the applicant's 2011  TOEIC
           scores were not reflected  in  the  applicant's  poor  level  of
           spoken English during the 2015 interview; and  during  which  he
           had referred to previously failing  an  English  language  test,
           having only entered the UK in October 2010, barely a year before
           taking the second English language test.


        5) As a result  of  the  respondent's  conclusions,  she  gave  the
           applicant no points under appendices A and B of the points based
           system, pursuant to  paragraph  245  HD(f)  of  the  Immigration
           Rules.

        6) The applicant requested an administrative review of the Decision
           on 27 January 2017, putting the respondent to proof of the claim
           of deception and also referring to having  obtained  a  Level  6
           diploma in business management  on  5  September  2011,  shortly
           before taking the second TOEIC test. The applicant asserted that
           the interview in August 2015 was 'not worthy of weight'  because
           if the respondent had had concerns based on the  interview,  she
           should have immediately  curtailed  the  respondent's  leave  in
           2015, rather than waiting to refuse the  applicant's  subsequent
           2016 application. The applicant asserted that the 2015 interview
           had been brief; and at the end of it,  he  had  been  told  that
           everything was well.

        7) In her administrative review decision of 18 February  2017,  the
           respondent reiterated the  'look  up'  evidence;  the  level  of
           cheating at Elizabeth College, where the test  had  been  taken;
           and the points raised by the  applicant  in  his  administrative
           review request, particularly his having obtained a diploma,  but
           nevertheless concluded that the evidence was sufficient that the
           applicant had engaged in deception.

       Previous orders and decisions


        8) The applicant's solicitors wrote to the respondent with  a  pre-
           action  letter  on  27  March  2017,  to  which  the  respondent
           responded  on  31  March   2017.   Following   the   applicant's
           application for judicial review on 18 April 2017, Upper Tribunal
           Judge Macleman initially refused to admit the application on the
           basis that it was out of time. Whilst the use of  administrative
           review was to be encouraged, he concluded that reference  to  it
           as the decision under challenge was not to be used to 'dress up'
           a delay, when the substantive decision under challenge  was  the
           Decision. In any event, Judge Macleman  considered  the  grounds
           did not have arguable merit.


        9) However, at an oral  hearing  seeking  permission  before  Upper
           Tribunal  Judge  Jackson  on  2  February  2018,   she   granted
           permission, regarding it as arguable  that  the  respondent  had
           failed to discharge the evidential burden of  establishing  that
           the applicant had used deception. The  other  grounds  that  the
           respondent had failed to place appropriate weight on evidence in
           the applicant's favour (the Level 6 diploma) or that  there  had
           been  a  procedural  irregularity  in  reaching  the   Decision,
           appeared to be weaker, but Judge Jackson did not limit the scope
           of the grant of permission to proceed.

       10) The proceedings were subsequently stayed pending the outcome  of
           appeals in the  Court  of  Appeal  in  the  linked  cases  of  R
           (Hossain)  v  SSHD  (C6/2016/3560)  and   R   (Islam)   v   SSHD
           (C8/2017/1385).  The stay was lifted following  case  management
           directions issued by Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor,  and  the
           respondent was permitted to file detailed grounds of defence.

         Grounds of challenge


       11) Ground (1) was that in reaching  her  Decision,  the  respondent
           failed to  consider  material,  which  was  in  the  applicant's
           favour, specifically the fact that the applicant had entered the
           UK as a Tier 4 student. In September 2011,  he  had  obtained  a
           Level 6 diploma in business management, only a month  before  he
           had allegedly  used  a  proxy  to  take  the  TOEIC  test.   His
           proficiency in English was a relevant  factor  to  consider,  in
           accordance with the authority of Majumder & Qadir v SSHD  [2016]
           EWCA Civ 1167, at [18].


       12) Ground (2) was that  there  was  procedural  unfairness  in  the
           process by which the respondent reached the Decision, and  after
           it.  The respondent had given the applicant  no  opportunity  to
           comment on, or respond  with  evidence  to,  the  allegation  of
           deception. The respondent had not disclosed that she was  minded
           to refuse the applicant's 2016 application on such  grounds  and
           the applicant had every reason to consider that  concerns  about
           curtailment  had  been  resolved  following  the   August   2015
           interview.  As per the authority of R  (on  the  application  of
           Mohibullah) v SSHD [2016] UKUT 561  (IAC),  the  respondent  was
           under an obligation to convey the gist of the serious allegation
           before  any  final  decision  was  taken.  The  ETS   'look   up
           information' and the interview record of  August  2015  had  not
           been disclosed to the applicant before  reaching  the  Decision.
           Instead, the respondent suggested that the applicant could  make
           a data subject access request for disclosure of information,  in
           breach of the duty of candour - R on the application of Saha)  v
           SSHD [2017] UKUT 17 (IAC).


       13) Ground (3) was that the decision was 'Wednesbury'  unreasonable,
           as the respondent could not rationally rely solely on the  'look
           up' result in reaching the conclusion  that  the  applicant  had
           engaged in deception, given the  weakness  of  the  respondent's
           evidence, as highlighted by Dr Harrison in  Majumder & Qadir.

       The basis of the respondent's resistance to the orders sought

       14) The respondent filed detailed grounds of defence  on  30  August
           2019, the summary of which is set out below.


         Grounds (1) and (3)


       15) The respondent regarded these grounds as essentially two aspects
           of the same challenge, namely that factors that should have been
           taken  into  account  were  not;  so  that  the   Decision   was
           'Wednesbury'  unreasonable.    In   response,   the   respondent
           referred, at [31], to the  generic  and  the  specific  evidence
           relating to  the  applicant,  including  witness  statements  of
           Rebecca Collings and  Peter  Millington;  an  expert  report  of
           Professor Peter French; a criminal  report  for  Project  Fa�ade
           into  Elizabeth  College,  London  dated  15   May   2015;   the
           respondent's letter dated 28 July 2015 inviting the applicant to
           an interview; the notes of that interview;  and  the  'look  up'
           results.  In that context, the  respondent  had  discharged  the
           initial evidential burden of proving deception in an  ETS  case,
           in line with the case of SSHD v Shehzad & Anor [2016]  EWCA  Civ
           615 and also the Majumder case already referred to.


       16) The respondent had considered not only the 'look  up'  tool  but
           the 2015 interview and was entitled to  do  so.   The  applicant
           knew of the contents of that interview because he was present at
           it, so the fact that he was only provided the  notes  after  the
           Decision, particularly where he did not dispute the accuracy  of
           those notes, was not relevant.  His case could be  distinguished
           from marriage interview cases, where an applicant might  not  be
           aware what a spouse had said during interview.

       17) Based on the totality of  evidence,  which  the  respondent  had
           considered, the respondent was unarguably entitled  to  conclude
           that the applicant had  engaged  in  TOEIC  deception.   Factors
           included the 'look up' tool; the applicant's poor  English  when
           interviewed in August 2015; the fact that he had had to take the
           TOEIC  test  twice,  including  the  second  time  at  Elizabeth
           College,  where  there  had  been  widescale  fraud;   and   the
           applicant's vagueness in describing the circumstances of  taking
           the test at Elizabeth College.  The respondent  was  not  aware,
           when filing the grounds  of  defence,  that  the  applicant  had
           sought a copy of his TOEIC voice file from ETS,  which  weakened
           his challenge further, as per the  authority  of  Ahsan  v  SSHD
           [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2009.   This  was  not  a  case   where   the
           respondent's decision attracted a right of appeal to the  First-
           tier Tribunal.  He had not made a human  rights  claim,  so  any
           challenge to the Decision by way of judicial review lay only  on
           conventional public law grounds.

         Ground (2)


       18) On the issue of procedural  fairness,  the  applicant  had  been
           invited to attend, and attended,  the  interview  on  17  August
           2015, at which he was asked to explain the circumstances of  his
           participation in the TOEIC test  and  given  an  opportunity  to
           provide an account, to address the respondent's  concerns.   The
           fact  that  he  was  unable  to  do  so  further   damaged   his
           credibility.  The recent Court of Appeal decision of  Balajigari
           v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 673, and the endorsement of a "minded  to
           refuse" procedure in cases  involving  'earnings  discrepancies'
           was distinguishable.  That case considered a  two-stage  process
           under paragraph 322(5)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  whereby  an
           applicant's dishonesty might nevertheless be outweighed by other
           factors at the second stage.


       19) In any event, there was no unfairness in the specific  facts  of
           this  case.   The  applicant  had  been  informed   sufficiently
           clearly, by the date of the 2015 interview, there was a  concern
           about his honesty and he was given an opportunity to respond.


       Additional ground of resistance


       20) In addition to the grounds  relied  on  by  the  applicant,  the
           respondent relied on section 31(2A) of  the  Senior  Courts  Act
           1981, on the basis that were this Tribunal to conclude that  the
           respondent had reached the Decision by a process that  could  be
           impugned on public law grounds, the outcome  for  the  applicant
           would not have  been  substantially  different  if  the  conduct
           complained of had not occurred,  because  the  respondent  would
           have reached the same conclusion.  The applicant had  no  answer
           to the observation that his English during  his  2015  interview
           was so poor as to be not consistent with his  having  taken  the
           second TOEIC test in 2011 at Elizabeth College, where there  was
           substantial evidence of systematic fraud.


      Submissions


      The applicant's submissions


       21) Mr Jesurum provided a skeleton argument and made additional oral
           submissions.  Both he and  Ms  Wilsdon  accepted  that,  as  the
           Decision was taken after 2014 and so post-dated any  changes  to
           section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, there was  no
           need for the Upper Tribunal to make any findings  of  'precedent
           fact' as to  whether  the  applicant  had  in  fact  engaged  in
           deception, as would be required if the  Decision  had  pre-dated
           the changes to section 10,  following  the  analysis  in  Ahsan.
           Instead, both representatives accepted that the challenge to the
           Decision was on conventional public law grounds.


       22) Mr Jesurum accepted that a person may be inclined to cheat, even
           if they had good English, and it was quite possible that if  the
           respondent had adopted a fair process, she may have reached  the
           same decision,  but  that  was  not  the  appropriate  question.
           Instead, the correct question was whether the outcome could have
           been different, so that the  process  by  which  the  respondent
           reached the Decision was important.  The  principles  of  public
           law review stressed the importance of protecting the process  by
           which decisions were reached.  It was not a question of  whether
           the applicant was at fault.


       23) The authority of Balajigari, at [48] and  [49],  confirmed  that
           the ability to make submissions  after  the  Decision  had  been
           made, but before the administrative review decision  was  taken,
           was not sufficient to cure defects in the Decision,  because  it
           risked  "confirmation  bias",   i.e.   the   respondent   merely
           confirming what she had previously decided.  The respondent  was
           required to indicate clearly to the applicant if  she  suspected
           him of using a proxy test taker; to give him an  opportunity  to
           respond, both as regards the conduct itself and as  regards  any
           other factors that she was considering; and then to  take  those
           answers into account, before drawing a conclusion that there had
           been such conduct.

       24) Balajigari could not be distinguished on the basis that it  only
           applied to a two-stage process under  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
           Immigration Rules, in contrast to different  considerations  for
           refusal under 322(2).  The  latter  also  involved  a  two-stage
           process, with both provisions  requiring  consideration  of  the
           exercise of discretion.  In the applicant's case, Mr Jesurum did
           not go so far as to say that there needed to  be  a  "minded  to
           refuse" procedure; what the respondent should have done  was  to
           specifically and categorically put the allegation of the use  of
           a proxy test taker to the applicant, even as late  as  the  2015
           interview and consider the applicant's response, before reaching
           the Decision.

       25) In contrast,  the  letter  dated  28  July  2015,  inviting  the
           applicant to the 2015 interview, a copy of which was at [172] of
           the applicant's bundle ("AB") was in vague  terms  and  did  not
           sufficiently convey the specific concern  about  the  use  of  a
           proxy test taker  to  the  applicant.   Instead,  it  stated  in
           general terms:

           "We are currently considering your existing leave to enter/leave
           to remain and  require  you  to  attend  an  interview  for  the
           purposes of assessing whether any of the grounds of  curtailment
           under paragraphs 245DE(c), 245EE(c), 276BD1, 276BN1, 276BS1, 323
           (other than 323(vii), 323A, 323B, or 323C apply."

       26) Even had the applicant sought legal  advice  on  the  provisions
           referred to above, it would have been impossible for him to know
           that these related specifically to allegations of  deception  by
           use of a proxy test taker.  The subsequent declaration form that
           the applicant was asked to sign at [74] AB  merely  referred  to
           the applicant being asked a series of questions to  discuss  his
           current leave to remain.  It did refer  to  him  being  reminded
           that it was an offence  to  seek  leave  remain  in  the  UK  by
           deception, but that referred to  answers  to  be  given  in  the
           interview, rather than  any  alleged  historic  deception.   The
           interview notes at [178] to [182] AB gave no further  confidence
           that the applicant would have been aware that the respondent was
           concerned about his participation in  TOEIC  deception.  It  was
           never put to him that he had cheated.


       27) While the interviewing officer referred in the  interview  notes
           at [182] AB to the applicant as "not credible" at interview, the
           interviewer also concluded that he was able to answer  questions
           in basic English and had not been coached.  This Tribunal needed
           to bear in mind that the TOEIC test that the applicant had taken
           was at "B1" level, a  relatively  modest  one;  his  TOEIC  test
           scores were a bare  pass.   His  lack  of  proficiency  in  oral
           English during the interview could be explained by a variety  of
           factors,   including   the   applicant's   lack   of   ease   or
           unfamiliarity, on a day-to-day basis, with  the  subject  matter
           that interviewer was asking him about.  The methodology by which
           the interviewer  assessed  the  applicant's  English  was  never
           explained, nor did the evidence state  what  qualifications  the
           interviewer had to be able to assess verbal English.

       28) The respondent's reasoning in the Decision, at [19] to [25]  AB,
           as to why the respondent believed that the  applicant  had  been
           party to a TOEIC  deception,  was  not  sufficient.   While  the
           Decision had included references  to  the  TOEIC  and  the  2015
           interview, there was  no  reference  to  the  respondent  having
           considered his Level 6 diploma, until the administrative  review
           decision. Reference to it at this stage was a classic example of
           'confirmation bias'.  The  Decision  had  not  referred  to  the
           concern that the  applicant  had  been  vague  during  the  2015
           interview about the circumstances in  which  he  had  taken  the
           TOEIC test.

       29) The applicant had asked ETS in February 2018 for  recordings  of
           his TOEIC test, as confirmed in  correspondence  and  a  witness
           statement from the applicant's solicitors at [61A] to  [62]  AB.
           The solicitor's statement confirmed that no recording  had  been
           provided, although in his  experience,  in  other  cases,  where
           recordings had been provided, they were invariably not the  same
           speaker as the test-taker, but ETS  would  not  provide  further
           details of the evidence trail.

       30)  If  this  Tribunal  reached  the  conclusion  that  there   was
           procedural  unfairness  and  a  failure  to  consider   relevant
           evidence in reaching the Decision, then I did not need to go  on
           to consider whether the Decision was 'Wednesbury'  unreasonable.



       31) The  case  of  Shehzad  was  not  authority  which  equated  the
           discharge of the initial evidential  burden  with  the  eventual
           legal burden.  The  frailty  of  the  respondent's  evidence  in
           Majumder needed to be considered.  It was  not  enough  for  the
           respondent to rely  merely  on  the  initial  evidential  burden
           having passed to the  applicant,  even  if  the  applicant  then
           failed  to  raise  a  satisfactory  innocent  explanation.   The
           respondent needed to go on and discharge  the  legal  burden  of
           proof. The 'look up' evidence was not enough  to  discharge  the
           legal burden, in the absence of  an  evidence  or  audit  trail,
           indicating,  for  example,  the  qualifications  of  the   human
           assessor at ETS who had marked the TOIEC test as 'invalid.'




         The respondent's submissions

       32) The challenge to the Decision  could  only  be  on  conventional
           public law grounds.  Shehzad  had  confirmed  that  the  generic
           evidence,  when  combined  with  the  'look  up'   result,   was
           sufficient to  discharge  the  evidential  burden  of  proof  in
           relation an allegation of deception.  Where  the  applicant  had
           failed to raise an innocent explanation, that was sufficient  to
           meet the legal burden as well, as there was no need to go behind
           the 'look up' result to challenge an assessor's  qualifications,
           or provide an audited evidence trail  analogous  to  a  criminal
           investigation.


       33) The respondent had clearly taken into  account  the  applicant's
           studies  prior  to  reaching  the  Decision,  referring  in  the
           Decision itself to his previous  Tier  4  (student)  visa.   The
           administrative review response also referred  expressly  to  the
           applicant's  Level  6  diploma,  but  also  considered,  as  the
           respondent had referred to in the Decision, to  the  applicant's
           poor verbal English in 2015, nearly four years after  supposedly
           taking his TOEIC for a second time in 2011.  The respondent  was
           entitled to attach limited weight to the Level 6  qualification.
           The lack of express reference to the  Level  6  diploma  in  the
           Decision did not mean that the respondent had not considered it.

       34) In terms of procedural fairness, the High Court  in  R  (on  the
           application  of  Islam)  v  SSHD  [2017]   EWHC   3614   (Admin)
           established that to establish fairness,  a  'minded  to  refuse'
           warning  was  not  necessarily  required  and  that   procedural
           fairness was depended on context.   The  critical  question  was
           whether the process, when considered as a whole, was fair.   The
           interview invitation letter of July 2015 had referred  expressly
           to the possibility of curtailment  under  paragraph  323,  which
           itself referred back to paragraph 322 of the Immigration  Rules.
           The questions  put  to  the  applicant  in  the  2015  interview
           referred explicitly to the TOEIC test. The  applicant  had  also
           signed a declaration prior to the  interview  which  included  a
           warning  of  obtaining  leave  by  deception  being  a  criminal
           offence.  The applicant had further notice of  the  respondent's
           concerns in the Decision, and the respondent provided a  further
           response in the administrative review decision  of  18  February
           2017.  The case of Balajigari did not assist the  applicant,  as
           it related to the two-stage process under paragraph 322(5).

       35) The  Decision  could  not  be  impugned  as  being  'Wednesbury'
           unreasonable.  The respondent did not reach the Decision  purely
           on the basis of the invalid 'look  up'  result,  as  incorrectly
           asserted by the applicant in the grounds.   The  respondent  had
           relied on the generic  evidence;  the  'look  up'  results;  the
           applicant's poor English when interviewed in  August  2015;  the
           applicant's vague answers in interview about  the  circumstances
           in which he had taken the TOEIC test; the fact that he had taken
           the test twice, the second time at Elizabeth  College;  and  the
           fact that he had not sought to obtain recording of  his  alleged
           test until 2018, and after the initial request, had  not  chased
           for a response from ETS.

       36) On the issue of section 31(2A) of the Senior Courts Act 1981, it
           was highly likely that regardless of  any  procedural  concerns,
           even if valid (which was not accepted), any  decision  regarding
           the  applicant  would  not  have  been  substantially  different
           because the applicant had never given a  cogent  answer  to  the
           case against him.  The fact that  he  had  obtained  a  Level  6
           diploma was not an answer  to  the  challenge  that  his  verbal
           English in the 2015 interview was so poor that it  was  unlikely
           that he had genuinely obtained a TOEIC pass in 2011.

 Discussion and conclusions


       37) As already noted, it is  not  necessary  for  this  Tribunal  to
           determine any question of precedent fact.  Mr  Jesurum  accepted
           that Shehzad was authority for the proposition that the  generic
           evidence and 'look up' result for the applicant  was  sufficient
           to discharge the initial evidential burden on the respondent  of
           proving a TOEIC deception,  so  that  the  evidential  (but  not
           legal) burden  then  passed  to  the  applicant  to  present  an
           innocent explanation,  prior  to  the  respondent  reaching  her
           Decision.


       38) In this context, I  am  conscious  that  the  challenge  to  the
           Decision is not a statutory appeal and instead I  must  consider
           the challenge on public law grounds, so that it is not for me to
           decide whether the respondent met the overall  legal  burden  of
           deception, but whether the conclusion  that  the  applicant  had
           engaged in TOEIC deception  could  be  impugned  on  public  law
           grounds.

      Grounds (1) and (3)

       39) The evidence which the applicant says that the respondent failed
           to consider in reaching the Decision was the fact of his college
           studies, resulting in his  obtaining  his  Level  6  diploma  in
           September 2011, the month before he allegedly arranged  a  proxy
           to take his TOEIC.


       40) The assertion in the  grounds  that  the  respondent  failed  to
           consider the  fact  of  his  college  studies  was  demonstrably
           incorrect, as the Decision referred expressly  to  his  entering
           the UK on a Tier 4 (general student) visa in  October  2010,  in
           the year immediately prior to the second TOEIC test  in  October
           2011 ([20] AB).  While the Decision does not refer expressly  to
           the Level 6 diploma,  I  conclude  that  the  reasoning  in  the
           Decision needs to be read in the context of the applicant having
           entered the  UK  for  the  very  purpose  of  studies  at  a  UK
           institution, through teaching in the medium of  English.   I  do
           not accept that because the Decision does not refer to a  single
           piece of evidence, that it follows that the respondent  did  not
           consider the fact of the applicant having obtained his  Level  6
           diploma in reaching the Decision,  particularly  when  the  same
           immigration history referred to in the Decision  included  other
           applications for leave to remain, for which  the  applicant  had
           previously  submitted  that  same  diploma.  To  find  that  the
           Decision could be impugned on public law grounds because of  the
           omission of a single piece of evidence would  otherwise  require
           the respondent to list each and  every  document  that  she  had
           considered in reaching a decision.   While  Mr  Jesurum  submits
           that it would be open to the  respondent  to  have  submitted  a
           witness statement  as  to  precisely  what  documents  had  been
           considered,  that  in   practice   amounts   to   an   identical
           requirement, which I do not accept  is  imposed  on  public  law
           grounds.  Instead, what  is  necessary  is  for  a  decision  to
           summarise the gist or broad thrust of the evidence, and how  the
           decision in question is reached, so that a person affected by  a
           decision can be satisfied that all relevant  factors  have  been
           taken into consideration. I do not accept  the  submission  that
           the Decision failed to convey consideration of  the  applicant's
           studies and attainments, when read as a whole.


       41) The submission in relation to 'Wednesbury'  unreasonableness  is
           the  mirror  aspect  of  the  assertion  about   not   attaching
           appropriate weight to the Level 6 diploma.  While Mr Jesurum now
           makes submissions in  relation  to  the  adequacy  of  the  2015
           interviewer assessing the applicant's  English;  that  a  formal
           assessment tool and relevant qualifications of the assessor were
           required, the  grounds  (particularly  at  [5])  were  far  more
           limited, asserting that if the interview was a material  factor,
           the respondent  should  have  curtailed  the  applicant's  leave
           straightaway. In relation to  these  points,  first,  I  do  not
           accept the submission that the respondent  is  not  entitled  to
           rely on the contemporaneous impression of an  interviewer,  even
           in the absence of  a  formal  assessment  methodology,  where  a
           person's  English  is  so  poor  that  the  claim  of   previous
           attainment of a TOEIC  is  unlikely  to  be  accurate.  In  this
           context, I was referred by Ms Wilsdon to the example during  the
           2015 interview (without ignoring the  totality  of  the  whole),
           where the applicant was asked, at [180] AB:

           "What are you doing now in the UK?"  [Answer] "Yes".


       42) Mr Jesurum does not  seek  to  challenge  the  accuracy  of  the
           interview notes, but instead asserts that a basic level 'B1"  in
           TOEIC, which is what the applicant obtained, might be  so  basic
           that someone with very limited English could  still  obtain  the
           qualification.  He referred to the "TOEIC correlation table", on
           a final unpaginated page of the applicant's bundle, which refers
           to someone understanding the main  points  of  familiar  matters
           regularly encountered and  being  able  to  describe  hopes  and
           ambitions.  I  am  conscious  that  I  am  not  considering  the
           Decision afresh, and I do not accept that his submission assists
           the applicant, in the sense that the TOEIC framework at B1 level
           so obviously describes such a low standard of English  that  the
           respondent's conclusion that it was unlikely that he had  passed
           the TOEIC test was 'Wednesbury' unreasonable.   I  also  do  not
           accept that the lack of another formal assessment  by  reference
           to the TOEIC methodology (akin  to  a  second  TOEIC  test)  was
           'Wednesbury' unreasonable.  Further, I do not accept that by not
           curtailing  the  applicant's  leave  immediately  in  2015,  but
           instead considering it in 2016, the Decision  was  unreasonable,
           in the public law sense. The quality of the applicant's  English
           at interview in 2015, in the context  of  the  generic  evidence
           'look up' result, was clearly still relevant in 2016; the  delay
           between 2015 and the applicant's application  of  November  2016
           was not extensive;  and  the  applicant  has  not  provided  any
           specific evidence to support his contention  that  he  had  been
           assured at the time that the interview had 'gone well', or words
           to that effect, such that it would be improper to have relied on
           the interview evidence.

       43) I also accept Ms Wilsdon's submission that  the  respondent  was
           entitled to take into account  what  she  perceived  to  be  the
           vagueness of the applicant's  answers  given  during  interview,
           including when he was asked whom he had paid in  order  to  take
           the test:

           "I am not understand, again please" ([179 AB]);

           and then when asked again, the applicant said:

           "Actually I not remind that, its too longs ago" ([180 AB]).

       44) In that regard, Mr Jesurum's criticism was not focussed  on  the
           respondent's assessment of vagueness, but rather that it was not
           referred to specifically in the Decision, and only added in  the
           detailed grounds of defence.  However,  as  with  the  issue  in
           relation  to  the  Level  6  diploma,  I  accept  Ms   Wilsdon's
           submission that the Decision needs to be read  in  context,  and
           that it clearly referred to concerns about the poor  quality  of
           the applicant's answers in the 2015 interview.


       45)  In summary, I conclude that the respondent did not fail to take
           into account relevant evidence (the Level 6  diploma);  or  take
           into account  evidence  that  she  should  not  have  done  (the
           contents of the 2015 interview) in reaching the Decision, so  as
           to make it unlawful on public law grounds.

       46) In addition, the Decision cannot be impugned on the ground  that
           having discharged the initial evidential burden (which was  met,
           by virtue of the generic evidence and  'look  up'  result),  the
           respondent  then  failed  to  consider  the  weakness  of   that
           evidence, in the absence of an innocent explanation having  been
           raised.  The applicant's innocent  explanation,  to  the  extent
           that it was raised at all, was very narrow, referring to  having
           a Level 6 diploma, to which,  in  the  context  of  his  answers
           giving during the 2015 interview, the respondent  attached  very
           limited weight  and  cannot  be  impugned  for  doing  so.   The
           applicant otherwise put the respondent to strict  proof  of  the
           allegation of deception.   Mr Jesurum does not contend  that  an
           innocent explanation has been raised, and  submitted  that  that
           was an 'arid question,' in light of the weakness  in  the  'look
           up' process, such as an audit trail and details of the ETS human
           evaluator's qualifications.  I  do  not  accept  that  there  is
           authority for the proposition that in the absence of an innocent
           explanation having been raised, the respondent needs to do  more
           to satisfy the legal burden of proving deception; and Mr Jesurum
           has not sought to advance that an innocent  explanation  of  any
           substance was raised.


       Conclusion on grounds (1) and (3)


       47) For the reasons set out above, I conclude  that  the  respondent
           did not fail to consider evidence that she ought to  have  done;
           or considered evidence that she ought not to have done, so  that
           the Decision can be  impugned.   I  further  conclude  that  the
           Decision  cannot  be  impugned  on  the  basis   that   it   was
           'Wednesbury' unreasonable in concluding that the legal burden of
           proving TOEIC deception was met.

       Ground (2)

       48) The real heart of Mr Jesurum's submissions, as he accepted,  lay
           in the process by which the respondent had reached the Decision.
              Dealing with each part of that process, he accepted that  the
           respondent did not need to have a 'minded  to  refuse'  process.
           I accept, on the  one  hand,  his  submission  that  it  is  not
           sustainable to distinguish the authority of Balajigari,  on  the
           basis that it  involves  a  two-stage  process  under  paragraph
           322(5), whereas the respondent's considerations under  paragraph
           322(2) do not.   Both  provisions  require  consideration  of  a
           residual discretion, as refusal is not mandatory. Instead,  they
           provide for circumstances where leave to remain "should normally
           be refused."


       49) At the heart of the Balajigari authority at paragraphs  [45]  to
           [61], is reaffirmation of a number of principles, including that
           the applicant should know the gist of the concerns  about  them,
           in order to be able to respond to them,  before  a  decision  is
           reached; and it also confirms that the process of administrative
           review does not cure any  earlier  defects  in  the  failure  to
           provide such an opportunity.  That does not, however, prevent an
           appraisal  of  the  process  as  a  whole,  as  per  R  (on  the
           application of Islam); nor does it  depart  from  the  principle
           that the process by which the respondent may enable a  party  to
           understand the gist of concerns about them is context-sensitive.
             In  the  context  of  the  particular  circumstances  of   the
           applicant's case, and when considering the process as  a  whole,
           the respondent wrote to the applicant in  writing,  warning  him
           that she was considering curtailment, by reference to  specified
           Immigration Rules, one of which she later relied on in  refusing
           the applicant's application for indefinite leave to remain.  The
           applicant was aware of the seriousness  of  the  matter,  having
           been warned, and having  acknowledged  the  seriousness  of  the
           interview, when provided with a declaration to  that  effect  at
           [175] AB.  The entirety of the detailed questioning  during  the
           interview focussed on the second TOEIC test that he had taken in
           2011 (when he took it; why he chose the test centre he did; with
           whom he had discussed taking the test; how he chose  the  course
           to prepare for the test; how much the test cost and how he  paid
           for it and  arranged  it;  what  the  test  involved;  and  what
           happened afterwards).


       50) In the context of receiving a letter indicating the  possibility
           of curtailment and an interview which focussed solely  on  every
           aspect of the second TOEIC test in 2011, the applicant can  have
           been under no doubt that the respondent's concerns,  which  were
           serious, (given consideration of curtailment)   related  to  the
           validity  of  his  second  2011  TOEIC  test.  Those   interview
           questions were put in an 'open' manner (as opposed  to  'closed'
           questions), designed to elicit information in order to assist an
           understanding of what had occurred.  I do not  accept  that  the
           authority of Balajigari requires the respondent to go  one  step
           further and formally put a specific allegation to the applicant.
           To do  so  would  needlessly  introduce  a  further  adversarial
           element to the process, when in the particular circumstances  of
           this case, the respondent  was  entitled  to  believe  that  the
           applicant knew perfectly well what  the  gist  of  the  concerns
           related to; namely the validity of his second  TOEIC  test.  The
           respondent might also have been criticised  for  already  having
           made up  her  mind  on  the  issue,  if  she  had  put  specific
           allegations to him in such adversarial  terms.   It  would  also
           necessitate the introduction of a  two-stage  process,  with  an
           initial  information  gathering  stage;  and  a   second   stage
           analogous to the laying of formal charges against the applicant.




       Conclusions on ground (2)


       51) For the reasons set out, I conclude that the  process  by  which
           the respondent reached the Decision cannot be impugned on public
           law grounds.  The respondent was entitled to conclude  that  the
           applicant understood the gist of the concerns against him.


       52) Having reached the conclusion that the Decision and the  process
           by which it was reached, cannot be impugned, it was  unnecessary
           for me to reach any conclusions in relation to section 31(2A) of
           the Senior  Courts  Act  1981.    While  the  grounds  had  also
           referred to a possible challenge on  the  basis  of  a  duty  of
           candour, this was not developed further by  Mr  Jesurum  and  he
           highlighted no area where the respondent had failed to  disclose
           relevant information in her control.


       53) The application for judicial review is refused on all grounds.



                       J Keith
             Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    11th October 2019



                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/3527/2017


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice








              The Queen (on the application of Mohammad Alamin)


                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Upon judgment being handed down on 11th October 2019, Ms  Wilsdon,  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, was in attendance  on  behalf
of the Respondent. No one attended on behalf of the Applicant.


It is ordered that


     1) The judicial review application is dismissed in accordance with the
        judgment attached.


     2) I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review  application  be
        dismissed.

   Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


     3) There was no application for permission to appeal to the  Court  of
        Appeal. In any event, I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of
        Appeal for the same reasons that I have refused the  orders  sought
        for judicial review.


        Costs


     4) By consent of the parties, the applicant shall pay the respondent's
        reasonable costs, to be assessed if not agreed.






                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    11th October 2019






      Applicant's solicitors:
      Respondent's solicitors:
      Home Office Ref:
      Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -------
       Notification of appeal rights


      A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review
      is a decision that disposes of proceedings.


       A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal  on
      a question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to
      the Upper Tribunal  for  permission,  at  the  hearing  at  which  the
      decision is given. If  no  application  is  made,  the  Tribunal  must
      nonetheless  consider  at  the  hearing  whether  to  give  or  refuse
      permission to appeal (rule 44(4B) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008).


      If  the  Tribunal  refuses  permission,  either  in  response  to   an
      application or by virtue of rule 44(4B), then  the  party  wishing  to
      appeal can apply for permission from the Court of Appeal itself.  This
      must be done by filing an applicant's notice with  the  Civil  Appeals
      Office of the  Court  of  Appeal  within  28  days  of  the  date  the
      Tribunal's decision on permission to appeal was sent (Civil  Procedure
      Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


