

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/3953/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                The Queen on the application of Selina Begum
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Finch and Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr R Sharma of Counsel, instructed by  Law  Lane
Solicitors, on behalf of the  Applicant  and  Mr  A  Payne  QC  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 22 March 2019.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is refused


 1. The Applicant, a national of  Bangladesh,  was  granted  permission  to
    apply for Judicial Review of the rejection by the Respondent  dated  12
    April 2018, of her application for an  EEA  derivative  residence  card
    under  Regulation  16  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2016.


 2. The Applicant's immigration and application history is as follows.  The
    Applicant entered the United Kingdom on 15 August 2009,  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student. Her leave was extended in  this  capacity  until  23
    August 2015. Prior to that date she applied  for  leave  to  remain  on
    private and family life grounds, but her application was refused  on  8
    February 2016 and certified as clearly unfounded.


 3. On 12 December 2017 she applied for an EEA derivative residence card as
    the primary carer of an elderly  British  citizen,  who  she  had  been
    caring for since 2011. She has been his live-in  carer  since  February
    2013.  On 5 January 2018 a Lasting Power of Attorney in favour  of  the
    Applicant for (i) property and financial affairs and  (ii)  Health  and
    Welfare, was registered by the British Citizen the Applicant cares for,
    with the Office of the Public Guardian. A copy of the power of attorney
    was sent to the Respondent on 12 March 2018 with a request that it  was
    considered  with  her  application.   The  Applicant  was   refused   a
    derivative right of residence card on 12 April 2018 for  the  following
    reasons:


      "To  demonstrate  that  a  person  is  a  legal  guardian,   a   legal
      guardianship order must be submitted.  A guardianship order is a court
      appointment which authorises  a  person  to  take  action  or  make  a
      decision on behalf of an adult with incapacity.


      While you have  submitted  documents  relating  to  Lasting  Power  of
      Attorney, a Power of Attorney is  not  acceptable  evidence  of  legal
      guardianship.


      As such, you have  failed  to  demonstrate  that  you  are  the  legal
      guardian of Roland Geoffrey Gilbert.


      Because your application falls for refusal on this basis,  no  further
      consideration has been given to  the  other  evidence  that  you  have
      supplied.  If you are able to supply the necessary documents, you  may
      wish to submit a further application for consideration."


 4. The application  for  Judicial  Review  was  issued  on  the  following
    grounds.  First, that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  irrational  as
    neither  the  2016  Regulations,  nor  any  provisions   in   Directive
    2004/38/EC on the right of citizens  of  the  Union  and  their  family
    members to move and reside freely within the territory  of  the  Member
    States (the "Directive") required the existence of a Legal Guardianship
    Order to establish a derivative right of residence; and, secondly  that
    in any event the Respondent's  requirement  for  a  Legal  Guardianship
    Order displayed a flawed understanding  of  the  law  surrounding  such
    orders under the Mental Health Act 1983.


 5. Up to and including the skeleton argument submitted on  behalf  of  the
    Applicant prior to the substantive hearing of this  application,  these
    primary grounds were pursued and expanded upon.  More  specifically  it
    was submitted that the concept of legal guardian was wider than a Legal
    Guardianship Order and included those without a mental  disorder  under
    the Mental Health Act 1983 and those subject to arrangements such as  a
    Lasting Power of Attorney which contain similar powers in any event  to
    a  Legal  Guardianship  Order.   It  was  further  submitted  that  the
    Respondent had  irrationally  failed  to  accept  a  Lasting  Power  of
    Attorney as evidence of the Applicant being the British citizen's legal
    guardian. In addition, it was submitted that the Respondent's  guidance
    which required a Legal Guardianship Order was in effect the  imposition
    of an additional and substantive requirement that had to be met  before
    an EEA derivative residence card could be issued and that, by  analogy,
    this was contrary to  the  Supreme  Court's  decision  in  R  (Alvi)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]  UKSC  33  that  such
    requirements must be contained within the Immigration Rules  themselves
    rather than in supplementary guidance issued by the Respondent.


 6. On the morning of the substantive hearing, Counsel  for  the  Applicant
    submitted a supplementary skeleton argument which  raised  further  new
    points, said to be supplementary  to  and  by  way  of  explanation  of
    arguments already relied upon.  Counsel  for  the  Respondent  did  not
    object to the new point being raised  in  this  supplementary  skeleton
    argument but reserved his right to apply for an adjournment during  the
    hearing if any point of wider application arose. We agreed that Counsel
    for the Applicant could make submissions arising from his supplementary
    skeleton but stated that, if necessary, we  would  direct  Counsel  for
    both parties to make supplementary written submissions.  After  hearing
    oral submissions, we decided that this was not necessary. We have taken
    all of the submissions into account when reaching our decision below.


 7. During the course  of  the  substantive  hearing,  the  nature  of  the
    Applicant's challenge to the Respondent's decision  of  12  April  2018
    further changed in a significant way and we return below to the  nature
    of the final arguments made before us.

Relevant Regulations and Guidance


 8. Regulation 16 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2016 (the "2016 Regulations") states that:
      "(1) A person has a derivative right to reside during  any  period  in
      which the person-
                 (a)   is not an exempt person;
                 (b)   satisfies each of the criteria  in  one  of  more  of
    paragraphs (2) to (6)
            ...
            (5)  The criteria in this paragraph are that-
                 (a)   the person is the primary carer of a British  citizen
    ("BC");
                 (b)   BC is residing in the United Kingdom; and
           (c)   BC would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom  or  in
                 another EEA state if the person left the United Kingdom for
                 an indefinite period".
      ...
      (8)  A person is the "primary carer" of another person ("AP") if
            (a)  the person is a direct relative or a legal guardian of  AP;
and
           (b)   either -
                 (i)   the person has primary responsibility for AP's  care;
           or
                 (ii)  shares equally the responsibility for AP's care  with
                       one other person who is not an exempt person".

 9. The 2016 Regulations do not define what is meant by a 'legal guardian'.
    However the  meaning  to  be  attached  to  it  was  clarified  in  the
    Respondent's Guidance - Free  Movement  Rights:  derivative  rights  of
    residence (Version 4.0), published by the Home Office  on  27  February
    2018 ("the Guidance"), at pages 41 to 42 where it states:

      "To demonstrate a person is a legal  guardian,  a  legal  guardianship
      order or special guardianship order must be submitted which names  the
      applicant and the child. A guardianship order is a  court  appointment
      which authorises a person to take action or make decisions  on  behalf
      of an adult with incapacity".

10. So far as is relevant to Legal Guardianship Orders, the  Mental  Health
    Act 1983 provides as follows:
      "1. Application of Act: "mental disorder".
     1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect with  respect  to  the
        reception, care and treatment of mentally disordered patients,  the
        management of their property and related matters.
     2) In this Act -
        "mental disorder" means any disorder or disability of the mind; and
        "mentally disordered" shall be construed accordingly; ...
      (2A) But a person with a learning disability shall not  be  considered
         by reason of that disability to be -
        a)  suffering  from  mental  disorder  for  the  purposes  of   the
           provisions mentioned in subsection (2B) below; or
        b) requiring treatment in hospital  for  mental  disorder  for  the
           purposes of sections  17E  and  50  to  53  below,  unless  that
           disability is associated with abnormally aggressive or seriously
           irresponsible conduct on his part.
      (2B) The provisions are -
         a) sections 3, 7, 17A, 20 and 20A below;
         b) sections 35 to 38, 45A, 47, 48 and 51 below; and
         c) section 72(1)(b) and (c) and (4) below.
     3) Dependence on alcohol or drugs is not considered to be  a  disorder
        or disability of the mind for the purposes of subsection (2) above.
     4) In subsection (2A) above, "learning disability" means  a  state  of
        arrested or incomplete  development  of  the  mind  which  includes
        significant impairment of intelligence and social functioning.

      ...


      7. Application for guardianship.
     1) A patient who has attained the age of 16 years may be received into
        guardianship for the period allowed by the following provisions  of
        this Act, in pursuance of an application (in this Act  referred  to
        as "a guardianship  application")  made  in  accordance  with  this
        section.
     2) A guardianship application may be made in respect of a  patient  on
        the grounds that -
        a) he is suffering from mental disorder of a nature or degree which
           warrants his reception into guardianship under this section; and
        b) it is necessary in the interests of the welfare of  the  patient
           or for the protection of other patients that the patient  should
           be so received.
        ..."


11. A Lasting Power of Attorney provided is for in section 9 of the  Mental
    Capacity Act 2005 as follows:
        "9. Lasting powers of attorney
        1) A lasting power of attorney is a power of attorney  under  which
           the donor ("P") confers on the donee (or  donees)  authority  to
           make decisions about all or any of the following -
           a) P's personal welfare  or  specified  matters  concerning  P's
              personal welfare, and
           b) P's property and affairs or specified matters concerning  P's
              property and affairs, and which includes  authority  to  make
              decisions in circumstances where P no longer has capacity.
        2) A lasting power of attorney is not created unless -
           a) section 10 is complied with,
           b) an instrument conferring authority of the kind  mentioned  in
              subsection (1) is made  and  registered  in  accordance  with
              Schedule 1, and
           c) at the time when P executes the instrument, P has reached  18
              and has capacity to execute it.
           ..."

Discussion

12. At the outset of the oral hearing, Counsel for the Applicant  initially
    stated that he adopted all written legal submissions made to date,  but
    then immediately accepted that the Directive was not applicable to  the
    present situation and that previous submissions relating to breaches of
    EU law were not relied upon.  We explain the reasons set out below  why
    that position  is  clearly  correct,  and  why  the  Directive  has  no
    relevance or application to the present proceedings  or  issues  raised
    herein.


13.  Article  3  of  the  Directive  sets  out  the  beneficiaries  of  its
    provisions, which includes its application to all  Union  citizens  who
    move to or reside in a Member State other than that of which they are a
    national, and to their family members, as defined  in  Article  2,  who
    accompany or join them.  It is not in dispute that the Applicant is not
    a family member of the EEA national in the present case, nor is  it  in
    dispute that carers of EEA nationals are not beneficiaries  within  the
    provisions of the Directive.


14. Outside of the provisions of  the  Directive,  a  derivative  right  of
    residence under Article 20 of the Treaty  on  the  Functioning  of  the
    European Union ("TFEU") was  first  recognised  by  the  CJEU  in  Ruiz
    Zambrano v Office National de l'Emploi (C-34/09),  [2012]  QB  265,  in
    which it was found that Article 20 precludes  national  measures  which
    have the effect of depriving citizens  of  the  Union  of  the  genuine
    enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred by virtue  of  their
    status as citizens of the Union.  This became  known  as  the  Zambrano
    principle.  The case itself concerned a third  country  national  adult
    who had children who were nationals of an EU state  and  who  would  be
    compelled to leave the territory of the EU if their parent was removed.
     Therefore, as a matter of EU law  it  did  not  extend  the  right  of
    residence to adult dependents.


15. As noted by Mr Justice Lane in paragraph 49 of Hamid Saeed v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2018] EWHC 1707:

      "...The Defendant's decision,  as  expressed  (now)  in  these  [2016]
    Regulations, to recognise  direct  relatives  and  legal  guardians  as
    potential carers within the Zambrano principle represents a  legitimate
    response to the Zambrano  case  law....  Mr.  Gill  QC  submitted  that
    Regulation 16 is drafted too narrowly to  be  compliant  with  EU  law.
    There is, however, nothing in the case law to which  my  attention  has
    been drawn to suggest that this is right.  The  main  cases,  at  least
    concern parents and minor children...There is no  binding  dictum  from
    the CJEU that Member States  are  to  recognise  derivative  rights  of
    residence in respect of any wider categories of person than  those  for
    which the defendant has made provision in the 2016 Regulations."

16. Mr. Justice Lane recognised that the United Kingdom had  the  right  to
    extend the Zambrano principle as a matter of  national  law  to  direct
    family members and legal guardians of adult dependents but  when  doing
    so, as a single Member State, this did not have the effect of extending
    EU law. Therefore, any benefit provided by  the  2016  Regulations  was
    additional to any to be derived from the Directive, Article 20 TFEU  or
    Zambrano.

17. As a consequence, we find that  no  breach  of  EU  law  can  arise  in
    relation to the 2016 Regulations,  as  a  result  of  the  Respondent's
    decision.


18. In the absence of any continuing challenge by the Applicant,  which  is
    based on EU law, the issues in  this  application  became  whether  the
    Respondent's decision was rational and what meaning should be  attached
    to the concept of a 'legal guardian' in Regulation 16(8)(a) of the 2016
    Regulations .  Furthermore, although the  Respondent's  decision  under
    challenge expressly stated that the other requirements for the issue of
    an EEA derivative residence card had not been considered,  Counsel  for
    the Respondent submitted that whether  the  Applicant  could  meet  the
    requirement of Regulation  16(5)(c)  of  the  2016  Regulations  was  a
    material question and that it was necessary to consider whether the EEA
    national would be unable to remain in the United Kingdom or in  another
    EEA state if the Applicant left the United Kingdom  for  an  indefinite
    period.




The meaning of 'legal guardian'

19. Counsel  for  the  Applicant  submitted  that  the  meaning  of  'legal
    guardian' in Regulation 16(8)(a) of the  2016  Regulations  was  to  be
    construed in the context of particular facts of the case and was a self-
    contained provision. Therefore, it must be interpreted  rationally  and
    not by reference to the Respondent's guidance.


20. As to the Respondent's guidance, set out above, that a person can  only
    satisfy  the  requirement  to  be  a  'legal  guardian'  with  a  Legal
    Guardianship Order or a Special  Guardianship  Order,  the  Applicant's
    case is that this amounts to a specific  substantive  requirement,  not
    contained in the wording of the Regulations and therefore unenforceable
    as a reason for refusal of the Applicant's application further  to  the
    decision of the Supreme Court  in  Alvi.   Counsel  for  the  Applicant
    accepted Alvi concerned the application of the Immigration  Rules  made
    under the Immigration Act 1971, which had the benefit of being  subject
    to a negative resolution procedure in Parliament. He also accepted that
    a different statutory  regime  underpinned  the  2016  Regulations  but
    submitted that there was still some force in  the  application  of  the
    principle contained in Alvi to the present circumstances.


21. Counsel for the Applicant relied on the fact that the power to make the
    2016 Regulations derived in part  from  the  European  Communities  Act
    1972, which  only  recognises  four  distinct  means  of  incorporating
    applicable treaties and directives  and  that  these  did  not  include
    guidance issued by the Respondent.  In these circumstances he submitted
    that the Respondent's guidance had no binding force.  He accepted  that
    guidance may assist  in  matters  of  interpretation,  but  only  where
    guidance is no narrower  or  more  restrictive  the  instrument  to  be
    interpreted.


22. However, the submissions as to the implementation of EU law must  fail,
    given our findings above and the Applicant's  express  acceptance  that
    neither the Directive, nor Article 20 of the TFEU,  as  interpreted  by
    the CJEU in Zambrano and following cases, requires the extension of  an
    EEA derivative residence card to carers of adults.  As  a  consequence,
    any guidance relating to derivative rights of residence for carers  was
    merely a matter of national law.


23. On behalf of the Respondent, Counsel also submitted  that  the  present
    context was different to that in  Alvi,  not  only  because  this  case
    concerns the 2016 Regulations and not the Immigration Rules,  but  also
    because the relevant guidance in the present  application  did  not  in
    fact contain  a  substantive  requirement  for  the  grant  of  an  EEA
    derivative residence card,  but  only  the  evidence  required  for  an
    applicant to show that they were a legal guardian. This  was  a  matter
    which the Respondent was best placed to assess and require.


24. We also find that the parts of the Respondent's guidance at pages 41 to
    42 set out above, do not seek  to  define  'legal  guardian',  but  are
    expressly worded so as to define the evidence required  to  demonstrate
    that a person is a legal guardian.


25. In  any  event,  even  if  the  Respondent's  guidance  amounted  to  a
    definition of 'legal guardian', that would not be determinative of  the
    issue of interpretation but would  only  be  relevant  to  whether  the
    Respondent's decision was irrational or unlawful.


26. In his submissions, relating  to  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  'legal
    guardian' in Regulation 16 of the 2016  Regulations,  Counsel  for  the
    Applicant relies on a legal dictionary definition of guardianship of an
    adult and submits that a Lasting Power of Attorney  falls  within  this
    definition  and  thus  the  2016  Regulations.    The   definition   of
    guardianship of an adult relied upon is as follows:


      "A  guardian  may  be  appointed  for  an  adult  person  in   certain
      circumstances, such as when a developmentally disabled person  reaches
      a legal age, or when a person becomes  incapacitated  due  to  age  or
      illness.  For example, when an elderly person gets to the point  where
      he can no longer care for himself, or his property, another individual
      may be appointed guardian.  In such cases, the  guardian  is  often  a
      family member."


27. Counsel for the Applicant also relies on the definition of a  power  of
    attorney as a "legal document in which  you  give  another  person  the
    right to act for you, especially in financial  or  legal  matters"  and
    submitted that a Lasting Power of Attorney  created  a  form  of  legal
    guardianship.  Counsel for the Applicant further relied on the  similar
    powers available under a Lasting Power of Attorney  to  those  under  a
    Legal Guardianship Order and  noted  that  where  a  Lasting  Power  of
    Attorney had been issued, there would  be  no  additional  need  for  a
    deputy to be appointed and that the Office of the Public  Guardian  was
    responsible for both Lasting Powers of Attorney and Legal  Guardianship
    Orders.


28. In contrast, Counsel for the Respondent submitted that it was  entirely
    rational for the Respondent  to  interpret  the  concept  of  a  'legal
    guardian' as a person who had been granted a Legal  Guardianship  Order
    or a Special Guardianship Order.  The legal  dictionary  definition  of
    'Guardianship of an Adult' is not  synonymous  with  that  of  a  legal
    guardian in Regulation 16 of the 2016 Regulations and in any event, the
    definition provided in a dictionary does not  necessarily  dictate  the
    meaning to be given to the term in the 2016 Regulations.


29. On behalf of the Respondent it was also submitted that a Lasting  Power
    of Attorney is not comparable to a Legal Guardianship Order, to such an
    extent that the meaning of legal guardian should be extended to include
    someone with a Lasting Power of Attorney.  The differences relied  upon
    were as follows:


        i) A Legal Guardianship Order is made by and subject to review by a
           Court. In contrast, a Lasting Power of Attorney is an  agreement
           made between private individuals which only has to meet the  far
           more limited requirement of being  registered  with  the  Public
           Guardian (Schedule 1  of  the  Mental  Capacity  Act  2005).   A
           Lasting Power of  Attorney,  therefore,  lacks  the  independent
           scrutiny and oversight of the Court which is applied to a  Legal
           Guardianship Order.
       ii) In contrast to a Legal Guardianship  Order,  which  requires  an
           order of the Court to bring  to  an  end,  a  Lasting  Power  of
           Attorney can be revoked by a donor with  capacity  at  any  time
           (under section 13 of the Mental Capacity 2005).  This means that
           a Lasting Power of Attorney can be revoked by the donor as  soon
           as a derivative right of residence has been granted.
      iii) A more limited range of powers is provided under a Lasting Power
           of Attorney than under a Legal Guardianship Order.
       iv) There are, in  any  event  two  forms  of  a  Lasting  Power  of
           Attorney; first, a property and financial one  and  secondly,  a
           health and welfare one.   The  former,  as  the  name  suggests,
           provides authority limited to  property  and  financial  matters
           and, therefore, is not comparable to a Legal Guardianship Order.
            Whereas the latter only comes into effect when the donor  loses
           capacity and, as such, only applies when a person has  a  mental
           disorder.

30. We find, having considered the submissions made by both  Counsel,  that
    in essence, a legal guardian is a person who is appointed by a court to
    act for another person where that person lacks capacity to  act.   That
    finding is consistent with the legal definition of guardianship  of  an
    adult and can  only  be  consistent  with  the  existence  of  a  Legal
    Guardianship Order and not a Lasting  Power  of  Attorney.   A  Lasting
    Power of Attorney is of  a  qualitatively  different  nature  and  most
    importantly when made, is  in  relation  to  a  person  who  still  has
    capacity.  A Lasting Power of Attorney, depending on the  choices  made
    by the individual, and the type of Lasting Power  of  Attorney  entered
    into, only necessarily takes full effect once a person  no  longer  has
    capacity to act for themselves.


31.  It  would  be  wholly  unrealistic  and  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    Respondent to investigate in each and every application  upon  which  a
    Lasting Power of Attorney is relied upon, the nature of the  agreement,
    the choices made by the EEA national within it and  whether  subsequent
    to the agreement being made, a person  has  become  incapacitated  such
    that another (the applicant for an EEA derivative  residence  card)  is
    required to act for them.  Only in specific circumstances, which cannot
    be fully ascertained from the face of a Lasting Power of  Attorney  and
    could not possibly apply on  the  date  on  which  such  agreement  was
    entered into, could a  Lasting  Power  of  Attorney  even  arguably  be
    compared to a Legal Guardianship Order and even then there  remain  key
    differences.  For the reasons set  out  by  the  Respondent  these  are
    qualitatively different  instruments  which  cannot  both  satisfy  any
    rational interpretation of a 'legal guardian'.


32. We find that neither as a matter of general principle, nor on the basis
    of the actual Lasting Powers  of  Attorney  entered  into  by  the  EEA
    national in the  present  case,  can  such  an  agreement  satisfy  the
    requirement of 'legal guardian' in  Regulation  16(8)(a)  of  the  2016
    Regulations.


33. Separately, on the basis that 'legal guardian' included only those with
    a Legal Guardianship Order, available under sections 1  and  7  of  the
    Mental Health Act 1983 to those with a mental disorder,  the  Applicant
    suggested in  argument  that  it  was  unfair  and  irrational  of  the
    Respondent to so limit the availability of an EEA derivative  residence
    card and exclude those with physical or other impairments.


34. If on this basis the Applicant was seeking to mount a challenge to  the
    substantive fairness of the decision, it is clear that such a challenge
    cannot survive the decision of the Supreme Court in R  (Gallaher  Group
    Ltd) v Competition and Markets Authority [2018] UKSC 25, in which  Lord
    Carnworth JSC found that substantive unfairness is not a distinct legal
    criterion and adds nothing  to  the  ordinary  principles  of  Judicial
    Review.

35. Finally, in the supplementary skeleton argument submitted on behalf  of
    the Applicant, reliance was placed  on  the  opinion  of  the  Attorney
    General and the anticipated decision of the  CJEU  in  SM  (Algeria)  v
    Entry Clearance Officer, UK Visa Section,  Case  C-129/18,  due  to  be
    handed down shortly after the substantive hearing.  We have  considered
    the judgement of the CJEU handed down on 26 March 2019 and find that in
    fact it has no bearing on the issues raised  in  this  application  for
    Judicial Review, particularly in circumstances  where  it  is  accepted
    that the Directive does not apply.


Would be the EEA national be unable to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  or
another  EEA  state  if  the  Applicant  left  the  United  Kingdom  for  an
indefinite period.

36. As noted above, although not expressly relied upon by the Respondent in
    the decision under challenge, it is clear that, even if  the  Applicant
    could have satisfied the requirement that she was a legal guardian  for
    the  EEA  national,  she  would  still  have  needed  to  satisfy   the
    requirements in Regulation 16(5)(c) of the 2016  Regulations  and  show
    that the EEA national would be unable to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    or another EEA state if she left the United Kingdom for  an  indefinite
    period. For completeness, we find that the Applicant's application  for
    an EEA derivative residence card under Regulation 16 was bound to  fail
    for this reason as she could not possibly satisfy this  requirement  on
    the evidence available before the Respondent at the date of decision.


37. As recognised by the CJEU in Dereci and Others, C-256/11 and reiterated
    by the domestic Courts in Harrison v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2012] EWCA Civ 1736 and Patel, Shah & Bourouisa v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2018] 2 All ER  1093,  [2018]  1  WLR
    5245; the Zambrano principle giving  rise  to  a  derivative  right  of
    residence is only likely to arise in  exceptional  circumstances  where
    the dependent EU citizen is compelled to leave the territory of the  EU
    and does not extend so far as a situation where the  EU  citizen  would
    choose to leave.


38. In the present case, there is nothing to suggest that the EEA  national
    will be forced to leave the UK and the EU  if  the  Applicant  were  to
    return to Bangladesh.  Despite the emotional ties and accepted level of
    care provided, we find that there  is  alternative  private  and  state
    provision for medical and social services care  available  to  the  EEA
    national in the United Kingdom.  The  suggestion  by  Counsel  for  the
    Applicant  that,  pursuant  to  the  Lasting  Power  of  Attorney,  the
    Applicant could herself compel the EEA national  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and the EU with her is wholly inappropriate.   In  reality,  it
    will be a matter of choice as to whether he would wish  to  leave  with
    the Applicant, due to his undoubted preference for care to be  provided
    by the Applicant rather than somebody else.


39. For these reasons, even if the Applicant could satisfy  the  definition
    of a legal guardian in the 2016 Regulations, which is not the case,  we
    would have found that any failure by the Respondent to give the  proper
    construction to the phrase legal guardian., could not  be  material  to
    the outcome of the application, which would be bound to  fail,  as  the
    Applicant cannot on the evidence available to the Respondent, meet  the
    requirements in Regulation 16(5)(c) of the 2016 Regulations.   This  is
    not a case in which there is any real doubt as to what the  outcome  of
    the application would be.


Order


We order, therefore, that the judicial review application be dismissed.

The Applicant is at liberty to apply for permission  to  appeal  in  writing
within 7 days of the date of this decision.  If no such application is  made
within this time, we refuse permission to appeal.



Costs

The  Applicant  shall  pay  the  Respondent's  reasonable  costs   of   this
application, to be subject to detailed assessment if not agreed.



                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson




        Dated:         4th July 2019



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.



                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/3953/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                The Queen on the application of Selina Begum
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Finch and Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson




                                    Order

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr R Sharma of Counsel, instructed by  Law  Lane
Solicitors, on behalf of the  Applicant  and  Mr  A  Payne  QC  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 22 March 2019.

      IT IS ORDERED THAT:

1. The Applicant's application for Judicial Review is dismissed.


2. The Applicant  shall  pay  the  Respondent's  reasonable  costs  of  this
   application, to be subject to detailed assessment if not agreed.


3. The Applicant is at liberty to apply for permission to appeal in  writing
   within 7 days of the date of this decision.  If no  such  application  is
   made within this time, permission to appeal is refused.




                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson




        Dated:         4th July 2019



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.


