
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: JR/03376/2019


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


|Heard at Field House                 |                                      |
|On 31 October 2019                   |16 September 2020                     |


                                   Before

                               MR JUSTICE DOVE
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                VICTORIA YIGA
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms N Quadi
For the Respondent: Mr J Anderson


DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Applicant is a national of Uganda who came to the United Kingdom
       in 2002. Shortly after her arrival she made an unsuccessful claim for
       asylum and, having had her appeal against that decision dismissed,
       she became appeal rights exhausted in 2004. On the 25th August 2012
       she contends that she entered into a marriage by proxy in Benin with
       a Mr [pic]Ayinde who is a French national. That marriage is the
       subject of dispute as will emerge below. It is evidenced by a
       marriage certificate and a letter from the Consulate of the Republic
       of Benin in London confirming its validity. The essence of the
       position, which is in truth more complex in its chronology, is that
       on the basis of her marriage to an EEA National the Applicant made an
       application for an EEA residence card. The date of that application
       is disputed, as is the question of whether or not it properly fell to
       be determined under the Immigration (European Economic Area)
       Regulations 2006 (the "2006" Regulations) or the Immigration
       (European Economic Area) Regulations 2016 (the "2016 Regulations").
       In any event, the Applicant exercised her right of appeal under
       Regulation 36 of the 2016 Regulations, and the matter was listed for
       hearing on the 14th June 2018 before the First-tier Tribunal.

    2. On the 14th February 2018, prior to the hearing, the Applicant was
       removed from the UK. The hearing of the 14th June 2018 the case was
       adjourned with a view to enabling the Applicant to be present at the
       appeal hearing. The Applicant made an application for a visit visa to
       attend the UK. That application, which is the subject of this
       application for judicial review, was refused on the 5th October 2018.
       The reasons for the conclusion of the Entry Clearance Officer that he
       or she was not satisfied that the Applicant was genuinely seeking
       entry as a visitor were expressed in the following terms:

          "You first entered the UK in 2002 and make an application to
          remain outside the rules on 7/6/2002 which was refused on
          22/8/2002. You then appealed and then again before all appeal
          rights were exhausted on 4/8/2004. You then absconded until
          3/1/2012 when you made further submissions which were rejected.
          There then followed four EEA spouse applications which were all
          rejected however before removal could take place you lodged a
          Judicial Review application which was rejected. Two further EEA
          spouse applications were made the last of which was rejected on
          23/1/2017. Further submissions, made on 9/1/2018 were rejected and
          you were removed on 17/02/2018. Since then on 31/08/2018 you made
          a further JR challenge against the removal which was rejected and
          your final EEA spouse rejection was appealed against and has a new
          hearing date on 22/10/2018 following two adjournments. This
          hearing can take place in your absence and given the chronic
          failure on your part to adhere to UK Immigration Rules as outlined
          above I am not satisfied that you intend a short visit of one
          month as indicated.

          I further note that you received medical treatment in the UK in
          2016 at a time when you had no leave in the UK and state you did
          not pay therefore I am satisfied there is an NHS debt outstanding
          which would need to be paid before any future travel to the UK
          would be favourably considered.

          Finally I note that the visit will cost �l500 however the only
          financial support document submitted is in your name but contains
          no credits and just one unsourced lump sum carried forward. As
          such I am not satisfied that such funds are genuinely available
          for your exclusive use or that you will be able to maintain and
          accommodate yourself for the duration of the visit without
          recourse to public funds.

          You have produced no further documentary evidence of your personal
          and financial circumstances. I must take into account your
          personal and economic circumstances in Uganda when coming to my
          decision, however given the statements you have made and the
          documentary evidence you have presented to support your
          application I am not satisfied that your circumstances in Uganda,
          coupled with your reasons for wishing to travel to the United
          Kingdom, are such that you have sufficient intention to leave the
          United Kingdom at the end of your proposed visit."

    3. It appears that the matter was listed before the First-tier Tribunal
       for a case management review hearing on the 22nd October 2018. At
       that hearing it was made known that the Appellant had made an
       application for entry clearance to return to the UK as a visitor and
       that this application had been refused without reference to the
       Immigration Judge's earlier direction that the matter should be
       adjourned to enable the Appellant to return to the UK and participate
       in her appeal. On the 4th December 2018 a lengthy letter was sent by
       the Respondent setting out the Respondent's position that there was
       no legal basis for requiring the Appellant to return to the UK for
       the purposes of the hearing of her appeal. The First-tier Tribunal
       rescheduled the appeal hearing for the 16th April 2019. Although
       questions were raised as to whether or not that hearing should be
       adjourned, it nevertheless proceeded, and the First-tier Tribunal
       Judge gave the following directions:

          "It is understood the Appellant has been refused entry clearance
          to attend any hearing. The Appellant's solicitors are forthwith to
          confirm to the Respondent and the tribunal what, if any, action
          the Appellant is taking in relation to direction 1 above.

          If no action is taken the matter will be listed for a substantive
          hearing of all issues. This is not a deportation case so AJ (s94B:
          Kyarie and Byndloss questions) (2018) UKUT 115 (IAC) will have no
          application.

          Application can be made to the Tribunal for permission for the
          Appellant to give evidence by electronic means. The Respondent is
          forthwith to file and serve all documentary evidence to support
          the several allegations made in the reason for refusal.

          A response to the letter of 9 December 2016 from the Benin Consul
          in London about the validity of the Appellant's Marriage or
          Skeleton argument why the Tribunal should not accept it at face
          value.

          The Appellant is forthwith to file and serve an expert opinion on
          the validity of her marriage under Benin Law."

    4. Following the issuing of the directions the Applicant gave
       instructions for these proceedings by way of judicial review to be
       pursued. A pre-action protocol letter was sent to the Respondent on
       the 13th May 2019 and proceedings were commenced on the 21st June
       2019. Permission to apply for judicial review and an extension of
       time was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy on the 26th
       July 2019. The application as originally formulated was pleaded as a
       single ground. Within that ground a number of submissions were
       advanced. Firstly, it was contended that the wrong regulations had
       been applied in refusing the application for an EEA residence card:
       the application should have been considered under the 2006
       Regulations and not the 2016 Regulations. Secondly, it was contended
       that the marriage which the Applicant had entered into was valid
       under the law of Benin. Thirdly, it was contended that, although the
       Applicant's relationship with her husband had broken down, she was
       nevertheless entitled to have the application for an EEA residence
       card granted under the 2006 Regulations. In respect of attendance at
       the hearing, paragraph 20 of the Applicant's pleadings stated that it
       was submitted "that the Applicant is entitled by law to attend her
       appeal hearing". Furthermore, in paragraph 23 it was submitted "that
       the Defendant's refusal to grant the Claimant entry clearance to
       attend her hearing was arbitrary and not in accordance with the law".

    5. It is clear from the documentation that there were extensions of time
       granted for the filing of the detailed grounds of defence on two
       occasions. The original deadline for the provision of this document
       was the 9th September 2019, but that was extended, firstly, to the
       30th September 2019, and then to the 8th October 2019, bearing in
       mind that the hearing had been listed for the 3 1 October 2019.
       Thereafter on the 30th October 2019, the day prior to the hearing, a
       consolidated trial bundle and a skeleton argument was filed and
       served. A witness statement was provided from the Applicant at the
       same time dated 25th October 2019. At the hearing, for reasons which
       are set out below, procedural issues were raised by the Respondent in
       addition to the substantive hearings raised in the judicial review.

       Procedural issues

    6. Nothing which follows should be taken as any reflection upon either
       counsel who appeared in this case, and indeed I am greatly indebted
       to both of them for their careful and focused written and oral
       submissions. In particular Ms Quadri was instructed very late in the
       day, and it stands greatly to her credit that she was able to rapidly
       assimilate the relevant materials and produce her skeleton argument,
       which was extremely helpful, at very short notice.

    7. At the hearing the Respondent complained that as a consequence of the
       skeleton argument produced the day prior to the hearing the
       Applicant's case had fundamentally changed. In effect, it was
       submitted, the Applicant had abandoned the grounds associated with
       the question of the correct regulations under which the EEA
       Regulations application had been determined and the point in relation
       to the validity of the marriage was no longer pursued. Instead the
       skeleton argument focused upon a single contention, namely that the
       failure to allow the visit visa application amounted to a breach of
       the requirements of procedural fairness at common law. This new
       allegation is based upon the contention that the requirements of
       common law fairness warranted the Applicant's appearance in person in
       the UK at her forthcoming appeal. It was submitted that the Applicant
       had no permission to amend her pleadings to raise this point nor did
       she have permission to apply for judicial review in relation to it.
       The Respondent relied in particular upon the observations of Singh LJ
       in the case of R (on the application of Talpada v Secretary of State
       for the Home Department) [2018] EWCA Civ 841. At paragraph 67-69
       Singh LJ observed as follows:

          "67.    I turn finally to the question of procedural rigour in
          public law litigation. In my view, it cannot be emphasised enough
          that public law litigation must be conducted with an appropriate
          degree of procedural rigour. I recognise that public law
          litigation cannot necessarily be regarded in the same way as
          ordinary civil litigation between private parties. This is because
          it is not only the private interests of the parties which are
          involved. There is clearly an important public interest which must
          not be overlooked or undermined. In particular procedure must not
          become the master of substance where, for example, an abuse of
          power needs to be corrected by the court. However, both fairness
          and the orderly management of ligation require that there must be
          an appropriate degree of formality and predictability in the
          conduct of public law litigation as in other forms of civil
          litigation.

          68. In the context of an appeal such as this it is important that
          the grounds of appeal should be clearly and succinctly set out. It
          is also important that only those grounds of appeal for which
          permission has been granted by this Court are pursued at an
          appeal. The Courts frequently observe, as did appear to happen in
          the present case, that grounds of challenge have a habit of
          "evolving" during the course of the proceedings, for example when
          a final skeleton argument comes to be drafted. This will in
          practice be many months after the formal close of pleadings and
          after evidence has been filed.

          69. These unfortunate trends must be resisted and should be
          discouraged by the courts, using whatever powers they have to
          impose procedural rigour in public law proceedings. Courts should
          be prepared to take robust decisions and not permit grounds to be
          advanced if they have not been properly pleased or where
          permission has not been granted to raise them. Otherwise there is
          a risk that there will be unfairness, not only to the other party
          of the case, but potentially to the wider public interest, which
          is an important facet of public law litigation."

    8. In response to these submissions the Applicant contends that in fact
       there has been no change in the Applicant's pleaded case since the
       case in relation to common law fairness was foreshadowed within
       paragraph 20 set out above. Permission had been allowed on the basis
       of the material which was lodged with the application and therefore
       permission existed to argue the point relating to common law
       fairness. In the circumstances there had been no prejudice to the
       Respondent as the argument in relation to common law fairness raised
       no new issues of fact, and was based upon propositions of law
       addressed by authorities that were already in large measure before
       the Tribunal. In the circumstances, therefore, the Applicant was
       entitled to raise the arguments which were presented.

    9. Having considered the submissions made I am quite unable to accept
       that the argument now raised by the Applicant is one which is
       properly pleaded in the application which launched these proceedings.
       To suggest that an argument based upon the requirements of common law
       fairness, and in particular the authorities set out below in that
       connection, was properly encompassed by the wholly unparticularised
       assertion in paragraph 20 of the original Grounds is a proposition
       which is in my view unsustainable. The purpose of providing pleaded
       grounds in an application for judicial review is to set out, amongst
       other matters, the legal provisions or relevant legal doctrines which
       justify the conclusion that the decision under challenge is unlawful,
       and the facts and submissions that are pertinent to that contention.
       Paragraph 20 does not begin to accomplish that task. It fails to set
       out what the "law" required and how it had been breached by the
       failure to grant the visit visa and permit the Appellant to attend
       her appeal hearing. It is quite inadequate for a pleading to simply
       assert that the decision is unlawful without setting out in detail
       the specifics of why that is the case. Whilst this occurred on this
       occasion through no fault of counsel appearing for the Applicant,
       that is no remedy for, and cannot excuse, the procedural default in
       which the Applicant finds herself.

   10. The observations of Singh LJ in Talpada with respect to the need for
       procedural rigor in public law cases is clearly relevant to the
       present case. I am not minded to grant any permission to amend the
       pleadings in this case so as to advance the argument based upon
       common law fairness. It has arisen extremely late in the day, in
       circumstances where these [pic]proceedings have been on foot for a
       considerable period of time. I note what is said by the Applicant in
       relation to the absence of any unfairness in allowing the argument to
       be presented. However, it needs to be recalled that the late service
       of papers were accompanied by the provision on an additional witness
       statement from the Applicant, which was relied upon by the Applicant
       in respect of some of the arguments associated with common law
       fairness, and which the Respondent has had no opportunity to deal
       with at all. It is obviously in principle unfair to admit a new
       argument accompanied by evidence in circumstances where a Respondent
       has no opportunity to address the material by investigating the
       issues raised and providing further evidence of its own as necessary.
       Furthermore, although not a dimension of unfairness, it undermines
       the objective of holding an efficient and comprehensive hearing if,
       as here, the opportunity has to be afforded to a party served with a
       late change of tack in the Applicant's case, to produce further
       submissions in writing after the hearing which the court does then
       not have the opportunity to examine at the oral hearing specifically
       convened for the case. Such a procedure does not serve the overriding
       objective well. For all of these reasons I am not minded to allow any
       amendment to the Applicant's pleadings in order to advance the
       argument based upon common law fairness.

   11. Furthermore, although it was submitted on behalf of the Applicant
       that permission existed to advance this argument, I am unable to
       accept that that is the case. To start with, as I set out above, I am
       unable to accept the submission that this argument was properly
       pleaded in the original grounds in this case, and therefore could not
       have formed pan of the consideration on the papers given to this case
       by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy. In any event it [pic]appears
       to me that the basis upon which he granted permission is set out in
       paragraph 3 of his decision in the following terms:

          "The application for the visit visa related to the much wider
          issue of whether or not the Applicant was entitled to return to
          Britain to attend her immigration appeal. This is a matter in
          which a Designated Judge in the First-tier Tribunal had adjourned
          the Applicant's EEA appeal and given orders that she be returned
          to Britain. Furthermore, I consider that given the assertion that
          the Applicant made the EEA application in December 2016 it may be
          that it cannot be said that the decision was unarguable. I
          therefore grant permission."

   12. It appears that the grant of permission related to the directions
       given by the First-tier Tribunal which I have set out above, and also
       the contentions raised in relation to the correct regulations in
       play. In so far, therefore, as it is clear as to the basis upon which
       Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted permission it does not
       appear to have related to any contention that the requirements of
       common law fairness demanded that the application should be granted.
       Clearly the need for judicial review proceedings to be subject to a
       preliminary scrutiny on the papers and the formal grant of permission
       is an important discipline in the proceedings. Allowing arguments to
       be developed at a late stage has the further potential mischief of
       bypassing that preliminarily scrutiny. In this case permission was
       not granted for the argument raised as a new point in the Applicant's
       skeleton argument and thus the element of preliminarily scrutiny
       provided for at the permission stage was side stepped.

   13. For all of these reasons in my view the Respondent's points in
       relation to procedure are sound. I am unwilling to permit the
       Applicant permission to advance the new argument which is raised on
       her behalf in relation to common law fairness. I would not allow her
       to amend her pleadings to raise the point. That is sufficient to
       dispose of these proceedings as the Applicant does not contend that
       she is entitled to succeed on any other basis. Nevertheless, and in
       the light of the fact that I have heard submissions on the point and
       consider that it is a matter which can be disposed of relatively
       succinctly, I set out below my conclusions in relation to the
       substance of the argument which has been raised.

       Common law fairness

   14. At the outset it is important to record a number of concessions which
       were made as part of the background to the argument. They are as
       follows:

       a) it is conceded on behalf of the Applicant that questions related
          to the legality of the Applicant's marriage, and whether or not
          her application was dealt with under the correct regulations, are
          not matters which can properly be explored as part of the present
          application. There are cogent reasons for this, which include the
          fact that the decision reached in relation to her EEA regulations
          application is not the subject of these proceedings and, in any
          event, she has an appropriate alternative remedy in relation to
          her complaints in connection with that decision, namely her appeal
          which is currently before the First-tier Tribunal. Thus to the
          extent that the judicial review was originally launched on the
          basis of these contentions it was misconceived.

       b) By virtue of regulation 40(2) and (3) of the 2016 Regulations
          certain appeals against certain "EEA decisions" (of which the
          Appellant's appeal before the First-tier Tribunal is one) cause
          any removal directions to be cease to have effect. In R (Ahmed) v
          Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 303 the
          Court of Appeal held that an appeal against a decision to refuse a
          residence card under the 2006 Regulations did not have suspensive
          effect. In the case of R (Shote) v Secretary of State for the Home
          Department [2018] EWHC 87 the High Court confirmed that the
          decision in Ahmed applies with equal effect in connection with
          decisions under the 2016 Regulations, as there is no material
          difference between the 2006 and the 2016 Regulations in this
          respect. The case of Shote was applied in subsequent case of R
          (Dogbey) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] EWHC
          1165. Thus it is conceded that the Applicant's appeal does not
          have suspensive effect.

       c) Furthermore, the categories of case where a right of temporary
          admission is given pursuant to regulation 41 of the 2016
          Regulations does not apply in the Applicant's case: this is
          because the Applicant is not subject to a decision to remove her
          made pursuant to regulation 23(6)(b).

       d) it is not open to an Applicant to ventilate an Article 8 claim in
          an appeal against the refusal of an EEA residence card; this
          underpins the reliance by the Claimant upon the principle of
          common law fairness since no reliance could be placed upon any
          procedural requirements of Article 8 in the context of this
          appeal.

   15. Against that background the Applicant submits that the requirements
       of common law fairness are such that the Applicant's visit visa
       should have been granted so as to enable her to attend her appeal in
       person. There are a number of strands to the Applicant's argument.
       Firstly, the Applicant relies upon the decision of the Supreme Court
       in R (Kyarie and Byndloss) v Secretary of State for the Home
       Department [20171 UKSC 42, at least by analogy with the present case.
       In particular, the Applicant draws attention to, firstly, the fact
       that at the heart of the refusal by the Respondent was the contention
       that the marriage she had entered into was "a marriage of
       convenience", which is a factual issue which would need to be
       resolved having heard the evidence of the Appellant and, secondly,
       the practical constraints upon giving evidence from abroad which Lord
       Wilson drew attention to, for instance at paragraph 73 of his
       judgment. The Applicant submits that these constraints would apply
       equally in relation to the Applicant's appeal in which questions of
       fact will need to be resolved.

   16. A further strand of the Applicant's argument is reliance upon the
       case of Ahsan v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017]
       EWCA Civ 2009. This case related to the question of whether or not an
       out of country right of appeal was adequate in a case in which it was
       contended by the Respondent that the Appellants had cheated in their
       English language test. The Court of Appeal followed the decision of
       the Supreme Court in Kyarie and Byndloss, and held that an out of
       country appeal would not satisfy the procedural aspect of Article 8
       unless facilities for giving evidence via video link were
       realistically available. In particular the Applicant relies upon the
       conclusions reached by Underhill LJ in paragraphs 97 and 98 of his
       judgment as follows:

          "97.    For the reasons given above I would hold that an out-of-
          country appeal would not satisfy the appellants' rights, either at
          common law or under art.8 of the Convention, to a fair and
          effective procedure to challenge the decisions to remove them; and
          that in those circumstances, subject to the human rights claim
          issue considered below, they were entitled to proceed with such a
          challenge by way of judicial review.

          98. I emphasise that that conclusion depends on the particular
          features of the appellants' cases, namely that the nature of the
          issues raised by their appeals was such that they could not be
          fairly decided without hearing their oral evidence, and also that
          facilities for giving such evidence by video-link were not
          realistically available. Even if those features are shared by the
          great majority of TOEIC cheating cases, it does not follow that
          they will be present in all cases where the legislation provides
          for an out-of-country appeal: in particular, whether it is
          necessary for the appellant to give oral evidence will depend on
          the nature of the issues."

   17. Further the Applicant observes that the decisions in Shote and Dogbey
       were not concerned with common law fairness, and therefore the
       conclusions which they reached do not grapple with the question of
       whether the requirements of common law fairness are breached in the
       present circumstances by the failure of the Applicant to be able to
       attend her own appeal.

   18. Having considered the submissions advanced on behalf of the Applicant
       I am not satisfied that they are correct. Firstly, it must be
       emphasised that the decisions in Kyarie and Byndloss and Ahsan were
       made in the context of the procedural rights required by Article 8 in
       relation to claims of a breach of Article 8. Such claims do not arise
       in the present case as Article 8 issues cannot be raised in an appeal
       under the 2016 Regulations (or, for that matter, the 2006
       Regulations). The present case therefore arises in a different
       context to those cases. That is not to say that considerations of
       common law fairness do not arise for consideration, but rather that
       the observations made in Ahsan arose (obiter) in a different legal
       context. Furthermore, as was observed in Ahsan, the question of
       whether fairness requires that an Appellant be present to give
       evidence in person will depends upon the nature of the issues which
       arise in the particular appeal under consideration (see paragraph
       98).

   19. I am not satisfied that the refusal of the Respondent to grant the
       Applicant a visit visa in the present case gives rise to a breach of
       the requirements of common law fairness, either in principle, or in
       the particular circumstances of this case as matters stand. In
       addressing the question of principle, it is important to observe
       that, whilst the 2016 Regulations made specific provisions for
       suspensive appeals and temporary rights of admissions where appeals
       are to be heard, none of those provisions apply in the Applicant's
       case. Thus, it was clearly not intended in enacting the legislation
       to provide an Appellant with the opportunity to attend his or her
       appeal against an EEA decision in the circumstances of this
       Applicant.

   20. In my view, the decisions in Kyarie and Byndloss and Ahsan arose in
       very different legal circumstances to the decision in the present
       case. As set out above, those cases related to appeals in relation to
       Article 8, and the procedural requirements in a case in which Article
       8 was directly engaged. The Appellant's appeal under the 2016
       Regulations is clearly distinct from this situation, and this
       conclusion is supported by the decisions in Shote and Dogbey. These
       arguments were considered again by the High Court in the decision or
       R (on the application of Md Shafikul Islam) v Secretary of State for
       the Home Department [2018] EWHC 2939 (Admin) where, at paragraphs 40-
       44 of his judgment, Mr Andrew Thomas QC sitting as a Deputy High
       Court Judge dismissed an argument based on Kyarie and Byndloss in the
       context of an appeal against an EEA decision. In my judgment, against
       the background of the legislative framework, and the consistent line
       of authority set out above, it is simply not open to the Applicant to
       contend that the common law principles of fairness require that, in
       principle, her visit visa should have been allowed to enable her to
       attend her appeal in person. The observations upon which she relies
       in Ahsan are, even if not obiter, conclusions reached in a different
       legal context. Dealing with the issue in principle, in my view
       fairness does not require that the Applicant return to attend her
       appeal. There is no reason in principle why, for instance, giving
       evidence by live link is not appropriate in an appeal concerning an
       EEA decision. Whilst I shall turn to the particular circumstances of
       the Applicant's appeal shortly, by and large decisions in relation to
       EEA questions will involve relatively simple and straight forward
       factual evaluations, often heavily dependant upon the view taken
       about accompanying documentation. Whilst in some instances there are
       no doubt practical obstacles to be overcome it is far from unusual
       for courts and tribunals to receive evidence via a live link, and for
       questions of the credibility and reliability of witnesses to be
       resolved in respect of evidence which has been received through that
       means. In my view, therefore, none of the issues of practical concern
       raised by the Applicant in this case give rise to an in principle
       concern that the requirements of common law fairness could not be
       met, subject to specific measures being taken to accommodate the
       requirements of fairness in individual cases.

   21. Turning to the particular circumstances of this Applicant, I am not
       satisfied that there would be any basis to conclude the requirements
       of fairness in her case were breached by the failure of the
       Respondent to grant her a visit visa to attend her appeal. Firstly,
       it is clear from the directions given by the First-tier Tribunal on
       the 16th April 2019 that the First-tier Tribunal contemplates an
       application for permission to give evidence by electronic means.
       Nothing in these directions suggest that the view of the First-tier
       Tribunal is that, bearing in mind the issues in the case, it would
       not be possible for there to be a fair hearing of the appeal without
       the personal attendance of the Applicant. Secondly, and related to
       this issue, it is clear that the issues in the appeal, in particular
       related to whether or not the Applicant entered into a marriage of
       convenience, are relatively straight forward and within a narrow
       compass. They will bear upon the question or whether or not her
       marriage was a legally valid marriage: an issue which will depend in
       particular upon an examination of the documentation supporting the
       Applicant's case and any available expert evidence. Oral evidence
       will no doubt address the relatively simple issues concerned with the
       tenancy agreement and the failure to attend interview upon which the
       Respondent relies. On the face of the material before the Tribunal
       there is nothing to suggest that these issues are incapable of being
       explored and evaluated by the Applicant giving evidence over a live
       link. Whilst in her recent statement the Applicant contends that she
       has had no help from the British High Commission in Uganda, in my
       view it is premature to form any conclusion as to the ability of the
       Appellant to appear at her appeal via electronic means. No doubt
       those issues will be explored as and when an application for those
       means are made to the First-tier Tribunal. For the purposes of this
       application, however, I am unable to conclude that there is anything
       about the particular circumstances of this Applicant's case as they
       stand at present which would support the premise that it would be a
       breach of the common law requirements of fairness to do anything
       other than grant her a visit visa in order to attend appeal.

DECISION

   22. As set out above in my view there are formidable procedural
       difficulties in the way of the Applicant presenting her argument in
       the form in which it was presented at the hearing. In any event for
       the reasons which I have set out above in my view her arguments could
       not succeed. For all of these reasons her application for judicial
       review must be dismissed.

                                                                      UTIJR5

                                                               JR/03376/2019

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






                       The Queen on the application of
                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                                Victoria Yiga
                                                                  Respondent




                           Before High Court Judge
                               MR JUSTICE DOVE


 Having considered all documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
 respective representatives, Ms N Quadi of Garden Court Chambers on  behalf
 of the Applicant. Mr J Anderson of 39 Essex Chambers,  on  behalf  of  the
 Respondent. At a hearing at Field House, London on 31st October 2019.


 Decision:  permission is refused


    1) Permission to apply for judicial review is refused.


 Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


    2) Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused.


 Costs


 (3) There having been no applications and upon enquiry of UTIAC disclosing
  that there is no evidence of the Applicant being legally aided there  will
  be no order for costs.


     Signed:       MR JUSTICE DOVE


               High Court Judge: MR JUSTICE DOVE


     Dated:       19/06/2020
[pic]
 Applicant's solicitors: [~]
 Respondent's solicitors: [~]
 Home Office Ref: [~]
 Decision(s) sent to above parties on 16/09/2020
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
 ---------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights
 A refusal by the Upper Tribunal of  permission  to  bring  judicial  review
 proceedings  following  a  hearing,  is  a  decision   that   disposes   of
 proceedings.


 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
 question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should  apply  to  the
 Upper Tribunal for permission, at the hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
 given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider at
 the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of
 the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


 If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application or
 by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to appeal  can  apply  for
 permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by filing  an
 appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office of  the  Court  of  Appeal
 within 7 days of the Tribunal's decision refusing permission to  appeal  to
 the Court of Appeal (CPR 52.9(3)(a)).


