

                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/3512/2019

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                                     MDA
     (a protected party by his litigation friend the OFFICIAL SOLICITOR)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms  A  Weston  QC,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
Birnberg Peirce Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and  Ms  J  Anderson,
of Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 14 January 2020.



Decision: the application for judicial review is refused



Introduction

   1. These judicial review proceedings, issued on 28 June  2019,  challenge
      the respondent's  decision  dated  1  April  2019  refusing  to  grant
      indefinite leave (ILR) to remain to the applicant. The  applicant  was
      granted Discretionary Leave to Remain (DLR) in  a  decision  dated  28
      January 2019 following his successful  appeal  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, which was allowed on human rights grounds.

   2. An application has been made anonymise these proceedings  because  the
      applicant lacks litigation capacity, he is detained in  a  psychiatric
      hospital and there is an order of the High Court to  that  effect.  In
      these circumstances, it is appropriate for anonymity to  be  continued
      and therefore the following order is made:

           "Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
           Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the
           Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these
           proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or
           indirectly  identify  the  original  applicant.  This  direction
           applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure  to  comply
           with this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
           proceedings. "



Procedural history

   3. The applicant, a  Somali  national,  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom
      clandestinely on 15 September 2008, aged 14, as an unaccompanied minor
      asylum-seeking child. He became a looked after child. He was  detained
      under section 2 of the Mental Health Act 1983 (MHA) in November  2008.
      There followed further periods of detention and the applicant  was  in
      hospital when his asylum claim was  refused  on  18  March  2011.  The
      applicant was granted 3 years' DLR on Article 3 grounds owing  to  his
      mental ill health as well as the prospect of a breach of his Article 3
      rights if removed to Somalia.

   4. Following the grant of DLR,  the  applicant  continued  to  be  either
      detained under the MHA or supported in the community. Periods  in  the
      community would be characterised  by  non-compliance  with  medication
      which led to a deterioration in his  mental  state  and  consequently,
      risky behaviour. He received  diagnoses  of  complex  PTSD,  psychotic
      symptoms, learning disability and personality disorder.

   5. An application for further DLR was made on the applicant's  behalf  in
      March 2014. That application was treated as withdrawn  because  social
      services informed the Home Office that the applicant wished to  return
      to "Somalia, Somaliland or Puntland."

   6. In December 2014, the applicant carried out an indecent assault  on  a
      member of staff while detained on a psychiatric unit. He was convicted
      of outraging public decency and sexual assault  and  sentenced  to  18
      months' imprisonment. On 21 May 2015,  the  respondent  wrote  to  the
      applicant to inform him of his liability to deportation  and  inviting
      submissions. On 18 September 2015, an order was  made  to  deport  the
      applicant which carried no right of appeal.

   7. On 15 December  2016,  the  applicant  lodged  an  unlawful  detention
      judicial review claim. That claim was allowed following a  substantive
      hearing, namely MDA v SSHD [2017] EWHC 2132 (Admin), in which  it  was
      held that the applicant's detention between  4  November  2015  and  3
      February  2017  was  unlawful  because  of  the  lack  of   procedural
      safeguards to enable him to engage in the immigration  decision-making
      process and that there had been a breach of the Public Sector Equality
      Duty (PSED).  The  applicant  appealed  that  decision,  arguing  that
      immigration detention had breached his Article 3 rights and  that  the
      Administrative Court ought to have decided whether damages  should  be
      nominal or substantial.  In a judgment handed down on  17  July  2019,
      the applicant's appeal was dismissed by the Court of Appeal,  MDA  and
      ASK v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1239, albeit a declaration  was  made  that
      sections 20 and 29 of the Equality Act 2010 (EA) had been breached.

   8. On 18 September 2017, an application to revoke the  deportation  order
      was made on the applicant's behalf. Following a judicial  review,  the
      respondent granted the applicant  a  right  of  appeal  by  way  of  a
      decision dated 10 August 2018. That appeal was allowed under  Articles
      3 and 8 ECHR in a decision promulgated  on  2  January  2019.   On  28
      January 2019, the respondent wrote to the  applicant's  solicitors  to
      inform them that the applicant was to  be  granted  limited  leave  to
      remain in light of his allowed appeal.   On  8  March  2019,  Birnberg
      Peirce sent representations on  the  applicant's  behalf  seeking  the
      respondent's  discretion  to  grant  ILR  or  5  years'   humanitarian
      protection.

   9. The basis of the above-mentioned request was primarily  owing  to  the
      applicant's need for long-term care planning in circumstances when  it
      was unlikely that he would have capacity  to  manage  his  immigration
      affairs. In addition, mention was made of the  applicant  having  been
      unfairly denied the opportunity to apply for ILR because  he  was  not
      granted  humanitarian  leave  at  an  earlier  stage.  Enclosed   were
      supporting letters from Dr Camden-Smith, a psychiatrist  and  from  Mr
      Brownless, a lawyer who represented the applicant at his mental health
      tribunal.

  10. The respondent declined to vary the applicant's leave as requested and
      it is this letter dated 1 April 2019, which is  the  subject  of  this
      challenge.

  11. The relevant parts of the Secretary of State's decision dated 1  April
      2019 were as follows;

           "I have consulted a senior caseworker regarding your request and
           can confirm that we can only consider a grant  of  discretionary
           leave in line with the discretionary leave policy.

           Your  client  was  previously  granted  a  period  of  3   years
           Discresionary (sic) leave on 18 March 2011 and the  Home  Office
           would only grant a further 3 years Discresionary (sic) Leave  in
           line with this policy.

           We would not be able to grant ILR or  5  years  HP  due  to  his
           mental health."

  12. The applicant sent a  letter  before  claim  on  14  June  2019  which
      challenged the decision not to grant him ILR. There does not appear to
      have been a response to that correspondence.

  13. The judicial review grounds were as follows:

        i) The respondent failed to take relevant matters into account;

       ii) The respondent unlawfully fettered her discretion and/or  failed
           to exercise it;

      iii) the respondent failed to discharge her duty under  the  sections
           20 and 29 EA to make reasonable  adjustments  to  her  decision-
           making process and/or breached section 149 of the PSED;

       iv) The respondent's decision breaches section 6 of the Human Rights
           Act 1998, Article 8 ECHR along with the  UN  Convention  on  the
           Rights of  People  with  Disabilities  (UNCRPD)  and  reached  a
           conclusion which was not rationally open to her

  14. The above-mentioned  grounds  were  undeveloped  in  the  application,
      however there was a detailed account of the facts of the case.

  15. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Owens  in  a  decision
      sent on 29 August 2019, on all grounds.

  16. The respondent provided detailed grounds of defence, dated 23  October
      2019, in which it was requested that  all  aspects  of  the  claim  be
      dismissed, and that the  applicant  meet  the  respondent's  costs  of
      defending this challenge.

  17. The applicant's skeleton argument was received on  20  December  2019.
      The grounds set out in the judicial review application continued to be
      relied upon but were accompanied by  focused  argument  which  can  be
      summarised as follows.

   Ground one

  18.   It  was  argued  that  the  respondent  was  obliged  to  take  into
      consideration a range of factors and her  failure  to  do  so  was  an
      established error of public law;  that  the  decision  challenged  was
      premised on the view that there can be no departure from the  position
      that 3 years' leave to remain was mandated and it was  contended  that
      the applicant had  been  caused  a  detriment  and  denied  access  to
      services, long term treatment and care planning.  The absence of long-
      term certainty was said to  lead  to  doubt  and  a  lack  of  clarity
      regarding the applicant's entitlement to services.

   Ground two

  19. The argument here was that  the  respondent  unlawfully  fettered  her
      discretion and that she failed to exercise discretion in light of  all
      material  factors.    Reference   was   made   to   the   respondent's
      Discretionary Leave policy in respect of  where  a  longer  period  of
      leave is considered appropriate as well as the arrangements concerning
      those originally granted DLR under the respondent's  policy  in  force
      before 9 July 2012.

   Ground three

  20. The respondent failed  to  give  effect  to  her  duties  to  disabled
      migrants under the EA; paragraph 16 of Schedule 3 to the  EA  did  not
      apply in this case because  the  decision  in  this  case  was  not  a
      variation decision and the Secretary of  State  had  not  demonstrated
      that it was necessary for the public good to grant  limited  leave  to
      the applicant.  There was no published policy of  practice  which  set
      out arrangements to ensure migrants lacking capacity to  manage  their
      affairs were not disadvantaged and the respondent had  not  considered
      the impact of  the  DL  policy  in  relation  to  mentally  disordered
      disabled persons. The reasonable adjustment sought was a grant of ILR.



   Ground four

  21. The grant of limited leave amounted to an interference with aspects of
      the applicant's private life, which was not in accordance with the law
      nor justified. The respondent's DL  policy  transitional  arrangements
      contemplate that ILR may be granted where DLR was first granted  prior
      to July 2012 for a total of 6 years.

  22. The applicant sought the following outcome;

        i. An order quashing the part of the decision refusing ILR;

       ii. A mandatory order requiring the  respondent  to  reconsider  the
           application for ILR within a limited  timescale,  in  accordance
           with the FTT decision;

      iii. A declaration that  the  respondent  breached  sections  20,  29
           and/or 149 of the EA;

       iv. Such further or other relief as the court considers fit;

        v. Costs;

       vi. Detailed assessment.

  23. The respondent's detailed skeleton argument, dated 2 January 2020, can
      be briefly summarised as follows. It was confirmed that there were  no
      disputes of primary fact but that there were  substantial  differences
      between the parties as to what inference could or should be drawn from
      those facts. Regarding the first ground, the  respondent  argued  that
      the matters identified were not legally relevant and did  not  require
      or justify a departure  from  the  published  policy.  The  respondent
      further argued that the second ground should fail as the Secretary  of
      State was under  no  legal  obligation  to  justify  adhering  to  the
      published policy. As for the third ground,  the  respondent  contended
      that a refusal to grant leave to remain is excluded from the  equality
      duties by paragraph 16(3)(b) of Schedule 3 to the EA.

  24. The fourth ground was unfounded  in  law  because  the  applicant  had
      failed to show that the application of the published policy was not in
      accordance with the law nor that the decision  to  grant  him  limited
      leave was disproportionate.

The Relevant Law

   'Equality Act 2010

   6  Disability

      (1)   A person (P) has a disability if:

        (a)      P has a physical or mental impairment, and

        (b)      the impairment has a  substantial  and  long-term  adverse
           effect on P's ability to carry out normal day-to-day activities.



   20 Duty to make adjustments

      (3) The  first  requirement  is  a  requirement,  where  a  provision,
        criterion  or  practice  of  A's  puts  a  disabled  person  at   a
        substantial disadvantage  in  relation  to  a  relevant  matter  in
        comparison with persons who are not disabled, to take such steps as
        it is reasonable to have to take to avoid the disadvantage.

   29 Provision of services, etc

     1) A person (a "service-provider") concerned with the provision  of  a
        service to the public or a section of the public  (for  payment  or
        not) must not discriminate against a person requiring  the  service
        by not providing the person with the service.

   136       Burden of Proof

     2) If there are facts from which the court must decide, in the absence
        of any  other  explanation,  that  a  person  (A)  contravened  the
        provision concerned, the court must  hold  that  the  contravention
        occurred.

   149 Public Sector Equality Duty

      (1)   A public authority must, in the exercise of its functions,  have
        due regard to the need to -

        a) eliminate  discrimination,  harassment,  victimisation  and  any
           other conduct that is prohibited by or under this Act;

        b) advance equality of opportunity  between  persons  who  share  a
           relevant protected characteristic and persons who do  not  share
           it;

        c) foster good relations  between  persons  who  share  a  relevant
           protected characteristic and persons who do not share it;

     3) A person who is not a public authority  but  who  exercises  public
        functions must, in the exercise of those functions, have due regard
        to the matters mentioned in subsection (1).

     4) Having due regard to the need to advance  equality  of  opportunity
        between persons who share a relevant protected  characteristic  and
        persons who  do  not  share  it  involves  having  due  regard,  in
        particular, to the need to-

        a) remove or minimise disadvantages suffered by persons who share a
           relevant protected characteristic that  are  connected  to  that
           characteristic;

        b) take steps to meet the needs of persons  who  share  a  relevant
           protected characteristic that are different from  the  needs  of
           persons who do not share it;

        c) encourage persons who share a relevant protected  characteristic
           to participate in public life or in any other activity in  which
           participation by such persons is disproportionately low.

     5) The steps involved in meeting the needs of  disabled  persons  that
        are different from the  needs  of  persons  who  are  not  disabled
        include, in particular, steps to take account of disabled  persons'
        disabilities.

     6) Having due regard to the need  to  foster  good  relations  between
        persons who share a relevant protected characteristic  and  persons
        who do not share it involves having due regard, in  particular,  to
        the need to-

        a) tackle prejudice, and

        b) promote understanding.

     7) Compliance with the duties in this  section  may  involve  treating
        some persons more favourably than others; but that  is  not  to  be
        taken as permitting conduct that would otherwise be  prohibited  by
        or under this Act.

     8) The relevant protected characteristics includes disability-

   Part 4 of Schedule 3 to the Equality Act 2010

   16 Disability

     1) This paragraph applies in relation to disability discrimination.

     2) Section 29 does not apply to-

        (a) a decision within sub-paragraph (3);

        (b) anything done for the purposes of or in pursuance of a decision
           within that subparagraph.

      (3) A decision is within  this  sub-paragraph  if  it  is  a  decision
        (whether or not taken in accordance with immigration rules)  to  do
        any of the following on the ground that doing so is  necessary  for
        the public good-

        a) to refuse entry clearance;

        b) to refuse leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;

        c) to cancel leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;

        d) to vary leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom;

        e) to refuse an application to vary leave to enter or remain in the
           United Kingdom.

      (4) Section 29 does not apply to-

        a)  a decision taken, or guidance given, by the Secretary of  State
           in connection with a decision within sub-paragraph (3);

        b) a decision taken  in  accordance  with  guidance  given  by  the
           Secretary of State in connection with a decision within that sub-
           paragraph.

   19 Interpretation

      A  reference  to  entry  clearance,  leave  to  enter  or  remain   or
      immigration  rules  is  to  be  construed  in  accordance   with   the
      Immigration Act 1971.'



The hearing

  25. There was little in the way of preliminary issues. Ms Weston handed up
      the judgment in R v SSHD (ex  parte  Danaei)  [1998]  INLR.  She  also
      requested that the anonymity order was kept in place. I confirmed that
      the judgment would be anonymised. I also mentioned  that  I  would  be
      taking into consideration the availability of aftercare in  accordance
      with section 117 of the Mental Health Act  1983  in  relation  to  the
      services available to the applicant upon discharge from  hospital.  Ms
      Anderson clarified that the incorrect Acknowledgement of  Service  was
      in the hearing bundle. I indicated that I  had  the  correct  copy  to
      hand. The parties also agreed to forward electronic  copies  of  their
      respective skeleton arguments after the hearing.

   Applicant's submissions

  26. Ms Weston explained the background to her instruction in this  matter.
      Briefly, a  Detention  Action  caseworker  visited  the  applicant  in
      detention in 2016 and brought attention to his condition.  A  judicial
      review was brought by the Official Solicitor (OS) on  the  applicant's
      behalf seeking his release, which was contested by  the  Secretary  of
      State. Following a court order, the applicant was  released  into  the
      care of an NHS mental health trust and admitted under Section 2 of the
      Mental Health Act 1983. The applicant  was  currently  detained  under
      Section 3 of the Act in a low-secure  facility.   The  afore-mentioned
      judicial review regarding the lawfulness of the applicant's  detention
      was  still  ongoing,  in  part.  A  second  challenge  regarding   the
      unreasonable delay in  the  respondent  deciding  the  application  to
      revoke the deportation order  was  conceded.  That  left  the  current
      challenge, where the OS was concerned that the Secretary of State  had
      not grasped the significance of the applicant's  condition  and  ought
      reasonably to have granted the applicant ILR. Ms Weston also made  the
      following arguments.

  27. It was the applicant's case that there is no policy in  place  at  the
      Home Office to ensure what happened to him would  not  happen  in  the
      future. The Home Office were not solely  to  blame  but  the  lack  of
      arrangements to protect the applicant put him at risk.

  28. Reliance was placed on the content of the decision of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (FtT) allowing the applicant's appeal against deportation  as
      well as a quantity of documents  in  the  full  hearing  bundle  which
      established the chronology of this  matter.   Ms  Weston  particularly
      relied upon the evidence from a mental health nurse at YOI Glen  Parva
      which provided clear evidence that the applicant had a mental disorder
      and contrasted this with the consultant at the same YOI who  said  the
      opposite, in the context of whether the applicant was fit to  fly.  Ms
      Weston  described  the  applicant  as  functionally   illiterate   and
      highlighted that no capacity assessment was undertaken at any stage in
      relation to his indication that he wished to return to Somalia.

  29.  Ms Weston summarised the challenge as follows. In the application  to
      revoke the deportation order it was put to the respondent that because
      no arrangements had been made to ensure that the applicant, who lacked
      capacity, could respond, he had been unfairly deprived of his right of
      appeal. The applicant needed to raise a human rights' claim  in  order
      to obtain a right of appeal, but he was unable  to  do  so.  When  the
      applicant was sent a minded to deport letter  when  detained  at  Glen
      Parva, he could not read it. Following his indication that  he  wished
      to return to Somalia, two social workers  had  attended  but  made  no
      assessment of his capacity to make  that  decision.  The  decision  to
      deport the applicant was made notwithstanding  evidence  that  he  had
      lacked capacity and was delusional and that  he  had  previously  been
      granted DLR on Article 3, mental health grounds.

  30. The FtT decision and reasons made  a  series  of  findings,  which  Ms
      Weston described as findings of fact which bound  the  respondent,  in
      terms of deciding what period of leave  to  grant  to  the  applicant.
      Those findings included reliance on the evidence  of  Dr  Camden-Smith
      who stated that even when the applicant's health is managed and he  is
      compliant, his illness is of a  kind  which  varies  and  it  was  not
      currently foreseeable that he would be  able  to  handle  his  affairs
      after discharge from hospital.

  31. Ms Weston argued that it was significant that the  applicant  was  not
      medicated at the time the index offence was  committed.  The  view  of
      Professor Hale was that the risk of offending was  greater  without  a
      supportive therapeutic environment. The FtT judge concluded  that  the
      very compelling circumstances test had been met and also  allowed  the
      appeal under Article 8. It was at this point that Ms  Weston  referred
      to the case of Danaei which she had  handed  up  earlier,  making  the
      point that if the respondent wished to challenge the findings  of  the
      FtT, she ought to have appealed that decision. Furthermore, there  was
      no credibility challenge brought during the applicant's appeal and  Ms
      Weston submitted that the FtT made  findings  of  fact  by  which  the
      Secretary of State is bound.

  32. At this  point  Ms  Anderson  interjected  in  order  to  dispute  the
      characterisation of the matters highlighted in  the  FtT  decision  as
      findings of fact.

  33. Reliance was  placed  on  the  written  representations  made  on  the
      applicant's behalf regarding  the  period  of  leave  to  be  granted.
      Additional information was submitted which touched on why  ILR  should
      be granted, in the form of a letter from the representative  appointed
      to represent the applicant before the Mental Health Tribunal  as  well
      as a report from Dr Camden-Smith.  Ms  Weston  compared  the  decision
      letter which emphasised that the Secretary of State would not be  able
      to grant ILR and would only be able to grant DLR with the terms of the
      current policy,  which  included  transitional  provisions  for  those
      granted DLR previously.

  34. Ms Weston summarised the approach in case law to complaints  regarding
      discretionary grants of leave outside the Rules. In R (S &  Others)  V
      SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 142 the opportunity  of  leave  was  missed,  the
      courts took a rationality approach, with fairness relevant only to the
      extent the Secretary of State ought to have taken into account her own
      illegality, it was not relevant to the human  rights  findings  or  to
      remedy. In this case a broad sense of historic illegality  was  relied
      upon. In the applicant's case  there  were  declarations  of  unlawful
      discrimination. Ms Weston  argued  that  this  case  demonstrated  how
      separation of power is preserved and how  a  court  can  exercise  its
      discretion in this case.

  35. Summarising ground one, Ms Weston argued that there was  no  grappling
      by the respondent with any of the historic unfairness issues and  that
      the  previous  findings  of  unlawfulness  were  necessarily  relevant
      factors, which the respondent's policy said must be considered.

  36. As for the second  ground  regarding  unlawful  fettering,  Ms  Weston
      submitted that the policy plainly set out the requirement to  exercise
      discretion. She relied on Asiweh v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  13,  arguing
      that regardless of the policy, an express request for the exercise  of
      discretion should have been acted  upon,  in  light  of  the  material
      submitted. There was no indication on the face of the decision  letter
      that discretion was exercised; it was expressed as the  decision-maker
      being bound to grant limited leave.

  37. The third ground concerned the law relating to reasonable adjustments.
      Ms Weston argued that an express request was made for the Secretary of
      State to depart from normal practice because a grant of ILR  had  been
      identified as a reasonable adjustment by the  OS  on  the  applicant's
      behalf.

  38. Addressing the respondent's view that this case fell with an exception
      to unlawful discrimination, Ms Weston  handed  up  further  documents,
      which consisted of section 136 of the Equality Act and the Home Office
      policy equality statement in  relation  to  discretionary  leave.  She
      submitted that  there  was  an  applicable  exception  to  the  normal
      principle that a party raising an issue has the burden of proving  it.
      In this case the respondent must convince the court that  the  refusal
      of ILR is necessary for the public good. The respondent's decision  to
      grant DLR did not appear to come within  exceptions  (a)-(e),  however
      this was a moot point. The argument on behalf  of  the  applicant  was
      that  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  say  that  the  decision  was
      necessary. Ms Weston argued that with ILR, the applicant would receive
      the help he needs in order to reduce the risk of  offending  and  that
      the Secretary of State had put no evidence to the contrary.

  39. In response to my query regarding  the  evidence  that  the  applicant
      would be deprived of aftercare, Ms Weston referred to the  email  from
      the applicant's mental health lawyer and letter from  Dr  Camden-Smith
      which referred to insecurity over temporary immigration status  having
      a great impact because those planning care are required to look in the
      short rather than long-term.  She  emphasised  the  limited  scope  of
      support under section 117 of the 1983 Act, which  did  not  extend  to
      social  care  falling  under  the  local   authority   such   as   for
      accommodation or visits from  a  community  mental  health  team.  The
      applicant was at a disadvantage where leave was finite.  In  addition,
      it was not  just  a  question  of  access  to  aftercare  because  the
      applicant was at serious risk of becoming  an  overstayer.  Ms  Weston
      emphasised that it was not the  function  of  the  OS  to  steer  what
      happens to a person absent litigation.

  40. Ms Weston submitted, with reference to section  136  of  the  Equality
      Act,  that  the  burden  of  establishing  the   unreasonableness   of
      reasonable adjustments was on the Secretary of State.  With  reference
      to Chapter 14 of the Equality Act 2010: Code of Practice on  Services,
      Public Functions and Associations, she argued that there was still  no
      policy developed to assist those in the applicant's  position.  Should
      the applicant's leave expire he was  still  at  risk  of  becoming  an
      overstayer in a hostile environment as there  were  no  procedures  in
      place. In R (ASK) and R  (MDA)  v  SSHD  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1239,  the
      Secretary of State conceded that there had  been  a  failure  to  make
      reasonable adjustments. It was clear  that  the  applicant  was  at  a
      disadvantage in the immigration decision making process and there  was
      a finding to that effect. In relation to the PSED, Ms Weston relied on
      what was set out between pages 14-17 of  her  skeleton  argument.  She
      added that the Secretary of State did not  previously  detained  those
      with mental health disorders and if she was going to  do  so,  it  was
      likely that some will lack capacity and will suffer as a  consequence,
      like the applicant.

  41. Lastly, in relation to the fourth ground, Ms Weston argued  that  this
      is a case in which the Tribunal was entitled to find a breach  of  the
      applicant's rights under  Article  8,  for  reasons  set  out  in  her
      skeleton argument. As for  the  UNPRCD,  Ms  Weston  acknowledged  the
      respondent's view that this instrument was not relevant, arguing  that
      the UK is a signatory and must have regard to it.  With  reference  to
      Burnip v SSWP [2012] EWCA Civ 629, the courts may have regard to human
      rights instruments which make specific provisions  for  the  group  in
      question. Ms Weston concluded by stating that the applicant had  shown
      no signs of making a recovery any time  soon,  he  continued  to  lack
      capacity and that there was  a  prospect  that  matters  may  go  awry
      because there is no statutory body to ensure  his  immigration  status
      was properly governed.

   Respondent's submissions

  42. Ms Anderson indicated that she would take  her  skeleton  argument  as
      read and respond to the Ms Weston's arguments in  order.  Her  opening
      submission was that it was only in extreme cases where a  court  would
      intervene to impose a different discretion and that the applicant  had
      a steep hill to climb to justify a departure from published policy.

  43. Arguing that it was not the case that the applicant had been failed by
      all those he came into contact with, Ms Anderson emphasised  that  the
      applicant's  offending  occurred   in   a   psychiatric   institution,
      psychiatric evidence was before  the  Crown  Court  and  there  was  a
      process for setting aside convictions if there was  a  miscarriage  of
      justice.

  44. Ms Anderson contended that it  was  not  a  proper  approach  for  the
      respondent to take into account the findings of the FtT  and  that  Ms
      Weston was putting too much weight upon them. The key part of the  FtT
      decision  was  the  findings  at  [180],  which  she  described  as  a
      speculative exercise of opinion regarding a hypothetical  matter.  One
      assumption was that medication would have been effective  in  stopping
      the offence from arising. Speculation did not assist the Secretary  of
      State and it did not amount to a  binding  finding  of  primary  fact,
      referring to Danaei. The opinion of the FtT did not  change  what  was
      material for ILR to be granted.  The  Secretary  of  State  could  not
      ignore the convictions owing to the automatic deportation regime  with
      a statutory presumption that deportation was conducive to  the  public
      good.

  45.  Ms  Anderson  made  the  following  submissions  regarding  what  she
      described as the high point of  the  applicant's  evidence.  What  was
      relied on to say ILR ought to be granted, could not  bear  the  weight
      put on it. The email was from an advocate on behalf of  the  applicant
      whose perspective is to look at best interests of the client. What was
      striking was the lack of reasoning why a grant of ILR would be in  the
      applicant's best interest. There was  a  lack  of  reference  to  hard
      evidence. Regarding Section 117 MHA, one cannot do down the  value  of
      care if it is to stabilise mental health. It was accepted on behalf of
      the applicant that he can receive aftercare  for  as  long  as  it  is
      required. There was no reference to arguments about  funding  in  this
      evidence.   What  was  said  is  that  it  is  "almost  impossible  to
      definitively plan recovery". There was  no  evidence  that  denial  of
      treatment flows from the refusal of ILR.  There was no explanation why
      it's "quite plain" that the applicant's needs  would  be  much  better
      served by a grant of ILR. The email indicated that it was written with
      the intention of assisting the presentation of the case  to  the  Home
      Office.  There was no other evidence making  the  case  for  saying  a
      grant of ILR would make any significant difference. The  FtT  decision
      said only that there was an Article 3 barrier to removal and there was
      no failure by the Secretary of State to deal with the FtT decision.

  46. Arguing that it was not irrational for the Secretary of State  not  to
      apply the DL policy,  Ms  Anderson  said  the  following.  The  policy
      applied to a self-evidently exceptional case, which the  instant  case
      was not. There was no challenge to the policy as being  unlawful.  The
      FtT made no directions to the Secretary of State, there was no medical
      evidence and no basis for persuading the Secretary of State to  depart
      from the policy. That was why Ms Weston  was  focusing  on  corrective
      justice, which the respondent did not consider to be a relevant factor
      or principle.  The Secretary of State could not do anything  regarding
      the suggestion that the applicant was wrongly convicted.

  47.  Regarding  the  applicant's  lack  of  competence  when   immigration
      decisions were made, the respondent  received  a  statement  from  the
      applicant, countersigned by a social worker  which  was  issued  by  a
      psychiatric institution and signed by a witness acting in an  official
      capacity.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to   expect   the
      institution treating the applicant to write and  say  that  he  lacked
      capacity if that was the case. This  was  not  an  illegality  by  the
      Secretary of State. At this point, Ms Weston confirmed  that  she  did
      not seek to go beyond the findings of  the  Administrative  Court  and
      Court of Appeal on illegality.

  48. In relation to the deportation process, the  Secretary  of  State  was
      aware of the issues and  that  the  applicant  was  in  a  psychiatric
      hospital, however she had a duty to the public and parliament, in that
      it was deemed by parliament to be conducive  to  the  public  good  to
      deport foreign criminals and she  had  no  discretion.  There  was  no
      illegality to which to apply corrective justice.

  49. Regarding, the claimed illegality in relation to the PSED in  relation
      to the applicant lacking capacity, the Mental Health Act 1983 presumes
      capacity and in  this  instance  an  institution  forwarded  documents
      without indicating a lack of capacity. There was  no  reason  why  the
      Secretary of State would assume the applicant had no capacity. It  did
      not follow that the respondent would have made  a  different  decision
      but for the lack of policies in place.

  50. Ms Anderson then focused on the issue of  corrective  justice,  making
      the following points. This was not a live and relevant issue  to  form
      the basis of  an  intervention  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  because  the
      jurisprudence was clear that this was simply wrong.  Referring  to  TN
      (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2015] UKSC 40, such arguments were rejected.  In
      R(S)  the  court  found   that   it   was   improper   to   compensate
      maladministration and it was not a proper use of statutory  power  and
      the Supreme Court agreed with this and confirmed  that  Rashid  should
      not be followed.

  51. Ms Anderson submitted that it was not necessary for a caseworker to go
      over the past and ask if there's been a  breach  of  duty  as  it  was
      legally irrelevant. To oblige the Secretary of State to  do  so  would
      encourage complexity.  This  was  why  there  are  policies  with  the
      potential for an extreme case to  be  excepted.  As  for  Ms  Weston's
      argument that ILR ought to have been granted and reasons given why  it
      was not, Ms Anderson submitted that the policy was clear,  DLR  should
      be granted and exceptionally there was scope for ILR  to  be  granted.
      The reverse approach was  wrong,  applying  Mohammed  [2014]  EWHC  14
      (Admin). The law was stronger since then, in  that  the  Secretary  of
      State must apply published policies unless there is  good  reason  not
      to. Deportation was in the public interest,  it  was  not  just  about
      reoffending but in terms of public confidence in  the  government  and
      courts, applying Hesham Ali. The case of George, concerned ILR lapsing
      following deportation, which was a legal symmetry point.  The  instant
      case was not one where the Secretary  of  State  should  say  why  ILR
      should not be granted. The burden was on the applicant  to  show  that
      his circumstances warranted an exception, if  he  does  not  show  it,
      there is no error of law.

  52. In response to  the  argument  that  the  respondent  had  engaged  in
      unlawful conduct regarding the EA and common law fairness, Ms Anderson
      argued that the risk that the applicant became an overstayer  involved
      speculation that there would be future failings and  as  such  a  pre-
      emptive remedy was being sought.

  53. Commenting on the decision letter, Ms  Anderson  emphasised  that  the
      first paragraph made reference to  the  representations  sent  on  the
      applicant's behalf and that there had been consultation with a  senior
      caseworker. It was right that the letter said that only a grant of DLR
      in line with the policy could be considered because the policy allowed
      for grants of ILR.  In relation to the statement that the Home  Office
      would only grant a further 3 years' DLR, there was no challenge to the
      length of leave, except that it was not indefinite. As for the part of
      the decision letter which stated that the respondent would not be able
      to grant ILR or 5 years' Humanitarian Protection due to mental health,
      this was correct and Ms Weston's submissions did not extend that  far,
      there being no policy to that effect.  The  decision  dealt  correctly
      with the submission that it was in the applicant's best  interests  to
      receive ILR on mental health grounds.

  54. Ms Anderson submitted that the Secretary of  State  was  not  able  to
      grant ILR owing to the consequences of  a  lack  of  mental  capacity,
      other than under the policy, which was not a remedy for the effects of
      mental illness plus alleged failings by the  Secretary  of  State.  Ms
      Anderson stressed that there was no challenge to the reasons here  but
      if there was it would fail.  The Secretary of State  was  entitled  to
      adhere to the policy. What was put forward on the  applicant's  behalf
      were not matters which would properly justify a grant of ILR. This did
      not mean that ILR would not be granted in the future. Nor was there an
      irrationality challenge.

  55. Lastly, in relation to the Article 8  and  PSED  points,  Ms  Anderson
      referred  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  R   (MBT)   v   SSHD
      (JR/7722/2018, where similar attempts to rely on  PSED  was  rejected.
      She plumped for exception (d), accepting that the  decision  could  be
      seen as a variation. Nonetheless, she argued that it would  not  be  a
      reasonable adjustment to grant ILR to  someone  and  that  there  were
      other ways of ensuring the applicant could make  future  applications.
      Finally, it was not accepted that there was nothing in place regarding
      future decisions in this case. There was not a proper  basis  for  the
      Upper Tribunal to intervene.

   Applicant's reply

  56. Ms Weston asked me to look at  the  case  of  TN  in  context.  Rashid
      concerned asylum and loss of statutory rights where  the  Ravichandran
      test was not satisfied. This was a very different case.  She  reminded
      me that she had made the point earlier that discretion applies to  the
      Secretary of State but that the avenue regarding  illegality  was  not
      closed down, in that  the  respondent  must  exercise  her  discretion
      lawfully. Ms Weston reiterated that the Secretary of State  failed  to
      take  into  account  relevant  matters  which   was   a   species   of
      irrationality and failed to apply the policy. A reasoned decision  was
      not made, the letter just said the respondent does not  grant  ILR  on
      mental health grounds. Therefore, the minimum requirement of  legality
      was not met. There remained a failure to have in place  a  process  to
      ensure equal access to the statutory appeals process.  The  "but  for"
      test does not apply, if it did there was the advantage of knowing what
      would happen if there was  a  process  because  the  OS  required  the
      Secretary of State to consider her Article 3 duties.

  57. Referring to VC [2018] EWCA Civ 57 Ms Weston  argued  that  there  was
      still no policy in place, following MDA in a case where the  applicant
      could not make representations regarding his  immigration  status.  In
      that case there was a finding of breach of duty. This is an  important
      aspect of previous illegality. The respondent  had  not  provided  any
      evidence of a policy to ensure that the applicant was  protected  from
      becoming an overstayer and does not consider it any part of  her  duty
      to ensure his human rights are well protected. Section 117 of the 1983
      Act was not a complete answer. For instance, this would not  apply  to
      section 17 leave  say  to  supported  accommodation.  There  might  be
      concerns regarding entitlement to public funds. The burden is  on  the
      Secretary of State to show that  this  reasonable  adjustment  is  not
      needed, a broad assertion  is  not  sufficient.  In  relation  to  the
      exceptions, the decision was not a variation as the applicant  had  no
      leave at the date of the decision  or  at  the  time  ILR  was  sought
      following the allowed appeal.

  58. Ms Anderson interjected to say that her instructions were that if  the
      applicant had ever been granted leave, the decision was  a  variation.
      In response, Ms Weston concluded her submissions by contending that it
      was only if the applicant already had leave, that it could be varied.

Discussion

   Ground one - that the Secretary of State failed to take relevant  matters
   into account

  59. The applicant relies on a list of factors which it is argued were  not
      considered by the respondent in  refusing  his  application  for  ILR.
      Those matters include the respondent's conduct,  detriment  caused  to
      the applicant in having no policy in place for those lacking capacity,
      the findings of previous judges and medical and other evidence.  There
      is no basis for a finding that the respondent  did  not  consider  the
      matters which  were  set  out  in  the  representations  made  on  the
      applicant's behalf. It has to be said that those  representations  did
      not include reference to all the  factors  set  out  in  the  skeleton
      argument. That those representations were considered is  evidenced  by
      the respondent's reference to them in the first line of  the  decision
      letter, which stated as follows, "Thank you for your letter dated  8th
      March 2019, which we received on 29th March  2019,  and  your  emailed
      copy on 28th March 2019."The letter goes on to note  the  request  for
      ILR, regarding which the author  of  the  letter  consulted  a  senior
      caseworker. There is no reason to suspect that the respondent did  not
      consider the representations made on the applicant's  behalf.  Nor  is
      there any reason to believe that the respondent acted in ignorance  of
      the history of this matter, including  the  judgments  of  the  higher
      courts. There has also been no direct challenge to the adequacy of the
      reasons provided and if there was Mohammed [2014] EWHC confirmed  that
      there was no requirement to give  reasons  for  applying  a  published
      policy.  Consequently, there is little support for this ground on  the
      face of the evidence.

  60. Notwithstanding the  findings  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  I  have
      considered  the  individual  factors  and  their  relevance   to   the
      respondent's decision to grant DLR rather than ILR.

  61. It is argued that the respondent's unlawful conduct ought to have been
      taken into  consideration  with  respect  to  the  duration  of  leave
      granted. Even if it was not, in TN (Afghanistan) [2015] UKSC 40,  Lord
      Toulson rejected the argument that past conduct of the respondent  was
      relevant to leave being granted as a form of corrective justice.

  62. At [72] of TN the following was said:

           "Discretionary leave by definition involves a discretion, but it
           is a discretion which belongs to the respondent and not  to  the
           court. The respondent must of  course  exercise  her  discretion
           lawfully, with  proper  regard  to  any  policy  which  she  has
           established, but I agree with Sir Stanley Burnton that it is not
           proper  for  a  court  to  require  the  respondent   to   grant
           unconditional leave to an appellant who would not be entitled to
           such relief under current policy (or have  a  current  right  to
           remain in the UK on other grounds, such as article 8), as a form
           of relief for an earlier error or breach of obligation."

  63. I have carefully considered Ms Weston's submission that  the  judgment
      in TN related to the Ravichandran issue in asylum cases however, I  do
      not accept that the conclusions of the Supreme Court were  limited  in
      that way, as the above quote demonstrates.

  64. The historical failures in this case cannot compel the  respondent  to
      grant ILR. The Supreme court in George [2014] UKSC 28 [2014] held that
      it was a matter for the Secretary of State to regulate the  status  of
      foreign criminals and that there was:

           "no legal symmetry in indefinite  leave  to  remain  co-existing
           with the status of someone whose presence is  not  conducive  to
           the public good. It makes perfectly good sense, whilst the legal
           obstacle remains, for the Secretary of State to be in a position
           to re-visit the terms of leave to enter."

  65. Ms Weston argued that there was evidence that the applicant's recovery
      and care was being hampered by lack of certainty and that there was  a
      medical evidence as to the applicant' need for long-term security. For
      reasons which are set out below,  the  evidence  fell  well  short  of
      establishing that the applicant's  treatment  including  aftercare  on
      discharge from hospital would be adversely affected by a grant of  DLR
      as opposed to ILR.

  66. The reference in the grounds to the  risk  that  the  applicant  would
      become an overstayer stretches the corrective justice point  to  cover
      anticipated failures by the respondent or other parties and  there  is
      no authority for such an approach.

   Ground two - that the respondent unlawfully fettered her discretion

  67. Ms Weston maintained that the respondent erred by failing to  consider
      the matters set out in ground one and failing to  exercise  discretion
      in any event. She argued during the hearing,  that  the  decision  was
      inadequate in public law terms because it was premised on the position
      that there could be no departure from a grant of DLR. That is not  the
      case. The decision referred directly to the policy, stating  that  the
      Home Office "would only grant a further 3 years" leave.  There  is  no
      support  for  the  contention  that  the  caseworker  was  under   the
      impression that the Home Office could not depart from a grant of  DLR.
      The respondent's DLR policy allows for a grant of ILR  in  exceptional
      cases and is couched in the following terms; "the  duration  of  leave
      must be determined by considering the individual facts of the case but
      leave should not normally be granted  for  more  than  30  months...."
      Under part 5.3 of the policy the respondent acknowledges  that  "There
      may  be  cases  where  a  longer  period  of   leave   is   considered
      appropriate...because  there  are   other   particularly   exceptional
      compelling or compassionate reasons to grant leave for a longer period
      (or ILR)."

  68. The evidence provided on the applicant's behalf was  insufficient,  in
      the view of the Secretary of State, for her to  take  the  exceptional
      step of granting  ILR  rather  than  DLR.  That  was  a  decision  the
      respondent was entitled to take and she was not  required  to  justify
      adherence to the published policy, under which leave is  not  normally
      granted in excess of 30 months.

   Ground three - failure to give effect to Equality Act duties

  69. It is argued that the respondent failed, as  a  service  provider,  to
      give  effect  to  her  duties  to  disabled  migrants  by  making  the
      reasonable adjustment requested. That adjustment being a grant of ILR.
      I have been guided by the judgment in ASK & MDA [2019] EWCA Civ  1239,
      which concerned this applicant and which sets out a  detailed  history
      and discussion on the PSED in the context of the Secretary of  State's
      failure to enquire into the applicant's mental capacity. The applicant
      succeeded on this  basis  and  was  granted  a  declaration  that  the
      Secretary of State had discriminated against him by  failing  to  make
      reasonable adjustments to the decision-making process.

  70. In this instance a decision had  been  made  to  grant  the  applicant
      limited leave to remain on 28 January 2019. Following the  applicant's
      representations seeking a greater period of  leave,  he  received  the
      decision letter of 1 April 2019, refusing that request.  It  is  clear
      that what was sought was a variation to the grant  of  limited  leave.
      The refusal to vary a grant of leave to remain is  excluded  from  the
      equality duties relied on under the Equality  Act  2010  by  paragraph
      16(3)(e) of Part 4 of Schedule 3 to the Act. Alternatively,  I  accept
      Ms Anderson's  submission  that  the  applicant's  case  comes  within
      paragraph 16(3) (b), being a decision to refuse leave to remain in the
      United Kingdom. In these circumstances, I find that section 29 of  the
      EA is not engaged and  there  is  therefore  no  requirement  for  the
      respondent to explain why the adjustment sought was not reasonable. It
      follows that sections 20 and 149 of the EA have no application.

   Ground four - that the applicant's Article 8 rights have been breached

  71. The applicant relies on his right to develop a private life and to his
      right to respect for his physical and moral integrity.  It  is  argued
      that his recovery and treatment towards rehabilitation and independent
      living in the community is impeded by the grant of time-limited leave.



  72. In view of the applicant's lengthy residence and complex mental health
      needs, he has evidently established  a  private  life  in  the  United
      Kingdom. It is clear that a decision  refusing  settlement  could,  in
      principle, amount to  an  interference  with  the  enjoyment  of  that
      private life. Furthermore, with reference to the  conclusions  reached
      on  ground  two,  the  respondent's  published  policy   was   applied
      appropriately and as such her decision was in accordance with the law.
      Unsurprisingly, in terms of necessity, the respondent  points  to  the
      prevention of disorder or crime given that the applicant's presence is
      deemed not to be conducive to the public good.

  73. That leaves the issue of whether the decision to refuse to  grant  ILR
      was a disproportionate breach of the applicant's right to develop  his
      private life.

  74. The evidence of the impact upon the applicant of a time-limited  grant
      of leave is set out in correspondence  from  Dr  Camden-Smith  and  Mr
      Brownless. I was not referred to any other  evidence  which  supported
      this contention.

  75. The correspondence from Mr Brownless  confirms  that  the  applicant's
      mental health case is complex and that  the  relapsing  and  remitting
      nature of the diagnoses made recovery  planning  "almost  impossible."
      He had the following to say in respect  of  the  effect  of  temporary
      leave on the applicant;

           "You will see therefore that in terms of fitting this within the
           permitted leave period for immigration purposes it would not  be
           possible to place a finite period on this patient's recovery and
           rehabilitation. It would appear quite plain that  the  patient's
           interests and needs will be much better served through him being
           permitted to remain indefinitely. This would allow thorough Care
           co-ordination and after-care services  to  adequately  plan  for
           MDA's time in and future beyond hospital."

  76. Mr Brownless appears to be a very experienced legal representative and
      it was his honest belief that the applicant's best interests would  be
      served by a grant of settlement and he may be right however, he refers
      to no evidence which supports  his  view.  Nor  has  he  provided  any
      detailed reasons why adequate care planning could not be achieved with
      temporary leave. Ms Weston argued that  there  may  be  difficulty  in
      funding accommodation so that the applicant could  access  section  17
      leave to a placement pending discharge. This submission was not  fully
      developed. Furthermore, the applicant's psychiatric history  indicates
      that he was previously discharged into the community both when he  had
      limited leave to remain and none.

  77. Dr  Camden-Smith  provided  independent  psychiatric  reports  on  the
      applicant dated 21 December 2017  and  8  December  2018,  which  were
      submitted as evidence in his deportation appeal. The  letter  from  Dr
      Camden-Smith, dated 4 March 2019 which was  sent  in  support  of  the
      request for settlement, explains that the applicant is diagnosed  with
      complex PTSD associated with a psychotic illness and that people  with
      this disorder are "unable to engage in any form of therapy until  they
      feel safe  and  settled."  Regarding  the  applicant's  position,  the
      psychiatrist stated the following:

           "The ongoing uncertainties about his immigration status, and the
           risk  of  deportation   have   negatively   impacted   on   (the
           applicant's) ability to engage in therapy. It  would  be  highly
           detrimental to (the applicant) to commence  therapy  for  c-PTSD
           without an assurance that his stay in the UK is likely to be  of
           sufficient length to enable him to complete his treatment. Given
           the  difficulties  with  the  engagement,  language,   and   the
           complexity of (his) condition, a period of thirty  months  would
           not be sufficient for his treatment to be completed. Uncertainty
           about renewal after this  period  is  likely  to  cause  ongoing
           distress and uncertainty  and  will  delay  (his)  recovery  and
           rehabilitation. Partial treatment of his mental  disorder  would
           in all likelihood result in further trauma and deterioration  in
           his mental state."

  78. It is unclear how Dr Camden-Smith was able to form the opinion she did
      regarding the effect upon the applicant of limited leave. There is  no
      indication in her letter of  4  March  2019  that  she  had  seen  the
      applicant since the time she assessed him for her addendum  report  in
      December 2018. Furthermore,  there  is  no  support  for  her  current
      opinion in that report, or indeed in her report dating from 2017.

  79. In her 2018 report, Dr Camden-Smith had the following to say regarding
      the applicant's ability to engage in psychological therapy:

           "(the applicant) has been  unable  to  engage  in  any  specific
           psychological therapy, due to his poor language skills. (He) has
           poor language skills in English (although these  are  improving)
           and a previous interpreter has indicated that his vocabulary and
           power of  self-expression  in  Somali  is  poor.  Engagement  in
           psychological therapy has also been limited  by  (his)  lack  of
           insight, and ongoing insistence that he does not have  a  mental
           illness, or any needs that would be  amenable  to  psychological
           therapies."

  80. Elsewhere in the  2018  report,  Dr  Camden-Smith  confirms  that  the
      applicant has been unable to access treatment  for  c-PTSD,  partially
      because of his lack of willingness to engage in this work.

  81. I have also considered the most recent  report  from  the  applicant's
      responsible clinician, namely Dr Mudholkar, which was prepared for the
      Mental Health Tribunal and is dated 29 September  2017.  Dr  Mudholkar
      merely records that the applicant "does not wish to discuss  his  past
      traumatic experiences." There is no indication in this report that the
      applicant is reluctant  to  engage  with  therapy  owing  to  concerns
      regarding his immigration status.

  82. The supporting evidence before the Secretary of State was insufficient
      to  show  that  there  were  particularly  exceptional  compelling  or
      compassionate reasons to grant leave for a longer period  as  required
      by the relevant policy. It has therefore, simply not been  established
      that  the  respondent's  decision  amounts   to   a   disproportionate
      interference with the applicant's right  to  a  private  life  because
      there is no evidence to  support  the  contention  that  he  would  be
      deprived of access to services or suffer any other detriment.



Order

        I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review  application   be
      dismissed.



Costs

       As the applicant is a legally aided party, I make  no  order  as  to
costs.


                             T Kamara
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




        Dated:    20 March 2020






Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
applicant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).



                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/3512/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






                                     MDA
     (a protected party by his litigation friend the OFFICIAL SOLICITOR)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms  A  Weston  QC,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
Birnberg Peirce Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and  Ms  J  Anderson,
of Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 14 January 2020.



Order

For the reasons  given  in  the  judgment  attached,  this  application  for
judicial review is refused.




Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal.




Costs

I make no order as to costs.


                             T Kamara
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara




        Dated:            20 March 2020


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


