
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
[pic]
                                                                JR/3328/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                              23 August 2021


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                           CHADI MAHMOUD ELRACHIDI
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                                    ORDER
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    UPON consideration of all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  Ms  S
    Jegarajah, Counsel for the Applicant, and Mr J Fraczyk, Counsel for the
    Government Legal Department at a hybrid hearing conducted on 23  August
    2021

    IT IS ORDERED THAT

         1. For the reasons  set  out  in  the  approved  judgment  dated  1
            September 2021, the Applicant's application for judicial  review
            is refused.

    COSTS

         1. For the reasons  set  out  in  the  approved  judgment  dated  1
            September 2021, there shall be no order  as  to  costs  for  the
            period leading up to and including the making  of  the  judicial
            review application on 9 May 2018 until 3 July 2019,  that  being
            the day before the Applicant  received  the  re-served  decision
            dated 25 October 2018.

         2. For the period beginning on 4 July 2019 up to and including  any
            work undertaken in respect of  consideration  of  the  embargoed
            draft judgment, the Applicant shall pay the  Respondent's  costs
            on an indemnity basis.

    IT IS DIRECTED THAT

         1. No later than 14 days after  this  Order  is  handed  down,  the
            Respondent shall  file  and  serve  a  schedule  of  her  costs,
            covering the period set out in paragraph 2, above.

    PERMISSION TO APPEAL

         1. There has been no application by the Applicant for permission to
            appeal to the Court of Appeal. In any event, I refuse permission
            on the basis that there are no arguable  errors  of  law  in  my
            judgment, nor do any matters of general importance arise in this
            case.


Signed: H Norton-Taylor

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

Dated: 1 September 2021

IAC-AH-KRL-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
[pic]

                                                                JR/3328/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                              23 August 2021


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                           CHADI MAHMOUD ELRACHIDI
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms S Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by the Applicant on a Direct Access
basis.

Mr J Fraczyk, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR:

Background


 1. The Applicant and his dependants are stateless individuals who  resided
    in Lebanon prior to their arrival in the United Kingdom.  The Applicant
    and his wife entered this country at some  point  in  2006.   Over  the
    course of their residence here three children were born, the eldest  in
    2012 and twins in 2014.

 2.  There  is  a  protracted  and  relatively  complex  history  to  these
    proceedings, however I need not set it all out here  and  will  provide
    only a summary of relevant events. On 12 December 2016,  the  Applicant
    made an application to the Respondent under the  Immigration  Rules  on
    the basis that he and his dependent children were stateless and  should
    be granted leave to remain under paragraph  403  of  the  Rules.   That
    application was not decided until 25 October  2018  (the  October  2018
    decision).  There is arguably a lack of  clarity  as  to  whether  that
    decision was properly served on the Applicant at that time.   Prior  to
    the decision being made, on  11  May  2018,  the  Applicant  made  this
    application for judicial review (the application), asserting  that  the
    Respondent's then ongoing delay was unlawful.

 3. Following the application, an Acknowledgment of Service was provided by
    the Respondent.  On 30 November 2018 permission was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge L Smith  on  the  basis  that  the  delay  was  arguably
    unlawful.

 4. Following the making of the October 2018 decision, the Respondent began
    what turned out to  be  concerted,  but  in  the  event,  unsuccessful,
    attempts to settle proceedings by way of a consent order.  The position
    put forward was that the application had become academic  in  light  of
    the decision refusing the statelessness application.

 5. At some point in early 2019 (I cannot quite pinpoint  the  exact  date,
    but it may well have been on or around 15 February  2019),  it  appears
    from the GCID evidence before me that the October 2018 decision was re-
    served on the Applicant.

 6. On 24 May 2019, an oral hearing before Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara  was
    adjourned.  At that point in time Ms Jegarajah  was  instructed.  Judge
    Kamara was concerned about the effectiveness of service and whether the
    Applicant had had a proper opportunity to consider his position.

 7. On 2 July 2019 the Respondent re-served the October  2018  decision  on
    the Applicant (perhaps for the second  time)  and  there  has  been  no
    suggestion that this was not effective.

 8. From the information before me it would appear that the Respondent made
    at least five attempts to settle the proceedings by way  of  a  consent
    order.  In stark contrast, no attempt  was  ever  made  by  either  the
    Applicant or any legal representatives to  engage  with  these,  or  to
    indicate in any other  way  that  the  proceedings  had  indeed  become
    academic in light of the October 2018 decision.  It was also  the  case
    that at no stage had the Applicant sought to make  an  application  for
    Administrative Review (AR) of the October 2018 decision.

 9. On 5 March 2020, the Applicant and  his  dependents  were  all  granted
    discretionary leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  the  basis  of
    Article 8 ECHR (specifically, the length of  residence  of  the  eldest
    child).  This important fact was not communicated to  the  Tribunal  by
    the Applicant or any legal representatives.

10.  The  Tribunal  has,  over  the  course  of  time,  sought  to   obtain
    confirmation from the Applicant as to  whether  or  not  he  wished  to
    pursue the application.  This culminated in the decision of a Lawyer of
    the Upper Tribunal issuing a decision and directions notice on  4  June
    2021 including  an  "unless"  direction  to  the  effect  that  if  the
    Applicant failed to contact the Tribunal within a specified period  the
    application would be automatically struck out.  I have been  unable  to
    see anything on file  to  indicate  that  any  such  communication  was
    received and I conclude that none was.  However, I  have  proceeded  to
    consider this case on the basis that it remains live (if  necessary,  I
    would formally reinstate the application).



Submissions

11. In a detailed and helpful skeleton argument dated 13  August  2021,  Mr
    Fraczyk set out the history of  the  correspondence  to  which  I  have
    alluded above, providing extracts from relevant emails,  all  of  which
    support the Respondent's contention that she  had  done  all  that  she
    reasonably could to resolve these proceedings at an earlier stage.  His
    primary submission was that this application was now, and had been  for
    a considerable period of time, entirely academic,  that  there  was  no
    point of public interest which arose, and that it should be refused  on
    that basis.  In addition,  he  submitted  that  the  Respondent  should
    recover at least part of her costs in respect of these  proceedings  in
    light  of  the  Applicant's  conduct   over   the   course   of   time.
    Exceptionally, he submitted, these costs should be made on an indemnity
    basis.  His fall-back position  was that there should be no order as to
    costs.

12. Ms Jegarajah accepted that this application was academic  and  did  not
    suggest that I should do anything other than refuse it on  that  basis.
    However, she urged me to direct the Respondent to re-serve the  October
    2018 decision so that the timeframe for making an AR application  could
    be 'reset' and that such an application could  then  be  made  by  her.
    Further  or  alternatively,  as  I  understood  the  suggestion,  these
    proceedings could be adjourned in order that  such  an  AR  application
    could be made.  She indicated that the  parties  could  discuss  a  re-
    service of the October 2018 decision even if this  claim  was  refused.
    She confirmed that if all else failed, the Applicant would make a fresh
    statelessness application.  She informed me that  the  Applicant  might
    have new legal representation in order to assist him with  any  further
    matters.

13. Mr Fraczyk strongly objected to any course of action involving the  re-
    service of the October 2018 decision.  That decision  had  been  served
    initially and then re-served at the latest in July 2019.  There was  no
    good reason, in his submission, for any further action to be  taken  by
    the Respondent in this case.

14. On the issue of costs Ms Jegarajah urged me  to  make  no  order.   She
    submitted that the consequences of making an order,  which  she  stated
    the Applicant could not comply with in any  event,  would  be  that  he
    would be landed with a litigation debt which might in turn have adverse
    consequences in respect of any future applications for leave to  remain
    in the United Kingdom.  She also highlighted what  she  said  were  the
    Applicant's "vulnerabilities" and that any omissions in  the  past  had
    not been his fault.

15. For  his  part,  Mr  Fraczyk  acknowledged  that  some  individuals  in
    precarious situations in this country might  be  vulnerable.   However,
    there was no evidence as to any vulnerability faced by the Applicant or
    his  family  members.   The  Respondent  had  been  forced   to   incur
    significant and unnecessary expense in these proceedings.

16. At the end of the hearing I formally reserved my decision.



Conclusions

17. I can state my conclusions in this case relatively briefly. It is clear
    that as of, at the very latest, the beginning of July  2019,  when  the
    October 2018 decision was effectively re-served on the Applicant,  this
    application for judicial  review  had  become  entirely  academic:  the
    Respondent had made a decision on  the  statelessness  application  and
    this had been effectively served on him.  No point of  public  interest
    has ever arisen in this case and the Applicant has not contended to the
    contrary.   There  has  never  been  any  material  issue  as  to   the
    possibility of damages being claimed for the alleged unlawful delay  in
    the decision making.

18. In my judgment the Respondent has taken every possible step to try  and
    settle these proceedings from the earliest stage following  the  making
    of the October 2018 decision.  Even if (and I am far from convinced  of
    this) the decision was  not  effectively  served  in  October  2018  or
    February 2019, it is common ground that it was effectively  (re-)served
    on 2 July 2019.  I am bound to say that I am troubled by  the  apparent
    inaction of the Applicant when, I am satisfied, he became aware of  the
    first proposed consent order in December 2018 or, at the latest, at the
    beginning of February 2019 when the next  proposed  consent  order  was
    provided (there being no evidence to suggest that he was not so aware).
    Even if he had not received the October 2018 decision letter itself, he
    must surely have been put on notice that it existed,  was  not  in  his
    favour, and that he could and should have requested a copy immediately.

19.  Despite  the  best  efforts  of  the  Respondent  to  resolve  matters
    efficiently in order to prevent the unnecessary expenditure of time and
    money, nothing of any value at all was done by the Applicant and/or any
    legal representatives engaged over the course of the last 2 years.  The
    lack any constructive communication from his side has, in my  judgment,
    been prolonged, unexplained, and entirely unjustified. The  failure  to
    act in a reasonable fashion has not only applied to his  dealings  with
    the Respondent, but also in respect of the Tribunal.

20. An additional matter which causes me significant concern is the failure
    of the Applicant or anyone else to have informed the  Tribunal  of  the
    grant of discretionary leave in 2020, or at least the failure  to  have
    engaged with the question of whether the current application was to  be
    pursued notwithstanding that grant and the relative security  which  it
    provided to the Applicant and his family.

21. Ms Jegarajah has alluded  to  "vulnerabilities"  on  the  part  of  the
    Applicant and/or his family. Mr Fraczyk  was  right  to  point  to  the
    absence of any evidence of problems which  might  have  even  begun  to
    explain the unreasonable inaction.  There is no  indication  of  mental
    health problems.  The family unit have had leave to remain since  March
    2020.  There has been legal representation in place for at  least  part
    of the time. If that was said to be inadequate or negligent,  there  is
    no evidence of any complaints having been made. In any  event,  I  note
    that the Applicant has had help from some other person  very  recently:
    an adjournment application was made, with assistance,  the  day  before
    the hearing (this was not pursued at the hearing).

22. Finally, I address Ms Jegarajah's request that I direct the  Respondent
    to re-serve the October 2018 decision on the Applicant in order that an
    AR application can be made.

23. I have no hesitation in refusing such a course of action.  The  request
    flies in the face of all  that  has  preceded  it.   The  October  2018
    decision was effectively (re-)served at the beginning of July 2019.  No
    AR application was made at that stage or at any time over  the  next  2
    years.   Meanwhile,  the  Applicant  has  failed  to  engage  with  the
    Respondent's attempts to settle these proceedings. As far as I can see,
    there has been no request for a further re-service of the October  2018
    decision prior to the hearing before me.  These basic facts  speak  for
    themselves.

24. Further, Ms Jegarajah confirmed that fresh  statelessness  applications
    could be made in any event, thus completely undermining her request  to
    me.

25. I refuse this application for judicial review and make no direction  to
    the Respondent.



Costs

26. All of the above feeds into my decision on costs.   Ultimately,  having
    considered all of the particular circumstances, relevant case-law,  and
    the submissions made by Counsel, I have decided that  the  costs  issue
    should be dealt with by way of separate time periods, as follows.

27. In respect of the initial period of delay in reaching a decision on the
    statelessness application, I am not satisfied that unlawful  delay  was
    made out.  No such finding had ever been made by the Tribunal  and  the
    grant of permission was just that.  A period of 18 months could not  of
    itself be deemed irrational and there is no evidence before  me  as  to
    any significant prejudice caused to the Applicant or his family  during
    the period in question.  It is also very difficult for the Applicant to
    establish any causal link between the making  of  the  judicial  review
    application in May 2018 and the refusal decision  in  October  of  that
    year.  There is no evidence to suggest that the  latter  was  a  direct
    result of the former.  Having said that, I note that the Respondent had
    offered to pay the Applicant's  reasonable  costs  when  providing  her
    draft consent order in early 2019. All  other  things  being  equal,  I
    would have been inclined award costs to  the  Applicant  to  cover  the
    making of the judicial review application  and  the  period  until  the
    Respondent's initial offer to settle the proceedings in  December  2018
    (or, at the latest, the second settlement attempt in February 2019).

28. However, the Applicant's overall conduct in these proceedings has  been
    so poor that I make no order as to costs in  respect  of  this  initial
    period.

29. The second  period  of  time  begins  on  18  December  2018  when  the
    Respondent made her first attempt to sett's le the proceedings  by  way
    of a consent order.  There is no  suggestion  that  the  Applicant  was
    unaware of this attempt and no explanation has ever been  given  as  to
    why it was unreasonable for the Applicant to have acceded to it.   Even
    if I were to take the second consent order provided on 5 February  2019
    as the starting point, it makes no difference.  Erring on the  side  of
    caution, I take into account  the  service  issue  in  respect  of  the
    October 2018 decision and regard the end of this period as being 2 July
    2019.  I see no basis for making an award of costs in  the  Applicant's
    favour for this period.  Even if there was, his overall conduct is such
    that I would make no order as to costs.

30. From the point at which the Applicant will have (at  least  taking  his
    case at the highest) set eyes on the October 2018 decision to  date,  I
    regard the Applicant's conduct, whether acting for himself or with  the
    assistance of legal representatives, to have been  plainly  beyond  the
    parameters of what can be considered reasonable.  I do  not  intend  to
    repeat here what I have  set  out  previously,  but  incorporate  those
    conclusions into my evaluation of the costs issue.

31. Ms Jegarajah's submission that an order of costs against the  Applicant
    would have adverse consequences in terms  of  future  applications,  by
    virtue of incurring a litigation debt, is unpersuasive.  That is not in
    my view a good reason not to make  an  order  against  him.   There  is
    almost always a risk of incurring costs in judicial review  proceedings
    and a failure to conduct oneself in a reasonable manner, whether or not
    assisted by legal  representatives,  creates  an  entirely  foreseeable
    possibility of having to pay money to the other party.

32. Having regard to the judgment of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Excelsior
    Commercial and Industrial Holdings  Limited  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  879  at
    paragraph 32, I conclude that the Applicant's conduct  since  receiving
    the October 2018 decision after its  re-service  on  2  July  2019  has
    clearly fallen significantly outside of the norm of what is expected in
    litigation.  In my view, taking matters cumulatively, an award of costs
    in favour of the Respondent on an indemnity basis is, exceptionally and
    on the particular facts of this  case,  justified  in  respect  of  the
    period from 4 July 2019 (a date I consider fair, being 2 days after the
    re-service by post) to the hearing before me.  I make such an order.



Signed: H Norton-Taylor

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

Dated: 1 September 2021


