
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/3954/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                               29 March 2019

                                   Before

           MR JUSTICE DINGEMANS SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

                                   Between

                                     ZZ

                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Defendant
                               - - - - - - - -

Raza Husain QC and Duran Seddon instructed by Gherson solicitors appeared
behalf of the Applicant.

Neil Sheldon QC instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


Mr Justice Dingemans:


      Introduction
   1. This is the hearing of a claim for judicial review of the  refusal  of
      the Secretary of State to consider further representations in  support
      of ZZ's claim for asylum because ZZ has outstanding an appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal against the Secretary of State's  earlier  decision  to
      refuse asylum.  The Secretary of State's decision was affirmed by  the
      First Tier Tribunal, but ZZ has been granted permission to  appeal  to
      the Upper Tribunal.


   2. ZZ has  the  benefit  of  an  anonymity  order  made  earlier  in  the
      proceedings.   There  is  in  this  case  a  higher  risk  of   jigsaw
      identification because of information given in earlier proceedings and
      judgments.  In these circumstances  and  with  the  agreement  of  the
      parties I will avoid referring to the relevant facts as far as I  can.





      The factual background
   3. ZZ's extradition to a category  1  state  was  sought  pursuant  to  a
      European Arrest Warrant.  His extradition was ordered  in  Westminster
      Magistrates' Court and an  appeal  to  the  Administrative  Court  was
      unsuccessful.  Section 36(3) of the Extradition Act  2003  ("the  2003
      Act") requires the return of ZZ  within  10  days  of  the  order  for
      extradition becoming final.


   4. ZZ made a claim for asylum. This had the effect of  extending  the  10
      day period  pursuant  to  section  39(3)(b)  of  the  2003  Act.   The
      Secretary of State refused the asylum claim.  ZZ appealed to the First
      Tier Tribunal.  The First Tier Tribunal  dismissed  ZZ's  appeal.   ZZ
      sought permission to appeal.  After the decision  of  the  First  Tier
      Tribunal ZZ obtained a further statement from a witness which ZZ  said
      supported his claim for  asylum  and  he  also  relied  on  a  further
      development in the relevant country.  (The issue of the effect of  the
      further witness statement and the further development is not before me
      and I do not comment on it).  ZZ obtained permission to appeal to  the
      Upper Tribunal to challenge the decision of the First  Tier  Tribunal.
      ZZ was refused permission to rely on the further witness statement  on
      the appeal.  This was because the only basis of  a  challenge  to  the
      decision of the First Tier Tribunal is for an error of  law,  and  the
      further witness statement was not before the First Tier Tribunal so it
      could not support an argument that there was an error of law  made  by
      the First Tier Tribunal.



   5. ZZ therefore sent the further witness statement and other material  to
      the Secretary of State as  further  representation  for  a  claim  for
      asylum.  The Secretary of State refused to give advance  consideration
      to further submissions and evidence in support of a  fresh  claim  for
      asylum saying "unfortunately we are unable to accept this claim".   In
      letters  this  was  explained  to  be  because  of   the   outstanding
      application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal and,  after
      permission to appeal was granted, because of the outstanding appeal.



   6. The hearing of the appeal in the Upper Tribunal is scheduled  in  late
      March 2019 and this hearing was before me on 20 March 2019.



      Issues
   7. If ZZ's claim for asylum is determined by the Upper  Tribunal  against
      him he is concerned that the Secretary of State may not have  time  to
      consider his further representations and accept, as ZZ  contends  that
      he should, those further representations as  amounting  to  an  asylum
      claim.  ZZ is also concerned that  if  the  Secretary  of  State  does
      consider the further representations and then decides that the further
      representations do not  amount  to  a  fresh  claim  then  ZZ  may  be
      extradited before he has an opportunity to challenge that decision  in
      public law proceedings.  ZZ contends that in these  circumstances  the
      Secretary of State has a public law duty to avoid  the  risk  that  ZZ
      might be extradited when he should be protected by the 1951 Convention
      Relating to the State of Refugees ("the Refugee Convention")  and  its
      implementing  legislation  and  rules.   ZZ  also  contends  that  the
      Secretary of State wrongly fettered his  decision  to  entertain  ZZ's
      claim because of the existing policy to wait until the appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal has been heard.



   8. The Secretary of State contends that there is no public  law  duty  on
      the Secretary of State to make a decision, in part because  ZZ's  case
      depends  on  hypothetical  future  events.   The  Secretary  of  State
      contends that ZZ's case will be fairly  determined,  if  and  when  it
      becomes necessary to do so, at the appropriate time.  The Secretary of
      State contends that there was no wrongful fettering of his discretion,
      because he acted properly in accordance with his policy.



   9. I am very grateful to Mr Raza Hussain QC and Mr Neil  Sheldon  QC  and
      their respective legal  teams  for  their  helpful  written  and  oral
      submissions.



      Relevant statutory provisions and provisions of the Immigration Rules
  10. Sections 36 and 39 of the Extradition Act 2003 provide as follows:
      36 Extradition following appeal
      (1)  This section applies if-
      (a)  there is an appeal to the High Court under section 26 against  an
      order for a person's extradition to a category 1 territory, and
      (b)  the effect of the decision of the relevant court on the appeal is
      that the person is to be extradited there.
      (2)  The person must be extradited to the category 1 territory  before
      the end of the required period.
      (3)  The required period is-
      (a)  10 days starting with the  day  on  which  the  decision  of  the
      relevant court on the appeal  becomes  final  or  proceedings  on  the
      appeal are discontinued, or
      (b)  if the relevant court and the authority which issued the  Part  1
      warrant agree a later date, 10 days starting with the later date.
      (3A)  If the day referred to in paragraph (a)  of  subsection  (3)  is
      earlier than the earliest day on which, by reason of  an  order  under
      section 36B or 36C, the extradition order may  be  carried  out  ("the
      postponed date"), that paragraph has effect as if it referred  instead
      to the postponed date.
      (4)  ...
      (5)  The decision of the High Court on the appeal becomes final-
      (a)   when the period permitted for applying to  the  High  Court  for
      leave to appeal to the  Supreme  Court  ends,  if  there  is  no  such
      application;
      (b)   when the period permitted for applying to the Supreme Court  for
      leave to appeal to it ends, if the High Court refuses leave to  appeal
      and there is no application to the Supreme Court for leave to appeal;
      (c)   when the Supreme Court refuses leave to appeal to it;
      (d)   at the end of the permitted period, which is  28  days  starting
      with the day on which leave to appeal to the Supreme Court is granted,
      if no such appeal is brought before the end of that period.
      (6)  These must be ignored for the purposes of subsection (5)-
      (a)  any power of a court to extend the period permitted for  applying
      for leave to appeal;
      (b)  any power of a court to grant leave to take a step out of time.
      (7)   The decision of the [Supreme Court]2 on the appeal becomes final
      when it is made.
      (8)  If subsection (2) is not complied with and the person applies  to
      the appropriate judge to  be  discharged  the  judge  must  order  his
      discharge, unless reasonable cause is shown for the delay.


      39 Asylum claim
      (3)  If-
      (a)  an order is made under this Part for a person to be extradited in
      pursuance of a Part 1 warrant, and
      (b)  the person has made an asylum claim (whether before or after  the
      issue of the warrant),
      the person must not be extradited in pursuance of the  warrant  before
      the asylum claim is finally determined; and sections 35, 36, 47 and 49
      have effect subject to this.
      (4)  ...
      (5)  If the Secretary of State allows the asylum claim, the  claim  is
      finally determined when he makes his decision on the claim.
      (6)  If the Secretary of State rejects the asylum claim, the claim  is
      finally determined-
      (a)  when the Secretary of State makes his decision on the  claim,  if
      there is no right to appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision
      on the claim;
      (b)  when the period permitted for appealing against the Secretary  of
      State's decision on the claim ends, if there is such a right but there
      is no such appeal;
      (c)  when the appeal against that decision is finally determined or is
      withdrawn or abandoned, if there is such an appeal.
      (7)  An appeal against the Secretary of State's decision on an  asylum
      claim is not finally determined for the purposes of subsection (6)  at
      any time when a further appeal or an application for leave to bring  a
      further appeal-
      (a)  has been instituted  and  has  not  been  finally  determined  or
      withdrawn or abandoned, or
      (b)  may be brought.
      (8)  The remittal of an appeal is not a final  determination  for  the
      purposes of subsection (7).
      (9)  The possibility of an appeal out  of  time  with  leave  must  be
      ignored for the purposes of subsections (6) and (7).


  11. Section 216(7) of the 2003 Act provides that "asylum claim" in section
      39(3)(b) has the  meaning  given  to  it  by  section  113(1)  of  the
      Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act").
      Section 113(1) of the  2002  Act  is  an  interpretation  section  and
      defines an asylum claim as a "claim made by a person to the  Secretary
      of State ... that to remove the person from or require  him  to  leave
      the United Kingdom would breach the United Kingdom's obligations under
      the Refugee Convention".


  12. The Immigration Rules provide:
      353. When a human rights or  protection  claim  has  been  refused  or
      withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of these  Rules
      and any appeal relating to  that  claim  is  no  longer  pending,  the
      decision maker will consider any further submissions and, if rejected,
      will then  determine  whether  they  amount  to  a  fresh  claim.  The
      submissions will amount to a fresh claim  if  they  are  significantly
      different from the material that has previously been  considered.  The
      submissions will only be significantly different if the content:
      (i) had not already been considered; and
      (ii) taken together with the previously considered material, created a
      realistic prospect of success,  notwithstanding  its  rejection.  This
      paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas.
      353A. Consideration of further submissions shall  be  subject  to  the
      procedures set out in these Rules. An applicant who has  made  further
      submissions shall not be removed before the  Secretary  of  State  has
      considered the submissions under paragraph 353 or otherwise.


      Some relevant legal principles on what amounts to  a  claim  and  when
      injunctions will be granted
  13. In Robinson v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2019]  UKSC
      11 the Supreme Court considered the meaning of a "human rights  claim"
      in section 82(1)(b) of 2002 Act in  the  context  of  a  second  human
      rights claim.  It was held that where a person had already had a human
      rights claim or a protection claim which had been rejected  and  there
      was no pending appeal,  further  submissions  which  relied  on  human
      rights or protection grounds had to be accepted by  the  Secretary  of
      State as a fresh claim pursuant to paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration
      rules if they were to attract a right of appeal under  section  82  of
      the 2002 Act.  In Robinson the submission that the change  of  wording
      introduced by amendments made  in  2014  to  the  2002  Act  impliedly
      abrogated paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules  was  also  rejected,
      see  Robinson  at  paragraphs  52  and  62.   Robinson  approved   the
      authorities on paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules  decided  before
      the  2014  amendments  to  the  2002  Act  which  held  that   further
      representations which the Secretary of State did not accept as a fresh
      claim did not amount to a claim, see Robinson at paragraph 57.



  14. In R(Troitino) v National Crime Agency [2017]  EWHC  931  (Admin)  the
      Court considered an asylum claim in the context of  extradition  to  a
      category 1 state.  In Troitino there was a dispute about  whether  the
      claimant had made an asylum claim because the claimant contended  that
      he had and the Secretary of State contended that  no  such  claim  had
      been made.  In that case because of  the  concern  that  the  claimant
      would be extradited in the 10 day period set out in section 36 of  the
      2003 Act, the Court granted an injunction on the  application  of  the
      claimant with short notice to  the  Secretary  of  State  and  to  the
      National Crime Agency to restrain extradition pending  the  resolution
      of the issue by the Court.


  15. Mr Hussain relied on the decision in Robinson  to  show  that  if  the
      Secretary of State rejected the further representations made by ZZ  as
      amounting to a fresh claim for asylum, then the 10 day period set  out
      in section 36(3)(b) would expire before ZZ  could  challenge  what  Mr
      Husain asserted would be wrongful failure to accept the asylum  claim.
      Mr Sheldon relied on the decision in Troitino  to  show  that  if  the
      Secretary of State either did not deal with ZZ's claim in time (and he
      said it would be dealt with in time) and rejected ZZ's claim and found
      that it did not amount to  a  fresh  claim,  then  ZZ  could  seek  an
      injunction from the courts to restrain his extradition, and that  such
      an injunction would be granted if there was an arguable case that  the
      Secretary of State's refusal to accept the further representations  as
      a fresh claim was  unlawful.   This  meant  that  the  risk  which  so
      concerned ZZ was not a real risk.



  16. Robinson is a case about  what  will  amount  to  a  human  rights  or
      protection claim for the purposes of a statutory appeal.   However  in
      my judgment Robinson and the earlier authorities to which it  referred
      and which it approved, are authority for the proposition that  further
      representations about asylum will not amount to an  asylum  claim  for
      the purposes of the 2002 Act if the Secretary of State has  held  that
      the further representations do not amount to a fresh claim.   This  is
      because Robinson and the earlier authorities have made it  clear  that
      asserting that further representations amount to an asylum claim  does
      not mean that the further representations are an asylum  claim.   This
      reasoning applies to section 39 of the 2003  Act,  by  reason  of  the
      definition section in section 216(7) of the 2003 Act which  refers  to
      the definition of asylum claim in the 2002 Act and  because  the  same
      need to prevent  repetitious  unmeritorious  claims  applies,  compare
      Robinson at paragraph 33.



  17. However the authorities show  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  on
      occasions  wrongly  failed  to  accept  further   representations   as
      amounting to a fresh claim.  There is no appeal from such  a  decision
      of the Secretary of State but the decision of the Secretary  of  State
      is subject to judicial review on Wednesbury grounds,  albeit  applying
      anxious scrutiny, see WM (DRC) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1495; [2007] Imm AR  337  and  Robinson  at
      paragraph 37.



  18. In such circumstances it may be that a person awaiting extradition may
      make further representations which, when properly analysed, amount  to
      asylum claim but this fact might  either  not  be  determined  by  the
      Secretary of State before the 10 day period in section  36(3)  of  the
      2003 Act expires or the  Secretary  of  State  might  unlawfully  have
      failed to accept the further representations as a fresh claim. In such
      circumstances that person may  seek  an  injunction  to  restrain  his
      extradition, pending the determination of the  issue  of  whether  the
      Secretary of State has unlawfully  failed  to  recognise  the  further
      representations as a  fresh  asylum  claim.   The  Court  will  assess
      whether that person has a  properly  arguable  case  either  that  the
      further representations amount to a fresh  claim  for  asylum  if  the
      Secretary of State has not yet made a decision, or that  the  decision
      of the Secretary of State not to recognise the further representations
      as a fresh claim for asylum is unlawful.  The Court may then grant  an
      injunction pending the determination of the issue.   The  Courts  have
      been granting injunctions where necessary in such cases, and  Troitino
      is an example of that practice.



  19. Therefore if ZZ's further appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is  dismissed
      and the further representations have either not yet been considered by
      the Secretary of State or ZZ contends that the Secretary of State  has
      unlawfully failed to  recognise  the  further  representations  as  an
      asylum  claim,  then  ZZ  may  seek  an  injunction  to  restrain  his
      extradition, pending the determination of the  issue  of  whether  the
      Secretary of State has unlawfully  failed  to  recognise  the  further
      representations as a fresh asylum claim.



      No unlawful decision
  20. It is against this background that I turn then to the issues  in  this
      case.  In my judgment there is no requirement  for  the  Secretary  of
      State to make a decision on the  further  representations  before  the
      determination by the Upper Tribunal of the outstanding appeal.  First,
      for the reasons set out above, there is no need to do so in  order  to
      ensure that the further representations can be considered before ZZ is
      removed.  This is because the courts can, if there is an arguable case
      that ZZ has an asylum claim which has either not yet  been  considered
      or recognised by  the  Secretary  of  State,  restrain  ZZ's  removal.
      Secondly it is not yet known what the Upper Tribunal will decide,  and
      a decision on the further representations might not be necessary.   It
      would be very unusual to find a public law duty on  the  Secretary  of
      State to make a decision when there is an outstanding appeal, if  only
      because it would divert resources into decision making which might  be
      irrelevant.  In my judgment the existence of  the  court's  powers  to
      restrain an unlawful removal means that there is no  such  public  law
      duty in this case.


  21. Further there was no unlawful fettering of the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision making in this case when he  did  not  consider  the  further
      representations because  the  appeal  was  outstanding.   ZZ  made  an
      application under paragraph 353  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
      Secretary of State applied that policy by not considering the  further
      representations until the appeal  was  determined.   That  policy  was
      lawful and the Secretary of State was right to apply it in  this  case
      for the reasons given  above.   I  therefore  refuse  this  claim  for
      judicial review.



      Costs
  22. There were submissions about costs at the conclusion of the hearing in
      the event that either ZZ or the Secretary of State won.  The Secretary
      of State has won in the sense that the claim for judicial  review  has
      been refused.  ZZ contended that an explanation of  the  circumstances
      in which ZZ might apply to the  Court  for  relief  was  of  practical
      assistance to him.  That may be so, but individuals are  not  entitled
      to come to the Courts for an advisory  opinion.   The  explanation  in
      this judgment about the circumstances in which an injunction might  be
      granted has been given to show that the public law duty contended  for
      by ZZ did not arise.  In my judgment ZZ should pay  the  Secretary  of
      State's costs to the subject of a detailed assessment on the  standard
      basis if not agreed.  This is because the Secretary of State  won  the
      claim and there is no proper reason either to  make  no  order  as  to
      costs or to order payment of a percentage only of the costs.

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/3954/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                     The Queen on the application of ZZ
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



       Before Mr Justice Dingemans sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Raza Husain QC,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
Gherson Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Mr Neil  Sheldon  QC,  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 21 March 2019.

     Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

For the detailed reasons contained in the written judgment  handed  down  on
29 March 2019.

Order


I therefore make an Order that the judicial review application be dismissed




Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  because  I  have  not
been asked to grant it, and because I do not consider that an  appeal  would
have a real prospect of success or  that  there  is  some  other  compelling
reason for the appeal to be heard.
 Costs

The Applicant should pay the Respondent's costs, to  be  the  subject  of  a
detailed assessment on the standard basis if not agreed.


         Signed:  Mr Justice Dingemans


                        Mr Justice Dingemans sitting as an  Upper  Tribunal
        Judge




        Dated:    29 March 2019






Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


