
IAC-FH-LW-V2

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                               JR/04568/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                                9 April 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                 danish taj
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Z Malik, instructed by Pioneer  Solicitors  appeared  on  behalf  of  the
Applicant.

Mr N Ostrowski, instructed by the Government Legal  Department  appeared  on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE allen: The applicant seeks judicial review of a decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 5 April  2018  refusing  his  application  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.  The respondent was
    not satisfied that the applicant had met the requirements to enable him
    to be awarded 10 points under Appendix C of the Immigration  Rules  and
    refused  his  application  as  it  was  decided  he  had  not  met  the
    genuineness test of paragraph 245DD(k) when assessing on the balance of
    probabilities the points listed at paragraph 245DD(l) of HC 395.


1.   Mr Taj had previously been granted leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student, on 18 December  2009.   That  leave  was
    until 17 February 2011.  On 24 February 2011 he was  granted  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 4  (General)  Student  until  23
    November 2011, and on 15 December 2011 he was granted leave  to  remain
    in the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  (Post-Study)  Migrant  until  15
    December 2013.  Subsequently, on 26 February 2014 he was granted  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
    until 26 February 2017.  He made  the  application  which  led  to  the
    decision under challenge on 22 February 2017.

2.   In the decision letter the respondent set out  various  concerns  under
    the heading "Non-Points Scoring Reasons for Refusal".   The  respondent
    was not satisfied that the applicant had  established,  taken  over  or
    become a director of one or more genuine businesses in the UK  and  had
    genuinely operated that business; he was  not  satisfied  that  he  had
    genuinely invested the money referred to in Table 5 of Appendix A  into
    one or more genuine businesses in the United Kingdom, that he  intended
    to continue operating one or more businesses in the United Kingdom  and
    did not intend to  take  employment  other  than  under  the  terms  of
    paragraph 245DE.

3.   The decision-maker set out the seven criteria noted down  at  paragraph
    245DD(l)  of  HC  395,  which  had  been  considered   it   was   said,
    concentrating particularly on items (i), (iv) and (v).

4.   With regard to the credibility of the applicant's business activity  in
    the United Kingdom, the respondent noted that he had named two clients,
    Avid Support Limited and Core Atlantic Limited.  He had said  that  for
    Core Atlantic Limited he set strategies, aims and priorities  and  held
    progress and review and provided internal and external audits and  also
    provided marketing and business plans.  For Avid Support it was  stated
    that he did web design, market research and action plans.

5.   Concerns were raised due to the fact that no details  of  Avid  Support
    Limited could be found at Companies House matching the  details  stated
    on his contract with them or any details he  had  provided  about  them
    during the interview.  It was noted that there was a company named Avid
    Support Ltd listed  at  Companies  House  but  their  details  differed
    significantly from the details shown on his  contract.   It  was  noted
    that their address on the contract was said  to  be  414B,  4th  Floor,
    Victoria House, Victoria Road, Chelmsford, CM1 1JR,  and  the  contract
    was signed by Imad Masood.  The  address  for  "Avid  Support  Ltd"  at
    Companies House showed as being 11 Brisbane Road,  Ilford,  Essex,  IG1
    4SR and the director was shown as Jawad Bhatti.  In addition  to  this,
    Companies House showed that Avid Support Ltd  had  not  had  any  other
    trading addresses since it was incorporated on 10 June  2016.   It  was
    said that the fact that the above details differed in such a way raised
    concerns as to the credibility of his contract and the  credibility  of
    his business activity in the United Kingdom as a whole.

6.   The point was also made that there was only an Avid Support Ltd  listed
    at Companies House and the claimed client Avid Support Limited did  not
    appear to be registered and this was said  to  raise  further  concerns
    regarding the genuineness of the contract.

7.   In addition the respondent said that he had been  unable  to  find  any
    other online presence for Avid Support Limited such as a  website,  and
    the fact that the applicant claimed to have conducted  web  design  for
    them but there was no evidence of them having a  web  presence  further
    added to the existing concerns.

8.   He had been asked to provide details of  any  market  research  he  had
    carried out prior to investing in his business.  He said  that  he  had
    researched local businesses such as Core Atlantic Limited to  find  out
    what they needed and how he could provide it.  When asked  the  results
    of his market research he said as follows:  "Very  positive  especially
    after brexit  (sic).   All  companies  are  looking  for  staff.   Core
    Atlantic Ltd very short of staff".

9.   This response was regarded as contrasting with  previous  responses  he
    had provided and also the contracts he had provided with regard to  the
    nature of the work he  claimed  to  conduct.   It  was  said  that  his
    response gave the impression that he recruited staff for their business
    which  raised  concerns  as  this  called  into  question  his  earlier
    responses provided with regard to the type of work carried out for Core
    Atlantic business.

10.  A further point of  concern  was  that  the  visiting  officer  at  the
    interview had observed that there was no visible sign at  the  premises
    displaying his company name.  The applicant was  told  by  the  officer
    that Companies House legislation said that he was required to  erect  a
    sign showing his company name and his registered  company  address  and
    wherever his business operated.  He was then asked to  explain  why  he
    had not chosen to comply with this requirement to which he  replied  by
    saying he was waiting for a sign to be put up but  was  not  sure  when
    this would  be.   His  apparent  lack  of  awareness  of  the  relevant
    legislation and apparent lack of urgency to erect a sign further  added
    to  existing  concerns  regarding  the  credibility  of  his   business
    operations.

11.  Under (v) when he gave details as to where his  employees  worked  from
    he said  that  they  mostly  worked  from  his  business  premises  but
    occasionally worked  from  home.   He  was  asked  to  provide  details
    regarding any health and safety requirements he had  in  place  at  his
    business premises to which he replied that he had none.  This was  said
    to add to existing concerns, as it would be a mandatory requirement for
    any employer in the United Kingdom  and  his  little  awareness  of  it
    raised concerns as to the genuineness of his claimed job creation.

12.  A final concern was that the interviewing officer observed on  visiting
    the business premises that the office was  very  small  and  questioned
    whether it was  feasible  that  two  employees  and  a  director  could
    realistically conduct work in such  a  space.   This  was  regarded  as
    casting further doubt upon the credibility  of  his  job  creation  and
    business activity in the United Kingdom.

13.  Permission to challenge this decision was  refused  on  the  papers  by
    Judge Keki? but subsequently granted following an oral hearing by Judge
    Kopieczek.

14.  In  essence  the  challenge  is  made  first  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent's decision is procedurally unfair; and secondly, that it  is
    irrational.  These points were developed in the skeleton arguments  and
    in submissions before me, and I shall address the points made below.

15.  There was a preliminary issue raised by  Mr  Ostrowski  concerning  the
    amended witness statement which had been put in by the  applicant.   It
    was accepted that permission had been granted by a Tribunal  lawyer  to
    admit the amended  witness  statement,  but  it  was  argued  that  the
    evidence was interwoven with submissions and comment which was entirely
    improper in the statement and also there was no statement of  truth  as
    required by the CPR.

16.  Mr Malik agreed  that  there  were  submissions  and  comments  in  the
    statement and that was improper, but there was no  application  to  set
    aside the lawyer's decision and he was content if it were admitted  for
    little weight to be attached to it.

17.  I stated that the evidence had been  admitted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    lawyer, and there had been no application to set it aside and it  would
    remain part of the relevant documents in the case,  though  bearing  in
    mind in particular the fact that it was  not  signed  contrary  to  CPR
    requirements I would attach little weight to it.

Submissions

18.  In his submissions Mr Malik noted in reference to the  interview  notes
    that there were misspellings, for example in Core Atlantic's name which
    was spelt as "Gold" and in relation  to  Avid  Support:  "Support"  was
    written as "Sport".  This was  important  with  regard  to  the  online
    presence issue.  There were only follow-up questions at questions 8 and
    9.  Question 15 concerning Core Atlantic and the search  for  employees
    issue was linked to question 14  and  was  concerned  with  the  market
    research carried out before the business was set up.  The applicant had
    given  candid  answers.   Likewise,  with  regard  to  Companies  House
    legislation and the sign, the answer was set out.  It was unclear  what
    was meant by health and safety matters and  the  respondent  had  taken
    issue with the recorded answer, but that was what the note  said.   The
    interview notes were the  Secretary  of  State's  evidence.   Mr  Malik
    accepted that usually in judicial review proceedings the  Secretary  of
    State's evidence would be accepted as  being  accurate  unless  certain
    exceptions applied and that it would be  unrealistic  for  him  not  to
    accept that the Tribunal was likely to prefer this evidence and he  was
    content to proceed on that basis, but he argued that in  any  event  on
    the basis of the evidence the applicant should succeed.

19.  In Mushtaq [2015] UKUT 224  (IAC)  guidance  was  provided  as  to  how
    interviews should be conducted.  The purpose of the  interview  was  to
    give a fair opportunity for the interviewee to respond  to  potentially
    adverse matters.  The gist of the case to be answered was to be put  to
    the applicant before the  decision  was  taken.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's concerns in that case had not been put to  the  applicant  at
    the interview.

20.  Reliance was also placed on Anjum [2017] UKUT 406  (IAC)  which  was  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) case.   Reliance  was  placed  in  particular  on
    paragraphs 19 to 21 and 25 to 28.  The relevant principles were set out
    there.  A rounded assessment of all the relevant  factors  set  out  at
    paragraph 245DD(l) was required and the evidence submitted could not be
    ignored with the focus being on something else.

21.  In the instant case it could be seen that nothing had been  said  about
    (ii) or (iii) but the decision-maker jumped from (i) to (iv).

22.  Mr Malik  had  four  particular  points  to  make.   The  first  raised
    concerns arising from the decision letter  at  page  47  of  the  trial
    bundle where the concerns about alleged discrepancies  in  identity  of
    individuals and addresses was not put to the applicant at the interview
    as required by Mushtaq and Anjum.  The point contrasting  Limited  with
    Ltd was absurd and there was no sense to the distinction  being  drawn.
    The point  about  the  different  signatory  for  the  director  and  a
    different address from the Companies House address was not put  to  the
    applicant at interview.  The contract between the  applicant's  company
    and Avid Support Limited could be seen at page 225 of the  bundle.   It
    could be seen there that Amad Masood was the authorised  signatory  and
    the address given was 414B, 4th Floor, Victoria House,  Victoria  Road,
    Chelmsford.  The contract did not say that Mr Masood was  the  director
    and that was relevant to the Secretary of State's point that Mr  Masood
    was the authorised signatory and the manager.  The contract did not say
    he was the director.  Also it gave the trading address.  The  Secretary
    of State was wrong if he was saying that only a director could  sign  a
    contract and that was  irrational.   It  was  also  irrational  if  the
    Secretary of State said that a company could only use  the  address  on
    the Companies House register.  Any concern there was  with  respect  to
    the client and not the applicant.

23.  Mr Malik's second point was that the concern of the Secretary of  State
    about the lack of an online presence for Avid Support Limited  had  not
    been put to the applicant and it  was  unfair.   No  details  had  been
    provided as to the research carried out, which search engine  had  been
    used (if any) and when it had been done.   There  was  nothing  in  the
    point.  There could be a website but  it  is  not  available  from  the
    particular search engine or it might have been down at  the  time.   An
    explanation could have been provided if the applicant had  been  asked.
    Again it was a concern about a client and  not  about  the  applicant's
    company and was manifestly unfair and irrational.

24.  With regard to the  point  about  market  research  and  Core  Atlantic
    Limited, the response of the Secretary of State in respect of this  was
    irrational.  If there were any ambiguity the burden was on the  officer
    to ask follow-up questions which, if put to the applicant,  would  have
    been answered.  In any event it was irrational to take  the  answer  as
    meaning that he was providing recruitment services  to  Core  Atlantic.
    There was no basis for that conclusion.  In answer to question 7 he had
    said what services he was providing.

25.  Mr Malik's next  point  concerned  the  reference  to  Companies  House
    legislation and the need to display the company's name at the premises.
     Mr Malik was aware of no such legislation and there was no  basis  for
    this being a legal requirement, and in any event it only recorded  part
    of the applicant's answer.  He had said that there was no sign  as  the
    office  was  shared.   There  had  been  a  failure  to  recognise  the
    applicant's  answer,  and  to  fail  to  engage  with  his  answer  was
    irrational.  Again the matter should have been  followed  up  if  there
    were concerns and it  was  unfair  not  to  put  the  concerns  to  the
    applicant.

26.  The next point argued by  Mr  Malik  concerned  the  reference  in  the
    decision letter to health and safety requirements.  It  was  not  known
    what this meant.  It was not  a  question  concerning  the  applicant's
    awareness of his obligations and it was not put  to  the  applicant  in
    that form and should be contrasted with his  answer  elsewhere  in  the
    interview concerning employees'  rights  where  he  had  given  a  fair
    answer.  If a parallel question had been put as to what  he  understood
    the law to be then he could have answered it.  There was no  basis  for
    concluding that the lack of awareness about health and safety justified
    the conclusion reached.  He had complied with all that the law required
    him to do.

27.  The final point concerned the issue about the size of the  office.   It
    was considered that it was doubtful that three  people  could  work  in
    such a space and this cast doubt on the credibility of the application.
     There was no clarification of what "very small"  meant.   The  officer
    had taken no measurements.  The respondent had failed  to  engage  with
    the answer given.  In response to question 47 at the interview it could
    be seen that employees sometimes worked from home so there was no basis
    to conclude that all of them worked at the same time from the premises,
    but anyway there was no evidential basis to find the premises were  not
    fit for purpose for three employees.  The question had not been put  to
    the applicant and he had not been asked what the measurements  were  or
    asked follow-up questions and this  was  unfair  and  irrational.   The
    respondent had been unaware that all three did not work  there  at  the
    same time and had not taken this into account.

28.  The decision-maker had not addressed  sub-paragraphs  (vi)  and  (vii).
    Points  were  denied  as  the  respondent  was  not  satisfied  as   to
    genuineness not because relevant documents had not been  put  in.   The
    decision was as a consequence irrational and unfair.

29.  In his submissions Mr Ostrowski first of all  took  me  to  authorities
    concerned with PBS cases and in particular EK (Ivory Coast) [2014] EWCA
    Civ 1517 which contrasted the context of that case which was a PBS case
    with the situation in Doody [1994] IAC 531 where what was at stake  was
    the liberty  of  the  subject.   Though  the  circumstances  were  very
    different from the instant case, this was relevant with regard  to  the
    nature of PBS cases.  It should be noted that doubt had  been  cast  on
    what had been said by the Upper Tribunal in Naved [2012] UKUT 14 (IAC),
    criticising it on the basis that it paid insufficient attention to  the
    issue lying at the heart of cases in this area, which concerns the fair
    balance to be struck between the public  interest  in  having  the  PBS
    regime operated in a simple way  and  the  interests  of  a  particular
    individual who may be detrimentally  affected  by  such  an  operation.
    Reference was also made to Talpada [2018] EWCA Civ 841 at paragraph 36,
    quoting  from  Underhill  LJ  in  Mudiyanselage  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  65,
    paragraph 56, that occasional harsh outcomes are a price that has to be
    paid for the perceived advantages of  the  PBS  process,  and  also  at
    paragraph 145 in that decision that those who seek to make applications
    of a PBS nature must take the utmost care to ensure  that  they  comply
    with the requirements to the letter.

30.  As regards the process in this case, this was  the  applicant's  second
    entrepreneur visa application.  He was  able  to  put  in  whatever  he
    wanted and there was no need for an interview but it seemed to  be  the
    Secretary of State's practice to carry out interviews.   The  interview
    had to be  for  the  purpose  of  assessing  the  application  and  the
    supporting evidence with the PBS requirements and to show there  was  a
    credible  business  being  operated  by  the  applicant.   He   clearly
    understood the purpose of the interview.  It was relevant also to  note
    his declaration at the end of the interview that he had understood  the
    questions put to him, confirmed that he had been given the  opportunity
    to provide  additional  information  relevant  to  his  application  or
    clarify the information he had already given and  had  been  given  the
    opportunity at the end of the visit to make further comments.   It  was
    clearly appropriate for Mr Malik not to challenge the veracity  of  the
    interview record given the declaration.   The  applicant  had  had  the
    opportunity to be accompanied by a representative and  had  chosen  not
    to.  He was completely free at interview to answer however he  saw  fit
    and to provide additional information as he saw fit.

31.  Mr Ostrowski's next point concerned the practical consequences  if  the
    applicant's argument was right with regard to fairness.  In essence  he
    was saying that if there was inconsistency between  what  he  said  and
    external information that any concerns should be put to the  applicant,
    or if there was an inconsistency between internal documents and answers
    at interview, then the interviewer should put that to the applicant and
    also perhaps put to him where there  were  adverse  conclusions  to  be
    drawn from what he said at interview.  These covered  the  factors  set
    out by Mr Malik which were said to come out to procedural unfairness.

32.  If  the  applicant  were  right  then  it  would  require  a  radically
    different interview process from that currently in existence.  It would
    make a quite lengthy interview a lot longer (this interview had  lasted
    nearly two hours).  Every answer given would require  consideration  of
    whether  it  contradicted  something  external  or  internal  and   the
    interviewer would have to decide whether he or she was likely  to  come
    to adverse conclusions and if so whether that needed to be put  to  the
    applicant.  It would be  lengthy,  disjointed  and  never-ending.   One
    interview might lead to another and that to a third or even possibly  a
    fourth.  More was being  required  than  procedural  fairness  demanded
    here.

33.  As regards the  principles  set  out  in  Doody,  the  fifth  principle
    stating that there must be an opportunity to make  representations  had
    clearly been met.  The sixth requirement that the gist should  be  made
    available was also satisfied in that that came from the requirements of
    the Rules themselves.  From cases such as London Reading College [2010]
    EWHC 2561 (Admin) and Liral Veget [2018] EWHC 2941 (Admin)  and  Bayani
    (1990) 22 HLR 406, it was clear that there was an  irreducible  minimum
    of information an applicant should be given and that  had  been  given.
    The applicant knew what the Secretary of State's concerns were from the
    structure of the PBS system and more specifically  from  the  questions
    asked at interview.  These showed the Secretary of State's concerns and
    that was the mechanism by which the decision was made.  What had to  be
    satisfied was within the Rule and it was wholly within the  applicant's
    control, in contrast to cases where the concerns were  about  employees
    such as in Liral Veget.  In B [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin), the question at
    paragraph 50 was the need to be careful not to impose  unrealistic  and
    unnecessary burdens on those required to make the decisions.

34.  With regard to the authorities relied on by Mr Malik, what was said  in
    Mushtaq was problematic as there  would  be  circumstances  or  adverse
    matters which would not immediately be in the interviewer's  mind.   In
    that case there were obvious limitations with the  interview  questions
    and the conclusions drawn, in contrast to this case.  As regards Anjum,
    a misunderstanding of answers was at the heart of the case, whereas  in
    the instant case it was more an argument that the applicant should have
    had the chance to expand on answers given.

35.  With regard to the points made by the applicant, it was  accepted  that
    the point about different names and trading addresses had not been  put
    to him, but that was in the category of matters which had  been  raised
    by Mr Ostrowski concerning  discrepancies  between  what  was  said  at
    interview and what was now known from hundreds of pages  of  supporting
    documentation.  The gist of the concern was whether it was a legitimate
    business or not.  The online presence point was an external matter  and
    it would be unreasonable for the Secretary of State to have to identify
    such a point during the currency of the interview.  It did  not  matter
    that no details had been given as to when it had been sought to  access
    web presence.  The gist was  raised  in  the  interview.   Requiring  a
    checking process demanded too much.

36.  Whether or not questions 14 and 15 were linked,  it  was  open  to  the
    respondent in light of the answer given to question 15 to regard it  as
    contradictory to the answer given to question 7 and the respondent  was
    entitled to take it at its face value.

37.  With regard to the health and safety point, the response was  a  simple
    one and the question was clear.  It was not unfair to place reliance on
    that.  Question 47 was a more detailed  question,  but  it  was  not  a
    question of whether more detailed  questions  could  have  been  asked,
    rather whether it was procedurally unfair to rely on a simple answer to
    a simple question.

38.  The issue as regards office size was not a question  but  a  conclusion
    resulting  from  the  site  visit.   There  was  no  reference  to  the
    legislation about the amount of size  required  but  the  question  was
    whether it was feasible.

39.  The decision was based on an amalgamation of the answers  given  rather
    than on particular ones.  As regards the point about having to  have  a
    company name at the  premises,  this  was  required  in  the  Companies
    (Trading Disclosures) Regulations of 2008 at regulation 3, so there was
    an obligation.

40.  As regards irrationality, there were four discrepancies in  respect  of
    the director/manager and the address of the company and no  explanation
    had been given.  It was a high hurdle to show irrationality as  it  had
    to amount to an outrageous defiance of logic in the  decision  that  no
    sensible person could arrive at.  In light of the  discrepancies  which
    were of varying degrees of importance, it was open to the respondent to
    conclude as he did.  The same general point held true  with  regard  to
    the signage and the health and safety and size of the premises  points.
    There was no irrationality in the decision.

41.  By way of reply Mr Malik argued that cases such  as  EK  (Ivory  Coast)
    and Talpada were concerned with  the  points  scoring  aspects  of  the
    points-based system in contrast with this case.   Paragraph  28  of  EK
    made that clear.  Authorities such as London Reading College  were,  Mr
    Ostrowski accepted, plainly different and the considerations  in  those
    cases did not apply here.  There were challenges to decisions to revoke
    sponsor licences and there would be decisions after suspension  and  an
    opportunity to respond to concerns.  Likewise with Bayani and B.   They
    were different cases.  There was no issue with regard to a  failure  to
    make  enquiries  with  third  parties  in  this  case.   The   relevant
    authorities were  Mushtaq  and  Anjum  and  they  provided  the  proper
    guidance for the Tribunal in this case.

42.  It was too late to raise the point  about  regulations  concerning  the
    requirements of the company's name.  The point had been made that there
    was no reference to any such regulation and it was too late to raise it
    now.  It should  be  borne  in  mind  that  there  were  points  in  Mr
    Ostrowski's schedule which did not appear  in  the  decision,  and  the
    Tribunal had to consider the lawfulness of the decision rather than any
    explanation of points in it made subsequently.  The decision-maker  had
    not engaged with sub-paragraphs (ii),  (iii)  and  (vii)  of  paragraph
    245DD(l).  It had not been argued that if  there  were  irrationalities
    the Tribunal should use its discretion to refuse  in  any  event.   The
    decision was unlawful for the reasons given.

43.  I reserved my decision.

Discussion

Fairness

44.  A valuable starting point will be what was said in Doody  [1994]  1  AC
    531 at 560, in particular Lord Mustill's fifth and sixth principles, as
    follows:

         "Fairness will  very  often  require  that  a  person  who  may  be
         adversely affected by the decision will have an opportunity to make
         representations on his own behalf either  before  the  decision  is
         taken with a view to producing a favourable result; or after it  is
         taken, with a view to procuring its modification; or both"

    and that:

         "Since  the  person  affected  usually   cannot   make   worthwhile
         representations without knowing what factors may weigh against  his
         interests fairness will very often require that he is  informed  of
         the gist of the case which he has to answer".

45.  EK (Ivory Coast) is as is said at paragraph 1 of the judgment  of  Lord
    Justice Sales concerned with the application of the general public  law
    duty of fairness in the context of the points-based system for applying
    for leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom.

46.  In paragraph 36 Sales LJ specifically contrasted the  context  in  that
    case with that in Doody.  He noted that in that case what was at  stake
    was the liberty of the subject, whereas the PBS regime was intended  to
    minimise  the  need  for  making  sensitive  and  difficult  evaluative
    judgments of the kind that fell to be made by the Secretary of State in
    Doody, and the interests of applicants which are at stake were  of  far
    less weight.  He went on to say that in the present context what is  in
    issue is whether an applicant for leave to enter or remain can persuade
    the Secretary of State to grant them something  in  relation  to  which
    they had no prior right or expectation, in accordance with a simple and
    mechanistic points system.

47.  I do not read this guidance as  confined  to  the  particular  type  of
    points-based case with which the Court of Appeal was concerned  in  EK.
    It is in my view sufficiently clear from the language used by Sales  LJ
    that it was intended to have general application to points-based system
    cases, and noting the contrast between those and cases with facts  such
    as those in Doody.  Likewise, in Talpada, I note the  quotations  there
    at paragraph 36 from Mudiyanselage and also at paragraph  37  that  the
    points-based system can  lead  to  "harsh  outcomes"  and  "hard  edged
    decisions".  I accept that the instant case is not one  concerned  with
    failure such as that of the applicant in that case  to  put  the  right
    occupation code on the initial application and failing to read  or  not
    taking into proper account  guidance  provided,  but  nevertheless  the
    requirements of the Rules are clear as to what is required, and  in  my
    view an applicant  has  to  give  very  careful  consideration  to  the
    evidence being put forward to support a claim designed to obtain  leave
    under paragraph 245DD.  The applicant, as Mr Ostrowski argued, has  the
    opportunity to provide whatever evidence he wishes to  put  forward  in
    support of his application and is bound to realise, particularly in the
    case  of  an  applicant  such  as  Mr  Taj  who  has  made  a  previous
    application, that there is likely to be a visit to his premises and  an
    interview, and that therefore the onus is on him to  show  that  he  is
    operating a credible business.  In that regard it is  surely  important
    for him to give thought to what weaknesses or difficulties there may be
    in the application that he puts forward.  It is also relevant  in  this
    case to bear in mind the declaration that he signed at the end  of  the
    interview in confirming that he  had  been  given  the  opportunity  to
    provide additional information  relevant  to  his  application  and  to
    clarify  the  information  he  had  already  given  and  to  have   the
    opportunity to make further comments and that  he  had  understood  the
    questions put to him.  These are all important points of context.

48.  With regard to the Doody principles,  Mr  Ostrowski  accepted  that  an
    applicant in the position of this applicant was required  to  be  given
    the gist of the respondent's case.  He argued, as set out  above,  that
    this was done by the fact of the applicant being able  to  satisfy  the
    requirements  of  the  Rules  and  that  the  irreducible  minimum   of
    information he should have been given was from  the  structure  of  the
    points-based system and more specifically from the questions  asked  at
    interview, demonstrating the Secretary  of  State's  concerns.   I  see
    force to this point.  No issue can, I think, be taken with the need  to
    have a structured interview, but issue may be taken, a  point  I  shall
    come into shortly, with the extent to which the system has  to  contain
    some measure of flexibility.

49.   Mushtaq sets out  the  uncontroversial  proposition  that  common  law
    principles  of  procedural  fairness  apply  to  the  decision   making
    processes of Entry Clearance Officers.  It is said that  the  interview
    serves a twofold purpose of enabling  applications  to  be  probed  and
    investigated and simultaneously giving the applicant a fair opportunity
    to respond to potentially adverse matters.  The fifth and sixth general
    principles enunciated by Lord Mustill in Doody were particularly  borne
    in mind.

50.  There is however a further point to be borne in  mind  in  relation  to
    Doody which comes through in EK (Ivory Coast)  and  other  authorities,
    and that is,as set out above, the importance of context.  As  noted  in
    EK, the context in Doody was very different from that of PBS cases, and
    the issue of context particularly with  regard  to  those  two  general
    principles was not a point specifically addressed in Mushtaq, though it
    is clear from Doody itself that context  is  important.   The  Tribunal
    found irrationality in respect of two of the factors identified by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in that case  as  being  adverse,  three  being
    regarded as giving rise to  procedural  unfairness,  in  that  specific
    matters which caused the interviewing officer concern were not  put  to
    the applicant.  A general point made at paragraph 19 was that  fairness
    will often require that the interviewer invite the subject  to  clarify
    or expand an answer or probe a response.

51.  As noted, there is no direct reference in that  case  to  the  need  to
    consider the context of fairness, and also it was not a PBS case  where
    the particular general points made in EK (Ivory Coast) have  relevance.



52.  Anjum however was a PBS case.  It was said there  that  an  immigration
    interview may be  unfair,  thereby  rendering  the  resulting  decision
    unlawful, where inflexible structural adherence to  prepared  questions
    excludes  the  spontaneity  necessary  to  repeat  or  clarify  obscure
    questions and/or to probe or elucidate answers given.  It was concluded
    that on any reasonable and fair showing the interview answers  demanded
    further probing and  clarification  together  with  a  linkage  to  the
    business plan.  As Mr Ostrowski pointed out in his  skeleton  argument,
    Anjum turns upon the  interpretation  of  the  applicant's  answers  to
    questions  concerning  the  development  of  his   business   and   the
    acquisition of an additional business  rather  than  as  in  this  case
    answers to practical and specific questions about the operation of  his
    business.  The further point he makes is that in  Anjum  the  applicant
    was not given the chance to comment on correct or amplify  an  area  of
    his responses which again contrasts with this case.

53.  A further point of contrast is that there is no  recognition  in  Anjum
    of the PBS context which, as I have noted above, I consider  to  be  of
    significance.  Accordingly, I consider that it is better regarded as  a
    decision on its own facts.

54.  In examining the facts of the case in the appropriate legal  framework,
    I proceed to consider the fairness issue first,  bearing  in  mind  the
    basis upon which the decision was made and addressing the  question  of
    whether the Secretary of State's process in this case was  procedurally
    unfair.

Procedural Unfairness

55.  In my view no procedural unfairness has been made out.  The context  as
    set out above is all important.  I accept Mr Ostrowski's point that  in
    effect the applicant received  the  necessary  irreducible  minimum  of
    information he was required to be  given  from  the  structure  of  the
    points-based system and from the questions asked at  interview.   I  do
    not think the respondent's concerns about the  name  of  Avid  Support,
    Avid Support having a different trading address, Avid Support  contract
    being assigned by someone other than the director, the lack  of  online
    presence, the recruitment services point, the size of the office  point
    and the health and safety issues were points that required to be put to
    the applicant for response.  Whether it is a  matter  of  inconsistency
    with internal documents, inconsistency with external information  or  a
    conclusion  that  the  decision-maker  is  likely   to   draw   adverse
    conclusions from what was said at interview, the process that would  be
    required to meet the applicant's concept of a fair hearing would in  my
    view take the matter outside the required efficiency and speed  of  the
    PBS process.  As Mr Ostrowski argued, it would potentially  necessitate
    a series of follow-up interviews to responses that were given, which in
    my view would go outside the purposes of  the  PBS  process.   In  this
    regard I bear in mind the fact that the applicant had every opportunity
    to prepare for the interview and to bring with him whatever information
    he chose, and that  he  agreed  at  the  end  that  he  had  had  every
    opportunity to provide additional information  or  clarify  information
    given that he had understood the questions and had had the  opportunity
    to make  further  comments.   Matters  such  as  discrepancies  between
    company names and directors/managers' names, the  lack  of  any  online
    presence for Avid Support Limited, the at least  potentially  ambiguous
    nature of his answer to question 15 concerning Core Atlantic being very
    short on staff, an absence of any sign displaying his company  name  in
    contravention of regulations and his lack of any apparent awareness  of
    the need to make provision for health and safety were all points  which
    he could have anticipated might give rise to difficulty in which he was
    in a position to prepare to guard against.  The same point can be  made
    with regard to the size of the office.  It is clearly  a  small  office
    and it was not incumbent in my view  on  the  officer  to  put  to  the
    applicant the point of concern about the feasibility  of  three  people
    working in such a space.

56.   Bringing  these  matters  together,  I  consider  that  no  procedural
    unfairness has been identified in this case, bearing in  mind  the  PBS
    context, and the specific concerns of the Secretary of State.

Rationality

57.   In  essence  the  same  issues  arise  in  the  different  context  of
    rationality,  bearing  in  mind  that  the  test  requires   it   being
    established that the decision was so outrageous in defiance of logic or
    accepted moral standards that no sensible person who  had  applied  his
    mind to the question could have arrived at it (Council of Civil Service
    Unions v Minister for the Civil Service [1985] AC 374 at 410).

58.  The first point here is  the  issue  concerning  the  company  and  the
    directors/managers' names.  I should start by  saying  that  I  see  no
    materiality whatsoever to the difference between Avid  Support  Limited
    and Avid Support Ltd.  I do not understand why such a trivial point was
    taken in the decision letter.  Of more substance is the fact  that  the
    contract which the Secretary of State saw showed Avid Support Limited's
    trading address as being the Victoria Road, Chelmsford address and  the
    authorised signature  being  that  of  the  manager,  Mr  Amad  Masood.
    However, the details for Avid Support Limited at Companies  House  gave
    the Brisbane Road, Ilford, Essex address  and  the  director  as  being
    Jawad Bhatti.  The fact that the Chelmsford address is described as the
    trading address on the contract does not seem to me to be a  matter  of
    major significance.  In my view it was open to the respondent to have a
    concern about the different addresses provided and the  fact  that  the
    contract was signed by Mr Masood the manager and there was no reference
    to the director Mr Bhatti.

59.  Of further and perhaps greater  significance  is  the  absence  of  any
    online presence for Avid  Support  Limited  such  as  a  website.   The
    applicant had claimed to have conducted web design for Avid Support but
    there  was  no  evidence  of  them  having  a  web  presence  and  that
    understandably added to the concerns of the  decision-maker.   Again  I
    see no irrationality in that  regard.   It  is  purely  conjectural  to
    suggest that the site might  have  been  down  or  to  argue  that  the
    respondent could and should have provided details as  to  which  search
    engine he used and when the researches were carried out.  The point  is
    a clear one in the decision letter and it was a  legitimate  matter  of
    concern.

60.  The next point concerns what the applicant said in answer  to  question
    15 when asked what the results of his market research were and he  made
    reference among other things to Core Atlantic Limited being very  short
    on staff.  This was treated as contrasting with his answer  as  to  the
    work that he did under the contract with Core  Atlantic  which  had  no
    reference to recruiting staff.  In this regard I  think  it  was  again
    open to the respondent to be concerned as he was about the answer.   It
    is to say the least a curious answer which certainly bears no relevance
    to what he had said in answer to question 7 as to the goods or services
    his business provided to Core Atlantic.  It may only have been a clumsy
    answer, but it was the answer given and it was one which the respondent
    was entitled to regard with some concern.

61.  The next point concerns the absence of a visible sign at  the  premises
    displaying the company name.  The fact  that  the  respondent  did  not
    identify the relevant regulations that  require  direction  of  a  sign
    showing a company's name and its registered company address or wherever
    it operates in no sense in my view invalidates  the  point  made  there
    that there was, as  it  was  described  "Companies  House  legislation"
    setting out that requirement.  The applicant's response was simply that
    there was "no  sign  of  company  as  office  is  shared  called  Swiss
    Estates".  The applicant stated he was waiting for a sign to be put  up
    but he was unsure of when this would be.  Although the  first  part  of
    that is missing from the respondent's consideration  of  the  evidence,
    that is of no materiality.  Whether or not the office  was  shared  the
    legislative requirement exists, (the  Companies  (Trading  Disclosures)
    Regulations 2008, regulation 3) and  the  respondent  was  legitimately
    concerned at the failure to comply with the relevant regulation,  which
    was not irrelevant to the credibility of the business operation.

62.  The same point can be made with regard  to  the  question  put  to  the
    applicant as to what health and safety requirements he had in place  at
    the premises, to which his answer was: "None".  In my view the question
    was a simple and clear one.  The respondent was not obliged to set  out
    in any detail what health and safety requirements he was referring  to.
    Although the applicant gave greater detail when asked  at  question  42
    what rights his employees were entitled to under  employment  law,  the
    absence of any health and safety requirements in place at the  premises
    is again a matter which gave rise to understandable concern as  to  the
    genuineness of the claimed job creation.

63.  The final point, that of the size of the office  and  the  concerns  of
    the officer as whether it was feasible for two employees and a director
    realistically to conduct work in such a space,  this  is  a  matter  of
    lesser significance.  It was a judgment based not on  measurements  but
    simply on a view taken, bearing in mind  that  the  applicant  said  in
    interview that his employees worked on the shop site  but  occasionally
    worked from home and therefore it was reasonable to  infer  that  three
    people would be using the room.  As I say it is not a major point,  but
    it is not a point entirely lacking in substance and  was  part  of  the
    overall consideration.  I bear  in  mind  Mr  Malik's  point  that  the
    decision-maker only specifically addressed sub-paragraphs (i), (iv) and
    (v) of paragraph 255DE(l). It was however made clear at page 2 of 8  of
    the decision letter that the respondent had  considered  the  following
    factors and it can be taken from that consideration that there were  no
    concerns about the matters that were not specifically  addressed,  i.e.
    sub-paragraphs (ii), (iii), (vi) and (vii).  That in my view does  not,
    in any sense, invalidate the decision.  The respondent reminded himself
    at page 6 of 8  that  the  genuineness  test  had  not  been  met  when
    assessing  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  the  points  listed  at
    paragraph 245DD(l).

64.  In conclusion, I consider that the irrationality  challenge,  like  the
    fairness challenge is not made out.  The  respondent's  decision  taken
    overall represents a conclusion on the evidence in the context  of  the
    correct legal test that has not been shown to be irrational, bearing in
    mind in particular the high threshold for irrationality  laid  down  in
    the case law.

65.  It follows that this application is refused.  I will hear  the  parties
    on costs and any ancillary matters at the handing down of the  judgment
    unless such matters can be agreed in advance.~~~~0~~~~
