
                                                                     UTIJR 6

                                                                JR/4527/2019

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                       The Queen on the application of
                        AO (Anonymity decision made)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                  Before the Honourable Mr Justice Johnson


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Shu  Shin  Luh,  of  Counsel,  instructed   by
Deighton Pierce Glynn Solicitors, on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Julie
Anderson, of Counsel, instructed by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London  on  12  March
2020.

Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

[pic]

                                  Judgment:

1. The Applicant is a victim of trafficking. The Secretary of State  decided
   not to grant her "Discretionary Leave" ("DL") to remain in the  UK  under
   the Home Office's policy "Discretionary leave considerations for  victims
   of modern slavery."  The  Applicant  argues  that  the  approach  to  the
   decision was legally flawed. She seeks an order quashing the decision and
   requiring the Secretary of State to re-take the decision.

2. The Applicant was represented by Ms Luh, the Secretary  of  State  by  Ms
   Anderson. I am grateful to both of them for  their  clear,  focussed  and
   helpful submissions.

The facts

3. The Applicant is a citizen of Nigeria, aged 37. From a young age she  was
   required to work as a child domestic servant  in  order  to  support  her
   family. She was sexually exploited and raped by  the  man  for  whom  she
   worked. She was forced by her family to undergo Female Genital Mutilation
   at the age of 15.

4. The Applicant's family arranged for her to be married to a man in  return
   for financial support. He brought her to the UK in 2010 but abandoned her
   at the airport, A woman offered her help but  instead  subjected  her  to
   domestic servitude  without  pay,  and  controlled  her  by  beating  and
   threatening her and locking her in the house. She was subjected to sexual
   advances by the woman's husband. She escaped and  slept  rough.  She  was
   raped and had her belongings stolen. Whilst street homeless she met a man
   who is now her husband. The couple have three children.

5. The Applicant claimed asylum. She gave the account that  I  have  briefly
   summarised above. The asylum claim was refused because it did not raise a
   ground for asylum [pic]under the Refugee Convention.  The  Applicant  was
   not, at that stage, referred to the National Referral  Mechanism  ("NRM")
   in order for an assessment to be made as to whether she was a  victim  of
   trafficking. It was the Salvation Army, rather than those responsible for
   considering  the   Applicant's   asylum   claim,   that   realised   that
   consideration should be given to this issue. It referred the Applicant to
   the NRM in July 2015. The Home Office made a  decision  on  the  referral
   three years later, in June 2018. It decided that the Applicant was not  a
   victim of trafficking. The Applicant challenged that decision by  way  of
   judicial review. The proceedings were  compromised  by  a  consent  order
   dated 30 April 2019. Under the terms of  that  order,  the  Secretary  of
   State agreed to withdraw the decision of June 2018, the Applicant  agreed
   to submit and further representations and evidence, and the Secretary  of
   State agreed to issue a new decision.

6. Following that consent order the  Applicant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
   Home Office and said that because there was no available  public  funding
   to meet the  costs  of  preparing  further  representations,  no  further
   representations would be submitted.

7. On 5 June 2019 (so 4 years after the referral)  the  Secretary  of  State
   accepted that there "are conclusive grounds to accept [the Applicant]  is
   a victim of modern slavery". No reasons were given in the decision letter
   for that finding, but there was nothing to indicate that the  Applicant's
   account of her background was disputed in any way. The Secretary of State
   has disclosed in these proceedings the minute which clearly explains  the
   decision making.  That  minute  shows  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
   Applicant has "been subjected to domestic  and  sexual  exploitation  and
   that [she was] subjected  to  these  circumstances  by  virtue  of  human
   trafficking.".

Medical treatment in UK

8. The Applicant has received treatment in the UK for  symptoms  of  anxiety
   and post-traumatic stress  disorder.  In  a  letter  in  October  2015  a
   counsellor wrote that the Applicant had "overwhelming memories  which  in
   my professional opinion, show all the signs of post-traumatic stress." In
   October 2017 a senior  practitioner  in  specialist  community  perinatal
   mental  health  services  referred  to  the  Applicant's  "disclosure  of
   suicidal thoughts, flashbacks  and  anxiety  ...  the  symptoms  she  was
   experiencing  were  longstanding  and  consistent  with  her  history  of
   significant trauma.". In November 2017 a Consultant in Fetal  Medicine  &
   Obstetrics referred to  "a  background  of  known  post-traumatic  stress
   disorder and anxiety.". In a letter sent to the Applicant  a  few  months
   after she had given birth  a  senior  practitioner  wrote  "psychological
   therapy to address your trauma history and the distressing flashbacks and
   anxiety your experience in relation to this is  likely  to  be  the  most
   appropriate form of treatment for you. Unfortunately this type of therapy
   is not recommended in the early months after having  a  baby  as  it  can
   destabilise  mental  health  in  the  early  days."   In  July  2018  the
   Applicant's GP wrote that she suffered:

         "from  symptoms  of  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  since  being
         sexually  abused  in  Nigeria,  plus  being  a  victim  of  genital
         mutilation, plus she was  sexually  assaulted  in  2010.  She  also
         suffers severe depression and is  currently  suicidal  since  being
         threatened  with  deportation  to  Nigeria   and   flashbacks   and
         nightmares have increased, I am writing in support of the  decision
         on her case being challenged as I  believe  her  life  will  be  in
         danger if she is. She takes medication and has engaged with therapy
         but PTSD is extremely difficult to treat and cure and triggers need
         to be avoided, one of which is deportation to Nigeria."

9. In October 2018 the Applicant's GP wrote that  she  "suffers  with  long-
   term anxiety and depression and has  symptoms  of  Post-Traumatic  Stress
   Disorder.  She  suffers  with  low  mood,  poor  functioning  at   times,
   nightmares and flashbacks."

The decision to refuse DL

10. On the same day that the Secretary of State  found  that  the  Applicant
   was a victim of trafficking, a decision was made (by  the  same  decision
   maker) to refuse to grant the Applicant DL.  Leaving aside  the  question
   of assisting police with their enquiries, or seeking compensation in  the
   courts (potential grounds for granting DL that are not applicable  here),
   the decision addressed three broad issues: the Applicant's medical needs,
   the risk of re-trafficking, and the needs of  the  Applicant's  children.
   Broadly, the  Applicant  advances  three  grounds  of  challenge  to  the
   Secretary of State's decision. The three grounds of  challenge  focus  on
   the  Secretary  of  State's  response  to  each  of  these  three  issues
   respectively.

11. As to the Applicant's medical needs the decision  maker  noted  evidence
   that indicated that the Applicant had suffered from symptoms  of  anxiety
   and post-traumatic stress disorder and that she had received counselling.
   The letter continued:

         "however there is no available evidence to suggest that your client
         has been diagnosed with PTSD.

         There is no supporting information to indicate that your client  is
         continuing to receive the above listed treatment Furthermore,  such
         treatment is available in your client's home country.

         It  is  noted  that  medical  treatment  is  available  in  Nigeria
         (http://apps.who.int/medicinedocs/documents/s16549e/sl6549e.pdf...)
         and that  Nigeria  is  a  country  in  which  psychiatric  care  is
         available,  there  are  "8  psychiatric  hospitals  and  about   24
         hospitals with a psychiatric unit" it is also noted that there  are
         numerous private clinics which offer access to  psychiatric  health
         (https://www.mentallyaware.org/cost-of-psychiatric-care-in-
         nigeria[pic]...)."

12. On the question of the risk of re-trafficking the letter stated[pic]

         "It has been concluded that there is  no  realistic  risk  of  your
         client being re-trafficked or becoming a victim of  modern  slavery
         again if she were to return to Nigeria. The objective  evidence  is
         that Nigeria is one where  authorities  are  willing  and  able  to
         provide assistance to your client as  a  citizen  should  you  need
         [pic]their support and protection-

13. The letter then set  out  a  long  unattributed  quote  (albeit  without
   quotation marks and without  identifying  the  source)  from  a  document
   dealing with the protection of trafficking victims in Nigeria.

14. In relation to the Applicant's children the letter stated:

         "While it is considered that your children have been fiving in  the
         UK for 1 year 8 months, 5 years 11 months and 3 years 9 months,  it
         is not considered that these lengths of time are substantial.  This
         means that your children have not had sufficient time to  establish
         any significant ties within the UK It is further noted  that  there
         is access to education and medical treatment in Nigeria.

15. Since the decision a formal diagnosis has been made that  the  Applicant
   is suffering from PTSD.



Legal and policy framework

16. The Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in  Human
   Beings ("the Convention") has, as its paramount objectives, "respect  for
   victims' rights; protection of victims and action to  combat  trafficking
   in human beings" (see the  preamble  to  the  Convention).  Its  purposes
   include (see article 1(1)(b)):

         "to protect the human rights of the victims of trafficking,  design
         a comprehensive framework for  the  protection  and  assistance  of
         victims ..."

17. Article 12 requires state parties to adopt measures  to  assist  victims
   in their physical, psychological and social recovery. Article 13 requires
   the adoption of a "reflection [pic]period" of at least 30 days  in  cases
   where there are reasonable grounds to believe that the person is a victim
   of trafficking. This period is to enable the person concerned "to recover
   and escape the influences of the traffickers and/or to take  an  informed
   decision on cooperating with  the  competent  authorities".  During  this
   period the person may not be forcibly removed from the country,

18. Article 14 states:

         "Article 14 - Residence permit

         1.   Each Party shall issue a renewable residence permit to victims
         [if]:

             a.   The competent authority  considers  that  their  stay  is
                  necessary owing to their personal situation;

             ..."

19. An Explanatory Report to the Convention explains:

         "The personal situation requirement takes in a range of situations,
         depending on whether it is the victim's safety,  state  of  health,
         family situation or some other factor which has to  be  taken  into
         account."

20. The Secretary of State has a general power to grant leave to  remain  in
   the UK to any person in the UK who is not a British citizen (see  section
   3(1)(b) of the Immigration Act 1971, read with section 4(1)). In the case
   of victims of trafficking she seeks to exercise that power  (by  granting
   DL) in a way that is consistent with the Convention.

21. In PK (Ghana) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2018]  EWCA
   Civ 98 the Court of Appeal found that the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
   guidance in relation to victims of trafficking failed properly to reflect
   the obligation imposed by article 14(1)(a) of  the  Convention  (see  per
   Hickinbottom LJ at [61]). This was because the  Secretary  of  State  had
   adopted a test of only granting DL when the  personal  [pic]circumstances
   were "compelling". Instead, the  test  to  be  adopted  was  whether  the
   personal circumstances were such that a grant of DL was necessary in  the
   light of, and with a view to achieving, the objectives of the  Convention
   (see per Hickinbottom LJ at [44]).

22. In the light of the decision  in  PK  (Ghana)  the  Secretary  of  State
   promulgated  the  policy  that  regulated  the  decision  in  this  case.
   "Discretionary leave considerations for victims of modern  slavery".  The
   version of that policy that applied at the date  of  the  decision  under
   challenge was published on 10 September 2018.  This states:

         "When deciding whether a grant of leave  is  necessary  under  this
         criterion an individualised human rights and children  safeguarding
         legislation-based approach should be adopted. The aim should be  to
         protect and assist the victim [pic]and  to  safeguard  their  human
         rights. In seeking to do so decision makers should primarily:

           . assess whether a grant of leave  to  a  recognised  victim  is
             necessary  for  the  UK  to  meet  its  objective  under   the
             Trafficking Convention to provide protection and assistance to
             that victim, owing to their personal situation

         It is not possible to cover all the circumstances in which  DL  may
         be appropriate because this depends on  the  totality  of  evidence
         available  in  individual  cases.  However,   considerations   when
         deciding if DL is  appropriate  might  include  (the  list  is  not
         intended to be exhaustive):

           . whether the person may be eligible  for  a  more  advantageous
             form of leave, for instance, asylum or humanitarian protection

           . whether leave is necessary because there is a significant  and
             real risk in light of objective evidence that the  person  may
             be re-trafficked or become a victim of modern slavery again  -
             in such cases consideration should also be given as to whether
             the risk is greater in the UK or in the person's home country

           . whether, if returned home, the person would face harm or  ill-
             treatment from those who first brought  them  to  the  UK,  or
             exploited them in their home country

           . whether  on  the  objective  information  and  evidence  in  a
             particular case the receiving state have the  willingness  and
             ability to provide through its legal system a reasonable level
             of protection to the person, if returned  to  their  care  (it
             would be rare for an individual to be able to  rely  on  there
             being an absence  of  sufficient  protection  for  victims  of
             modern slavery in an EU member state)

         ...

         Additionally, a person  may  provide  evidence  from  a  healthcare
         professional that they need  medical  treatment.  In  these  cases,
         consider whether it is necessary for the treatment to  be  provided
         in the UK. In terms of needing to stay  in  the  UK  to  have  such
         treatment you may wish to  consider  that  the  UK's  international
         obligations do not extend to a requirement that treatment  must  be
         provided by specialists in trafficking,  or  that  it  be  targeted
         towards one aspect of an individual's needs  (the  consequences  of
         trafficking) as opposed to his or her overall  psychological  needs
         as set out in the case of EM v SSHD. In  brief,  the  support  duty
         calls for  the  provision  of  support,  not  that  the  person  is
         supported until they achieve full physical, psychological or social
         recovery Leave  granted  to  allow  for  medical  treatment  should
         normally be granted for the duration of the course of treatment  or
         up to 30 months, whichever is shorter."

Framework for reviewing the Secretary of State's decision

23. The power to grant DL rests with  the  Secretary  of  State  alone,  and
   certainly not with the Court. The Applicant seeks judicial review of  the
   Secretary of State's decision. She readily accepts  that  it  is  not  an
   appeal on the merits, that it was for the Secretary of State to make  the
   decision, and it is not for the Court to substitute its own  view  as  to
   whether DL ought to have been granted. The issue is whether the Secretary
   of State made any public law error. The Applicant  does,  however,  argue
   that the principles of judicial review are flexible and that the level of
   rigour that public law requires of decision makers depends on the context
   (see R v Secretary  of  State  for  [pic]the  Home  Department  ex  parte
   Bugdaycay [1987] AC 514 per Lord Bridge at 531, and Kennedy v Information
   Commissioner [2015] AC 455 per Lord Mance JSC at [51]).

24. Here, she relies on two aspects of the context. The first  is  that  the
   Applicant has been accepted to be a victim of trafficking. The purpose of
   the Secretary of State's policy is to achieve the aims of the Convention,
   including protecting her from  further  trafficking.  At  stake  are  the
   Applicant's rights not to be held in slavery  or  servitude,  not  to  be
   required to perform forced or compulsory labour, and not to be subject to
   sexual assault. In this type of context decision  makers  must  "show  by
   their reasoning that every factor  which  might  tell  in  favour  of  an
   applicant has been properly taken into account" - see R (YH) v  Secretary
   of State for the Home [pic]Department [2010] EWCA Civ 116 per Carnwath LJ
   at [24]. This is well-established in the particular case  of  trafficking
   and the prohibition of slavery and forced labour under article 4  of  the
   European Convention on Human Rights - see R (SF (Sri Lanka)) v  Secretary
   of State for the Home Department [2015] EWHC 2705[pic]

         "The  non-derogable  right  set  out  in  Article  4  is  of   such
         fundamental importance that gateway decisions,  such  as  the  June
         2014 decision, as to whether a person is a  victim  of  trafficking
         and so entitled to  the  protection  which  the  State  affords  to
         victims requires particular attention  and  rigorous  scrutiny.  In
         relation to Article 10  of  the  CAT,  as  I  have  explained,  the
         Explanatory Memorandum states (so far as material and with emphasis
         added) that: 'Failure to identify a  trafficking  victim  correctly
         will probably mean that victim's continuing to be denied his or her
         [pic]fundamental rights..'"

25. That was concerned with the question  of  identification  of  whether  a
   person was a victim of trafficking. There is  no  principled  reason  for
   taking a less rigorous approach in cases concerned with the steps  to  be
   taken  to  protect  those  who  have  been  identified  as  a  victim  of
   trafficking.

26. The second aspect of the context is that the decision was  made  without
   any input from the Applicant.  She  was  not  explicitly  asked  to  make
   representations on the specific question of whether DL should be  granted
   under the Secretary of State's policy, and nor did she do so. This  meant
   that the Secretary of State was under a heightened duty  to  ensure  that
   all relevant matters were taken into account.

27. Ms Anderson correctly points out that there  was  considerable  material
   before the Secretary of State. Moreover, the Applicant had  been  legally
   represented in the antecedent judicial review  claim.  Those  proceedings
   were compromised by an order that  enabled  the  Applicant  to  make  any
   further representations within a prescribed period, and for the Secretary
   of State thereafter to decide whether  the  Applicant  was  a  victim  of
   trafficking. It will have been known to the Applicant's lawyers that  the
   Secretary of State would likely make a decision on DL at the same time as
   making a decision on  whether  she  was  a  victim  of  trafficking.  She
   therefore had every opportunity to ensure that all matters on  which  she
   wished to rely were drawn to the Secretary of State's attention.

28. I accept Ms Anderson's submissions so far  as  they  go.  The  fact  is,
   however, that the Applicant did not make any representations on the issue
   and she was not explicitly invited to do so.  Her  lawyers  had  made  it
   clear that  they  were  not  in  a  position  to  assist  her.  In  those
   circumstances there was a need for some particular care in assessing  the
   material and drawing inferences from evidential  gaps,  without  inviting
   comment from the Applicant: absence of evidence  on  a  point  could  not
   necessarily be taken as reliable positive evidence that the  point  could
   not be established.

29. Accordingly, I accept Ms Luh's submissions that both  of  these  aspects
   of the context should influence  the  level  of  rigour  that  is  to  be
   expected of the Secretary of State's decision-making.

Ground 1: Approach to Applicant's mental health

Argument

30.  There  is  a  difference  between  the  parties  as  to   the   correct
   construction of that part of the  decision  letter  which  addresses  the
   Applicant's mental health. Ms Luh says that the reasons for  refusing  to
   recognise that the Applicant's medical condition was  such  that  it  was
   necessary to grant DL were that (1) there was no evidence  that  she  had
   been diagnosed with PTSD, (2) there  was  no  supporting  information  to
   indicate that the Applicant  was  continuing  to  receive  treatment  for
   anxiety and PTSD, and (3) such treatment was available in Nigeria,

31. As to (1) and (2) she argues that these factors were not  pre-requisites
   for a grant of DL, and that if they had been critical  the  Secretary  of
   State should have made further enquiries, The Applicant was  subsequently
   diagnosed with PTSD and further enquiries as to whether  the  Applicant's
   symptoms  amounted  to  PTSD  would  therefore  have  established   that.
   Moreover, there was  a  particular  reason  why  the  Applicant  had  not
   received treatment (namely that it was medically contraindicated  in  the
   perinatal period). Further enquiries could have established that.  As  to
   the question of the availability of treatment in Nigeria she argues  that
   the Secretary of State ignored relevant information and took  account  of
   irrelevant material.

32. For her part; Ms Anderson says that the observation that  the  Applicant
   had not  been  diagnosed  with  PTSD  was  merely  a  factually  accurate
   observation as to the state of the evidence, rather than a  free-standing
   reason for refusing DL. The fact that there was no supporting information
   that the Applicant was  continuing  to  receive  treatment  was  relevant
   because otherwise there may have  been  a  risk  of  [pic]interrupting  a
   continuing course of treatment and that  would  have  been  a  reason  in
   favour of DL.  This  was  therefore  indicative  of  the  decision  maker
   positively considering different routes by which DL might be granted.  On
   analysis, there is nothing to indicate that the Applicant's medical needs
   arise out of the trafficking rather than sexual  abuse.  The  purpose  of
   granting DL is to enable a trafficking victim to  achieve  a  minimum  of
   psychological stability,  not  to  entitle  a  right  to  access  medical
   services  in  the  UK  for  the  treatment  of  symptoms  that  are   not
   attributable to trafficking.

Discussion

33. Ms Anderson is obviously right that  the  Secretary  of  State's  policy
   does not give rise to a general right to access medical services  in  the
   UK. The fact that a victim of trafficking happens to have  medical  needs
   that can be better treated in the UK than elsewhere does not  in  and  of
   itself mean that a grant  of  DL  is  necessary  in  order  to  meet  the
   objectives of the Convention, particularly if those medical needs do  not
   arise out of trafficking. Here, however, there was no evidence to suggest
   that the Applicant's medical problems were unrelated to the  trafficking.
   On the contrary, there was evidence that they were caused,  at  least  in
   significant part, by sexual abuse. The sexual abuse could not  rationally
   be regarded as being independent of the trafficking. It was  an  integral
   part of the trafficking. When recognising that the Applicant was a victim
   of  trafficking  the  decision-maker  identified  the  purpose   of   the
   trafficking as  being  sexual  exploitation.  Moreover,  nothing  in  the
   Secretary of State's decision suggested that the Secretary of  State  had
   concluded that the Applicant's medical problems  were  unrelated  to  the
   trafficking. If that had been the basis for the decision  then  it  would
   have been necessary to say so.

34. Nor do I accept that the purpose of a grant of DL is simply to enable  a
   victim to "achieve a minimum of  psychological  stability".  That  phrase
   does not appear in the Secretary of State's policy. It is taken from  the
   Explanatory Report in relation to article  13  of  the  Convention.  That
   provision concerns the "recovery  and  reflection  [pic]period"  that  is
   needed to enable a suspected victim of trafficking to achieve  a  minimum
   of psychological stability so as to enable them to "escape the  influence
   of traffickers and/or to take an informed decision  on  cooperating  with
   the competent authorities". It therefore has a narrow focus and  purpose.
   The aim of a grant of DL is broader, and  is  explicitly  stated  in  the
   Secretary of State's policy to "protect and  assist  the  victim  and  to
   safeguard their human rights". That said, I  entirely  accept  a  broader
   contextual submission made by Ms Anderson that there  is  no  presumption
   that victims of  trafficking  require  a  residence  permit,  or  that  a
   residence permit is intended as a first step  towards  migration  to  the
   host state.

35. The question of whether the Applicant had PTSD  could  not,  in  and  of
   itself, provide a basis for refusing DL.  Ms  Anderson  did  not  suggest
   otherwise. She recognised that if the Applicant's medical  condition  was
   such that it was necessary to grant DL in order to achieve  the  purposes
   of the Convention, then the absence of a formal diagnosis should not make
   any difference. I agree. Moreover, there  was  ample  evidence  that  the
   Applicant had suffered from  symptoms  that  are  associated  with  post-
   traumatic stress disorder, and nothing to suggest that her  symptoms  did
   not meet the threshold required for a  diagnosis.  If  the  Secretary  of
   State had sought to justify the decision to refuse DL on the basis of  an
   absence of a diagnosis of PTSD then  it  would  have  been  necessary  to
   engage with Ms Luh's argument that the duty  to  make  further  enquiries
   necessitated, in the context of this case, a duty to enquire into whether
   the Applicant's symptoms did in fact merit  such  diagnosis.  As  it  is,
   however, the issue falls away once it is recognised (as is common ground)
   that the absence of a formal diagnosis could  not  provide  a  basis  for
   refusing DL.

36. The Secretary of State's  observation  that  there  was  "no  supporting
   information to indicate that [the Applicant] is continuing to receive ...
   treatment" was factually accurate. It did not, however, follow  that  the
   Applicant was not receiving treatments The Secretary  of  State  did  not
   know what the position was, either way.  The most recent  evidence  cited
   in the decision letter pre-dated that  decision  by  19  months.  In  the
   context of this case it could not safely be concluded,  on  the  material
   before the Secretary of State, that the Applicant could be  removed  from
   the  UK  without  interrupting  treatment.  Insofar  as  the  Applicant's
   treatment had in fact been interrupted that was because of the  birth  of
   the child - it did not mean that continuing treatment was unnecessary.

37. The only remaining reason given by  the  Secretary  of  State  was  that
   treatment was  available  in  Nigeria.  In  principle,  this  could  have
   provided a sustainable basis for refusing DL (so far as  the  Applicant's
   medical condition is concerned) if the treatment available in Nigeria was
   sufficient to achieve the aims of the Convention. No doubt  there  was  a
   wealth of authoritative material available to the Secretary of  State  as
   to the quality of medical treatment in Nigeria. She chose to  rely  on  a
   "blog".  [pic]I intend no criticism of the blogger (who could have had no
   inkling that their post would be relied on by the UK's Home Secretary) in
   observing that the article does not cite any  original  sources.  It  has
   been cited in a  highly  selective  manner.  It  is  relied  on  for  the
   proposition that there are 8 psychiatric hospitals and 24 hospitals  with
   a psychiatric unit in Nigeria. Yet the very same sentence observes (in  a
   passage that was not quoted) that this is "for a population of almost 200
   million" and that there  are  "very  few  professionals  trained  in  the
   field". In other words, the point being  made  was  not  that  there  was
   sufficient mental health provision in Nigeria. It was the opposite.

38. The Secretary of State also cited a  World  Health  Organisation  report
   for the proposition that medicinal treatment was  available  in  Nigeria.
   The report does indeed make good that proposition. I do not attach  great
   significance to the fact that it does not explicitly mention the  precise
   medication that the Applicant has found to be the most effective.  As  Ms
   Anderson points out it does not purport to give an exhaustive list of all
   the medication that is available, and generic equivalents might  be  used
   in place of proprietary brands. However, the report does state (again  in
   a passage not referenced by the Secretary of State) that "[m]edicines are
   unaffordable to the majority of Nigerians".

39. If  the  Secretary  of  State  rationally  concluded  that  the  medical
   sequalae from the Applicant's trafficking could be  sufficiently  treated
   in Nigeria then the Secretary  of  State  would  have  been  entitled  to
   conclude that the Applicant's mental health did not require a grant of DL
   (subject to the further point raised under ground 3 below). However,  the
   evidence relied on by the Secretary  of  State  did  not  come  close  to
   providing a rational basis for concluding that this was the case. It  was
   necessary to consider the particular circumstances of the Applicant  (who
   came from a rural area, a day's journey from the nearest  city).  It  was
   necessary to consider her particular medical needs. It was then necessary
   then to assess whether the Applicant would be able  to  access  treatment
   that would be sufficient to provide  her  with  the  assistance  that  is
   required by the Convention and contemplated by the Secretary  of  State's
   policy

40. For these reasons I find that the decision  was  flawed  on  public  law
   grounds.

Ground 2: Approach to risk of re-trafficking

Argument

41. Ms Luh argues that it is not necessary to show a risk of  re-trafficking
   in order to be granted a residence permit. That is so.  However,  leaving
   aside categories of case that do not here apply, DL will only be  granted
   where that is necessary owing to the victim's personal  circumstances.  A
   risk of re-trafficking is one factor which might necessitate DL.  It  was
   therefore entirely appropriate for the Secretary of State to consider the
   issue. As Ms Anderson points out, if the Secretary of State had concluded
   that there was a  risk  of  re-trafficking  then  that  would  have  been
   relevant  to  the  decision.  Conversely,  if  the  Secretary  of   State
   rationally concluded that  there  was  no  risk  of  re-trafficking  then
   (subject to the other factors that were in the mix) DL would not fall  to
   be granted on this basis. So Ms Luh's preliminary point does not go  very
   far.

42. Ms Luh's substantive point was that an assessment of  the  risk  of  re-
   trafficking required the structured  analysis  identified  by  the  Upper
   Tribunal in HD (Trafficked women) Nigeria CG [2016] UKUT 00454 (IAC). She
   contended that here the Secretary of State had simply relied  on  generic
   evidence and that the level of analysis fell far short of  that  required
   in HD. Ms Anderson responded that the Applicant's position (which is what
   has to be considered under the policy) was very different from  when  she
   was in Nigeria. Then she was a young single woman in  the  grips  of  the
   exploitative, controlling and abusive behaviour of her family.   Now  she
   is a married woman with a family of her own and has experience of seeking
   assistance from NGOs. She was unable to  demonstrate  that  her  pervious
   abusers were still alive or that they would be able to identify her,  and
   anyway she could go to another part of Nigeria.

Discussion

43. The Secretary of State's arguments amount to an invitation to engage  in
   a merits based evaluation that is not appropriate in  these  proceedings.
   It is necessary to review the decision taken by the Secretary  of  State,
   rather than to undertake my own assessment of the level of risk that  the
   Applicant faces on return to Nigeria. If the Secretary of State had based
   her decision on the  Applicant's  different  personal  circumstances  now
   compared to the time when she left Nigeria then it would be necessary  to
   assess that reasoning. However, that was not the approach that was taken.
   The decision that there was no risk of re-trafficking was not said to  be
   due to the  fact  that  the  Applicant  was  now  a  married  woman  with
   experience of engaging with NGOs. Rather, it  was  simply  asserted  that
   there was no realistic risk of the Applicant being re-trafficked, and  an
   unattributed generic report was quoted as to the  efforts  taken  by  the
   authorities in Nigeria to protect and assist victims of trafficking.

44. In HD  (Trafficked  women)  Nigeria  CG  [2016]  UKUT  00454  (IAC)  the
   Tribunal found that there is no  general  risk  of  a  woman  trafficking
   victim being re-trafficked after returning to Nigeria. The word "general"
   needs to be given some emphasise The Tribunal  also  emphasised  that  it
   will be  necessary  in  any  individual  case  to  undertake  a  detailed
   assessment  of  the  particular  and   individual   characteristics.   It
   identified some of the factors to be considered - see at paragraphs  190-
   191:

         "190.    Whether a woman returning  to  Nigeria  having  previously
         been trafficked to the United Kingdom faces on return a  real  risk
         of being trafficked afresh will require a  detailed  assessment  of
         her particular and individual characteristics.  Factors  that  will
         indicate an enhanced risk of being trafficked include; but are  not
         limited to:

             a.   The absence of a supportive family willing  to  take  her
             back into the family unit;

             b.   Visible or discernible characteristics of  vulnerability,
             such as having no social support network to assist her, no  or
             little  education  or   vocational   skills,   mental   health
             conditions, which may well have been caused by experiences  of
             abuse  when  originally  trafficked,  material  and  financial
             deprivation such as to mean that she will be living in poverty
             or in conditions of destitution;

             c.   The fact that a woman was previously trafficked is likely
             to mean that she was then identified  by  the  traffickers  as
             someone disclosing characteristics of vulnerability such as to
             give rise to a real risk of being trafficked. On returning  to
             Nigeria,  it  is  probable  that  those   characteristics   of
             vulnerability will be  enhanced  further  in  the  absence  of
             factors that suggest otherwise.

         191. Factors  that  indicate  a  lower  risk  of  being  trafficked
         include; but are not limited to:

             a.   The availability of a supportive family willing  to  take
             the woman back into the family unit;

             b.    The  fact  that  the  woman  has  acquired  skills   and
             experiences since leaving Nigeria that  better  equip  her  to
             have access  to  a  livelihood  on  return  to  Nigeria,  thus
             enabling her to provide for herself."

45. In order to assess whether the  Applicant  was  at  risk  of  being  re-
   trafficked it was necessary to engage with these types of  factors.  They
   were relevant considerations that fell to be taken into  account.   There
   is a generic assertion in the letter that careful consideration had  been
   given to the Applicant's circumstance, but  there  is  no  evidence  that
   these factors were considered.

46. For that reason I agree that the  decision  was  flawed  on  public  law
   grounds for these further reasons.

Ground 3: Approach to risk of suicide and family[pic]

47. Ms Luh further argued that the Secretary of State failed to address  the
   risk of suicide that was raised in some of the letters  from  clinicians.
   She also contended that the Secretary of State had failed sufficiently to
   address the best interests of the Applicant's children.  Their  interests
   fell to be considered in the context of a mother whose  already  impaired
   mental health was likely to deteriorate further  as  a  result  of  being
   removed to Nigeria.

48. Ms Anderson contended that this ground relied on  the  allegations  that
   were advanced under grounds  one  and  two  and  that  it  added  nothing
   material, and that anyway these factors could be advanced in the  context
   of a claim for humanitarian protection.

49.  I  agree  that  these  factors  might  be  relevant  to  a  claim   for
   humanitarian  protection.  If  the  Secretary  of  State  considers  that
   humanitarian protection should be granted then (as the policy implies) it
   may not then be necessary to consider DL.  That is  because  humanitarian
   protection  is  a  "more  advantageous  form  of  leave"  than  DL.    In
   [pic]particular, it lasts for longer (5 years rather than 30 months), and
   it more naturally and speedily leads to a claim for settlement  (after  5
   years rather than  10  years).   But  that  does  not  mean  that  (where
   humanitarian has not  been  granted)  factors  relevant  to  humanitarian
   protection may permissibly be left out of account when  assessing  if  DL
   should be granted.  There  is  the  potential  for  considerable  overlap
   between claims for DL and humanitarian protection, but they each fall  to
   be considered on their own merits according to the  differing  legal  and
   policy frameworks. Ms Anderson did not suggest  otherwise,  and  accepted
   that the Applicant's psychiatric health  and  family  position  could  be
   relevant to consideration of DL, even though they were also  relevant  to
   questions of humanitarian protection.

50. I do, however, agree that ground 3 flows from the  underlying  complaint
   that the Secretary of State failed to address the Applicant's  individual
   personal circumstances as required under her own policy.  That underlying
   complaint is well-founded for the reasons I have  given  in  relation  to
   grounds 1 and 2. That being the case it  is  not  necessary  to  consider
   ground 3 further.

Section 31(2A)(a) Senior Courts Act 1981

51. The Secretary of State relies on the requirement  of  section  31(2A)(a)
   of the Senior Courts Act 1981 that relief be  refused  if  it  is  highly
   likely that the outcome would not have been substantially different if  a
   lawful decision had been made. Here; I have found that the  Secretary  of
   State  failed  to  address  factors  about   the   Applicant's   specific
   circumstances that were relevant to the decision.  The  impact  of  those
   factors was highly fact-sensitive. They do not all go one  way:  compare,
   for example; paragraphs 190 and 191 of HD and their  application  to  the
   Applicant's case.  These are  matters  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
   assess. I do not consider that it is  highly  likely  that  the  decision
   would have been the same if these matters had been assessed.

Outcome

52. Accordingly,  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  not  to  grant  the
   Applicant DL was flawed on public law grounds. The Applicant's claim  for
   judicial review is allowed[pic]



Order

53. I therefore make an Order quashing the  Respondent's  decision  dated  5
   June 2019 to refuse to grant discretionary leave to  the  Applicant,  and
   requiring  that  a  new  decision  be  made  as  to  whether   to   grant
   discretionary leave to the Applicant.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

54. I refuse permission to appeal. I do not consider that  an  appeal  would
   have a real prospect of success of that there  is  any  other  compelling
   reason why an appeal should be heard. Any application for  permission  to
   appeal must be made by  filing  an  appellant's  notice  with  the  Civil
   Appeals Office of the Court of Appeal within 28 days  of  the  date  that
   this decision was sent to the parties.

Costs

55. The Respondent shall pay the Applicant's  costs  of  the  claim,  to  be
   assessed if not agreed.


Signed:
         Mr Justice Johnson
         13 March 2020




Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:



Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only.  Any party who wishes to appeal should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


