
                                                                     UTIJR15

                                                                JR/4617/2017

                               Upper Tribunal
                    Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                     Notice of Decision/Order/Directions




                       The Queen on the application of

                         Gudivara Prem Prashanth Rao

                                  Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent






 Decision and Directions of Mrs Justice Moulder sitting as an Upper Tribunal
                                    Judge


Upon hearing counsel for the claimant and counsel for the respondent at a
hearing at Field House, Bream's Building, London EC4 1DZ on 22 January
2020;
and upon reading the witness statement filed and served on behalf of the
Secretary of State dated 29 January 2020 and the written submissions filed
at the direction of the court on behalf of each party subsequent to that
witness statement.

It is ordered:

   1. The application for judicial review is dismissed.


   2. The respondent shall pay 50% of the claimant's costs of the
      application for judicial review.

Reasons:

   1. The claimant now accepts in the light of the witness statement on
      behalf of the respondent dated 29 January 2020 that the judicial
      review claim is academic.


   2. As to costs it is submitted for the claimant that the claim was only
      academic once the respondent set out its position following the
      hearing in the witness statement dated 29 January 2020.


   3. The respondent submitted (in her written submissions after the
      hearing) that she is entitled to her costs since (inter alia) the
      matter was academic once the decision in Ahsan [2017] EWCA Civ 2009
      was handed down.


   4. Following the decision in Ahsan in December 2017 and an application to
      appeal to the Court of Appeal for permission in these proceedings, an
      order was made by consent for permission for judicial review in this
      claim. The proceedings cannot therefore have been academic merely by
      reason of the decision in Ahsan or such an order would not have been
      made.


   5. Once the claimant made a human rights claim and that was refused on 7
      August 2019, the claimant had an in country right of appeal. At that
      point the claimant's judicial review on the basis that an out of
      country remedy was an inadequate remedy was academic.


   6. Although it was submitted for the claimant at the hearing that the
      claimant was not seeking to rely on new grounds, the claimant in
      effect sought to rely on a submission that the "in country" statutory
      appeal was inadequate because a period of only 60 days would be
      granted. No application was made to amend the grounds.


   7. Accordingly although the matter was advanced on that basis at the
      substantive hearing of the judicial review, the proper procedure for
      seeking permission to rely on additional grounds was not followed.


   8. It was also evident that the applicant could not mount a successful
      judicial review challenge to the 2015 decision given the failure to
      pursue the earlier judicial review and this was accepted by counsel
      for the applicant at the hearing.


   9. As to the grant of leave assuming a successful statutory appeal, the
      respondent has now confirmed in its witness statement that it will
      grant leave outside the rules for a period not exceeding 30 months and
      will not treat the 2015 decision as a basis for a future refusal of
      leave. It is submitted for the respondent that the position of the
      respondent in this regard should have been apparent to the claimant's
      representatives. However neither of these matters were addressed in
      the draft consent order proposed by the respondent in September 2019.


  10.  In the light of the failure of the applicant to make an application
      to amend its grounds and the fact that it could not succeed in
      relation to the 2015 decision, I conclude that the respondent should
      only be obliged to pay a proportion of the claimant's costs. I order
      accordingly.


  11. The amount of the costs shall be assessed if not agreed.



                 The Honourable Mrs Justice Moulder
      Signed:
                 Mrs Justice Moulder, Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge




      Dated:           07 February 2020




Sent  to  the  Applicant,  Respondent  and  any  interested  party   /   the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:
